                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE CORPORATE FINANCE OF MULTINATIONAL FIRMS

                                           Isil Erel
                                          Yeejin Jang
                                      Michael S. Weisbach

                                      Working Paper 26762
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26762


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We thank Fritz Foley, Jim Hines, David Wessel and participants in a presentation at Brookings
for very helpful suggestions. Greg Allen, Hyeik Kim, Rick Ogden provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Corporate Finance of Multinational Firms
Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 26762
February 2020
JEL No. G30,G31,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

An increasing fraction of firms worldwide operate in multiple countries. We study the costs and
benefits of being multinational in firms' corporate financial decisions and survey the related
academic evidence. We document that, among U.S. publicly traded firms, the prevalence of
multinationals is approximately the same as domestic firms, using classification schemes relying
on both income-based and a sales-based metrics. Outside the U.S., the fraction is lower but has
been growing. Multinational firms are exposed to additional risks beyond those facing domestic
firms coming from political factors and exchange rates. However, they are likely to benefit from
diversification of cash flows and flexibility in capital sources. We show that multinational firms,
indeed, have a better access to foreign capital markets and a lower cost of debt than otherwise
identical domestic firms, but the evidence on the cost of equity is mixed.


Isil Erel                                         Michael S. Weisbach
Fisher College of Business                        Department of Finance
Ohio State University                             Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Avenue                                  Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210                                2100 Neil Ave.
and NBER                                          Columbus, OH 43210
erel@fisher.osu.edu                               and NBER
                                                  weisbach.2@osu.edu
Yeejin Jang
University of New South Wales
School of Banking & Finance
y.jang@unsw.edu.au
   1. Introduction

        As the world economy has become more integrated, there has been an increase in the

number of multinational firms. As of 2017, about half of the publicly-traded firms in the U.S. are

multinationals. For the average multinational firm, foreign income (sales) represent about 40% of

aggregate income (sales). The extent of international operations of multinational firms is similar

for international firms in MSCI World developed countries. As the global economy becomes more

integrated, the fraction of firms with foreign sales also rose rapidly in emerging markets. Given

that multinational firms are such significant players in the world economy, understanding their

financial policies is an important task.

       Operating in more than one country can affect a firm's financial decisions in a number of

ways. Most importantly, being multinational appears to affect both firms' cost of finance and their

access to capital during poor economic times. An important reason for financing advantages of

multinational firms is that they have more flexibility in their potential sources of financing than

domestic firms.

       In principle, any firm could borrow from any bank in the world or issue public equity or

debt in any country. However, for a number of reasons, it is usually much more cost-effective for

firms to raise capital in locations where they have operations (see Jang (2017)). Financing

international activities from local capital provides a natural hedge against currency risks.

Furthermore, additional choices of where to raise capital can allow a firm to better optimize over

rates, and also to diversify its sources of financing, which can be valuable when financing becomes

scarce in one part of the world.

       In addition, being multinational diversifies a firm's cash flows across countries and

minimizes the impact of country-specific shocks. Therefore, multinational firms have lower cash-




                                                1
flow volatility than otherwise similar domestic firms. This lower cash-flow volatility is likely to

reduce a firm's credit risk and cost of financing, and to increase its overall debt capacity. Consistent

with the choice of location of borrowing and diversification across countries lowering the cost of

debt, we document empirically that multinational firms pay lower spreads on their bank loans,

holding other factors constant. However, the results on the cost of equity are mixed, with some

studies finding that being multinational lowers the cost of equity while others find that it raises the

cost of equity.

        While being a multinational incurs benefits through diversification of capital sources and

by allowing for tax arbitrage across countries, it also entails costs. Firms operating in multiple

countries face political risks that are likely to be larger than those faced by domestic companies.

A multinational company is a "foreign" company in at least one country, and foreign companies

are often discriminated against by regulatory authorities. Dinc and Erel (2013) provide empirical

evidence on how economic nationalism, which is defined as preference for the native and against

the foreigner, has both direct and indirect economic impact on acquisitions and impedes

international capital flows. The authors show that governments implement national policies against

foreign acquisition bids through a number of methods, including playing for time by delaying

approvals by regulatory agencies, using golden shares in previously privatized companies, moral

persuasion by publicly opposing the deals, and providing financing to the rival bidders from

national bank. Even if a multinational firm is operating in a country in which it is treated well by

the government, there is always risk of a policy shift, potentially occurring when the government

changes, that could affect the multinational firm. This political risk is an incremental cost faced

by multinational firms but not by domestic ones.




                                                   2
        Multinational firms also face exchange-rate risk. They receive revenues in a mix of

currencies and have liabilities, both in terms of production costs and interest payments, which are

likely in a different mix of currencies. Therefore, movements in exchange rates create a mismatch

between the income the company receives and its liabilities, creating a demand for hedging foreign

exchange risk.

        This paper surveys the academic literature on the costs and benefits of multinational firms

relative to domestic ones with respect to their corporate financial decisions. Section 2 characterizes

multinational firms and presents detailed characteristics of multinationals in the U.S. and overseas.

In Section 3, we provide detailed summary statistics on the capital structure of multinational firms

and compare their capital structure with the capital structure of domestic firms. Section 4 discusses

the way in which firms diversify their sources of financing and the impact of this diversification

plays on multinational firms' costs of financing. Section 5 discusses the additional risks faced by

multinational firms in comparison to the domestic counterparts. Section 6 provides a short

summary.



2. Characteristics of Multinational Firms

        There are a number of ways in which one could define a multinational firm. Since none of

these definitions are perfect, we utilize two different approaches. First, we use foreign pretax

income to characterize multinational firms. Following Jang (2017), we create a dummy variable

that takes on a value of one when a firm reports non-zero foreign income in the previous three

years as a measure of whether a firm is multinational. 1 However, this approach could



1
  We use pre-tax foreign income (PIFO) in Compustat and international operating income (WC07126) in Worldscope.
Although Jang (2017) complements this definition using information on the location of subsidiaries from firms' 10K
filings, we concentrate on this definition based on non-zero foreign income definition due to data constraints.


                                                        3
mischaracterize firms that do not report foreign income when the percentage of foreign income is

relatively low compared to overall income or when it is negative. Therefore, as a second measure,

following Denis, Denis, and Yost (2002), we use information on foreign sales from the Compustat

Geographic Segment database in the U.S. or Worldscope for foreign firms to define internationally

diversified firms. 2 Specifically, a firm is defined as multinational if at least 5% of its sales are from

outside of its home country. According to this definition, however, a firm that exports goods to

other countries would be defined as a multinational firm even if it does not have any assets outside

its home country. 3

         Panel A of Table 1 presents statistics on the number of multinational and domestic public

firms in the U.S. between 1986 and 2017 using both definitions. The percentage of multinational

firms defined using foreign income (sales) increased from 20% (18%) to 48% (40%) over the last

32 years. Interestingly, Figure 1 documents the increase in the ratio of multinational firms despite

the significant decline in the number of U.S. public firms over time (see Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz

(2017)). The number of public firms in the U.S. decreased almost by half over the 32 years in our

sample, with surviving firms being more than twice as likely to be multinational.

         There are a number of reasons for the sharp decline in the number of public firms in the

early 2000s, but a particularly important one is the increasing role of private capital markets during

this period. Many public firms had leveraged buyouts and went private, IPOs were rare despite

the strong economy, and private capital markets allowed startups to remain private for a very long


2
  We use international sales (WC07101) in Worldscope.
3
  The definitions for multinational firms in both approaches might not be comparable across countries as reporting
requirements for foreign income or foreign sales might vary by country. In case of U.S., all publicly traded firms are
required to disclose foreign income or foreign sales separately for material foreign operations or sales. For example,
SEC Regulation §210.4-08(h) requires any U.S. public firms to separately disclose pre-tax income and income tax
expenses for domestic and foreign operations, if any of these measures for non-U.S. operations exceed 5% of the
consolidated total. Under SFAS No. 131, any U.S. public firms must report separately information about an operating
segment if its reported revenue is 10% or more of the combined revenue of all reported operating segments.


                                                          4
time. For example, Uber, one of the most successful startups of this time period was founded in

2009 and remained private until 2019, raising $24.7 billion privately over that period. 4 Moreover,

as shown by Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2017), there has been a significant increase in the delisting

rate in the last twenty years, largely due to increased pace of acquisitions of public firms by other

public firms. These acquisitions have also increased the average size of remaining public firms.

        Currently, U.S. public firms are fairly evenly split between domestic and multinational,

with 1,257 firms classified as multinational firms and 1,390 as domestic firms using the definition

based on the existence of foreign income in the previous three years. The split is similar when we

concentrate on foreign sales as a measure of being multinational (with 1,061 multinational and

1,586 domestic firms). For a typical U.S. multinational firm, 40% of sales are attributed to foreign

sales in 2017, and we get a similar ratio (38%) when we use foreign income relative to total income.

        Panel B of Table 1 presents frequencies for an international sample of firms. We report

results using both the definition based on foreign income and the one based on foreign sales. We

first report statistics for the 22 developed countries included in the MSCI World Index and then for

19 emerging countries included in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index (except Egypt, Pakistan,

Peru, Qatar, and UAE). 5 This panel indicates that the ratio of multinational firms has been stable

between 30-40% over the 18 years of our sample when we use foreign sales to identify

multinational firms. As of 2017, 34% of firms from MSCI developed countries and 33% of firms

from MSCI emerging countries are multinational firms. In 2017, the average multinational firm in

developed (emerging) countries attributed 58% (44%) of sales to foreign sales, slightly higher than

the 40% average for U.S. multinational firms. These differences in the fraction of firms that are



4
 See Crunchbase for details of Uber's financing history.
5
  We drop five countries ­ Egypt, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, and UAE ­ because of poor coverage of foreign sales or
foreign income variables in Worldscope.


                                                        5
multinational likely reflect differences in the nature of firms in different countries and also the

likelihood that firms in different countries go public.

       Using foreign income to identify multinational firms in countries other than the U.S. could

be problematic due to variations in reporting requirements across countries. In addition, as we

noted above, it is possible for firms not to report foreign income when the percentage of foreign

income is relatively low compared to overall income or when it is negative. According to this

definition, percent of firms that were multinationals was 17% (8%) in 2000 and 5% (3%) in 2017

in MSCI developed (emerging) markets. However, we know that, among firms that report foreign

income in the past three years, on average, 38% (26%) of their income was foreign in 2017.

       Panel C presents the same numbers across individual countries averaged over 2000-2017.

While U.S., Ireland, U.K, Hong Kong and Netherlands have the highest ratio of multinational firms

(classified using the foreign income definition), China, Columbia, Russia, India, and Brazil have

the lowest ratios of such firms. Panel C also reports debt-to-assets and cash-to-assets ratios of

multinational and domestic firms in these countries. In Figure 2, we visualize the differences in

these ratios between multinational firms and domestic firms. The reference line identifies the zero

difference in leverage or cash ratios for multinational and domestic firms. Consistent with the idea

that multinational activity increases a firm's debt capacity, many countries are located above the

reference line, showing that the leverage ratio of multinational firms tends to be higher than that

of domestic firms, especially in emerging markets. We also find that, with a few exceptions of

emerging countries such as Czech Republic, India, and Brazil, multinational firms have much

lower cash holdings than domestic firms. One exceptional case is the U.S., where multinational

firms hold more cash than domestic firms on average, consistent with the evidence documented

by Pinkowitz, Stulz and Williamson (2016).




                                                  6
        Next, we characterize the industry distribution of multinational firms. Table 2 presents the

percentage of multinational firms across industries in the U.S. (Panel A), and in MSCI developed

and emerging countries (Panels B and C) across twelve Fama-French industries. 6 As also shown

in Figure 3, some industries stand out in terms of the fraction of multinational firms in the U.S.:

Chemical and Allied Products (61%), Manufacturing (49%), Business Equipment (48%), and

Consumer Durables (48%). The other U.S. industries have much lower percentages, with 33% or

much less of their firms being multinational. Differences across industries are less evident in both

other developed countries and emerging countries. While Finance and Utilities have the lowest

fraction of multinational firms in the U.S. (1-5%), firms in those industries are much more

globalized in other developed countries (about 12-13%). In addition, compared with multinational

firms in emerging countries, the ones in developed countries rely more on foreign income, in

particular, in Oil, Gas, and Coal Extraction and Chemical and Allied Products industries (40-44%

in the U.S. and 31-40% in other developed countries). While the fraction of multinational firms in

the U.S. is relatively low, multinational firms in Utilities and Finance generate 17-29% of income

overseas.

        Multinational firms are likely to differ from domestic firms in a number of ways. In Table

3, we present firm-level characteristics of multinational firms and domestic ones. Panel A contains

statistics for the U.S. sample, covering 1986-2017. This panel indicates that multinational firms

tend to be larger and more stable than domestic firms. Average total assets are almost twice as

high for multinationals as for domestic firms, and multinationals' average market capitalization is

almost four times as high. Cash flows are also much higher, and importantly, the standard deviation

of cash flows is statistically significantly lower for multinationals, possibly because of


6
 We rely on the foreign-income-based definition of multinational firms here, and throughout the rest of the paper.
Similar tables created based on foreign-sales-based definition are available upon request from the authors.


                                                        7
multinationals' cash flows being diversified across countries. In addition, multinational firms have

a higher likelihood of being rated. Finally, compared with domestic firms, multinational firms hold

more cash, carry less leverage as a ratio of their asset size, and they are more likely to have zero

debt.

        In Panel B, we present the average statistics for MSCI World (developed) vs MSCI

emerging countries for 2000-2017. Multinationals from developed countries, with mean total

assets of $4.8 billion, are on average smaller than U.S. multinationals, with $6.3 billion in average

total assets. Multinationals from emerging countries are, on average, much smaller, with $2.6

billion in total assets. The average market capitalization follows the same rankings, with

multinationals from the U.S. at $4.9 billion, developed countries at $2.9 billion, and emerging

countries having $1.6 billion of average market capitalization.

        When we compare multinational firms with domestic firms, we see that multinationals are

larger than their respective domestic firms in terms of both total assets and market capitalization.

Like U.S. multinational firms, foreign multinationals have higher cash flows and enjoy lower

volatility of their cash flows. Consistent with the pattern observed in Figure 2, unlike U.S., foreign

multinationals in other developed countries keep lower cash in reserve than domestic firms. While

multinational firms in developed countries have a lower debt ratio, MNCs in emerging markets

tend to have a slightly higher debt ratio and are less likely to carry zero debt than domestic firms.

This pattern potentially reflects the higher debt capacity of multinationals, especially in emerging

countries with weak external financial markets.




                                                  8
3. The Capital Structure of Multinational Firms

3.1. Capital Structure of U.S. Multinationals

        In Table 4, we provide detailed summary statistics for capital structures of U.S.

multinational firms, first for the entire universe of public firms and then for firms of differing credit

quality. We start by reporting detailed characteristics for all firms, where the majority of firms are

unrated. To compare similarly rated firms, we analyze investment-grade rated (Panel B) and

speculative-grade rated (Panel C) separately.

        Table 4 indicates that U.S. multinational firms are more likely to hold cash, as a percentage

of their assets, but less likely to borrow in the debt market. The average cash-to-assets ratio is

16.7% for multinationals while it is only 13.5% for domestic firms in the U.S. However, the mean

total debt-to-asset ratio is 23.7% for multinationals and 26.5% for domestic firms (although median

ratios are both 21%). Larger cash holdings likely reflect tax effects as multinationals have

incentives to hold cash earned overseas rather than pay repatriation taxes for cash returned to

domestic shareholders. The differences in debt ratios would occur if these firms followed the

"pecking order" theory of capital (Myers and Majluf (1984)). Since multinationals are likely to

have been historically successful in generating cash flows and diversifying internationally, they

would not have had to go down the pecking order as often as similar domestic firms would. Thus,

compared with domestic firms, multinational firms would carry less debt on their balance sheets.

        When we examine the details of the debt structure (i.e., senior bonds, subordinated bonds,

commercial paper or bank debt), we see that the lower total debt ratio for multinational firms

occurs because of multinationals' bank loans being lower as a ratio of total debt. Term bank loans,

on average, form 20% of total debt for domestic firms but only 14% for multinational firms, with

the difference being statistically significant at the 1% level. Compared with domestic firms, an




                                                   9
average multinational firm relies more on senior bonds or notes (30% of total debt vs. 19.3% of

total debt). They are also more likely to issue convertible debt and commercial paper. On the other

hand, domestic firms, since they tend to be less credit-worthy, are 11% more likely to borrow with

collateral (38% vs. 27%).

       Next, we compare capital structures of U.S. multinational and domestic firms grouped by

credit ratings. We first compare investment-grade rated firms (Panel B of Table 4) and then

speculative-grade rated ones (Panel C of Table 4). Rated multinational firms, investment grade or

speculative grade, hold more cash but have less total debt, especially long-term debt, compared

with respective domestic firms. As expected, investment-grade firms rely more on senior bonds or

notes and less on bank debt. The ratio of senior bonds or notes, as a fraction of debt, increases to

58.4% for investment-grade-rated multinational firms from 30% overall and the ratio of bank term

loans, as a fraction of debt, drops to 3% for investment-grade-rated multinational firms from 14%

overall. For speculative-grade firms, we see different patterns in the details of debt structure for

multinationals in comparison to domestic firms: the average multinational firm has more term

loans, as a fraction of its total debt, than the average domestic firm (21% vs 16%) while the ratio

of senior bonds and notes is weakly different from each other for speculative-grade firms.

       Holding credit ratings constant is one way to limit the sample to comparable multinational

and domestic firms. Another way is to focus on firms with similar asset sizes. Next, in Table 5, we

analyze multinationals' capital structures relative to those of domestic firms within different size

buckets. We first compare large multinational firms with similarly-sized domestic firms (Panel A).

These large domestic firms have total assets larger than or equal to the median total assets of

multinational firms, with the median estimated each year. The match creates relatively similar

firms in terms of total assets, with mean total assets of $19.64 billion for multinational firms and




                                                10
mean total assets of $15.53 billion for large domestic firms. Grouping by asset size, the difference

in market capitalization is still substantial, about $14 billion for multinational firms compared to

$4.7 billion for domestic firms of similar asset size. Although large multinational firms carry lower

leverage than large domestic firms, they are more likely to issue long-term debt, which is

dominated by senior bonds and notes (44% vs. 28%). The cash ratio for these large multinational

firms is, on average, 12.5%, which is almost double the ratio for large domestic firms (6.7%).

Large multinationals tend to have a higher leverage than a typical multinational firm (28% vs.

24%), and again, lower than the leverage of similar domestic firms.

       In Panel B, we compare smaller-than-median domestic firms with multinational firms

whose assets are smaller than or equal to the median asset of the domestic firms, with the median

estimated each year. Average total assets (market capitalization) for this subsample of

multinational firms is $252 ($401) million. Again, cash ratios are larger, and leverage is lower, for

multinational firms than for domestic firms. However, for these smaller multinational firms, bank

loans are relatively more important than senior bonds or notes (35% bank debt vs 12% senior

bonds and notes, as a percentage of total debt).

       In summary, these tables show that there are clear differences in cash holdings, debt ratios,

or capital structure details between U.S. multinational and domestic firms. These differences exist

within size and credit rating categories.



3.2. Capital Structures of Non-U.S. Multinational Firms

       In Table 6, we tabulate details of capital structures for international multinationals in

comparison to their domestic counterparts, first for MSCI developed countries (Panel A) and then

for MSCI emerging countries (Panel B). An important difference with the U.S. sample is that




                                                   11
foreign multinational firms in developed countries, compared with domestic firms in their

respective regions, hold less cash as a fraction of their total assets (14.6% vs. 16.6%). Also, even

though their leverage ratio is similar to U.S. counterparts, non-U.S. multinational firms rely less

on the senior bond market for financing, but more on the bank debt market. For example, as

discussed above, bank debt is on average 26% of total debt for U.S multinational firms (and 20%

of total debt for large U.S. multinationals, which are similar in size to the multinationals from other

developed countries). However, for multinationals from MSCI developed or emerging countries,

this ratio is over 50%.



4. Capital Raising by Multinational Firms

4.1. Where do Multinationals Get Financing?

       An important consideration when a firm raises capital is the location of the capital provider.

Being geographically closer to the capital provider reduces information asymmetry between the

lenders and the borrowers (see, e.g., Sufi (2007)). Given that they have assets in multiple countries,

multinationals can more easily raise capital from multiple countries. The location of where to raise

capital represents an important corporate financial decision faced by multinational firms.



4.1.1. Debt Financing

       The two most important forms of debt finance are publicly traded bonds and bank debt.

Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach (2006) document that in their sample period (1990-2001),

about 20% of all capital raised through bond issues comes from outside the issuing firm's home




                                                  12
country. The most common places of issue of international bonds are the U.S. and Europe, and

many issuers are multinationals from countries with less liquid capital markets. 7

        Most large bank loans are syndicated across multiple banks, and the participating banks

often come from different countries. Therefore, loans are often made up of capital from multiple

countries. Table 7 summarizes these patterns for syndicated loans made to U.S. firms during the

period 1990 to 2018. For multinationals, 33% of loans had at least one participating bank from

Canada and 32% had at least one from the U.K. Domestic firms also have syndicated loans with

foreign banks participating, but to a lesser degree: 23% of syndicated loans to domestic firms had

at least one lender from Canada and 16% had at least one lender from the U.K.

        Next, we examine the difference in bank loan sources between multinational firms and

domestic firms in a regression setting. The sample includes syndicated loans issued to U.S. public

firms during the period of 1990-2018 obtained from Dealscan, aggregated at the loan package

level. We estimate OLS regressions, where the dependent variable is the indicator for including at

least one foreign lender in its syndicate in columns (1) and (2), and the percentage of foreign lender

as the total number of syndicate members in columns (3) and (4). The main independent variables

are the multinational indicator based on non-zero foreign income in past three years and the

percentage of foreign income. The regressions include controls of loan features and borrower

characteristics and year, industry, borrower rating, and deal purpose fixed effects.

        Table 8 presents the results that examine the differences in the sources of loans between

multinational and domestic firms, with controls for a number of variables that could potentially

affect the structure of the loan. This table illustrates that multinationals are 5% more likely to have

at least one foreign lender in the syndicate. In addition, they have 3.5% higher fraction of foreign


7
  See Henderson, Jegadeesh and Weisbach (2006), Appendix C, for details on the amount of different types of capital
that firms from a number of countries receive from each other country.


                                                        13
lenders in the syndicate, which is equivalent to a 16% increase at the mean (0.22). The fraction of

a firm's foreign income positively and significantly affects both of these variables. The effects are

economically large: they imply that a one-standard-deviation of foreign income (0.245) would

increase the fraction of foreign lenders in the syndicate by 2.2 percentage points, which is

equivalent to a 10% increase.



4.1.2. Equity Financing

         Firms can also issue equity outside their own country. Henderson, Jegadeesh, and

Weisbach (2006) document that about 12% of capital raised by equity issues come from sources

outside a firm's home country. While international equity issues are less common than debt issues,

they still represent an important consideration in multinational firms' financial decisions.

         The most common way to issue equity in other countries is to cross-list the stock on a local

exchange. 8 International equity issues through cross-listings are more common for multinational

firms than for domestic ones (see Doidge et al. (2009)). In addition, foreign institutional ownership

increases with foreign sales (Ferreira and Matos (2008)).

         Table 9 compares foreign ownership and the incidence of equity offers from other countries

across multinationals and domestic U.S. firms. It is evident from this table that multinational firms

have more foreign ownership (4.3% for multinationals vs. 1.8% for domestic firms) than domestic

firms. Foreign institutional ownership has constantly increased since 2000 and, as of 2017, 8.4%

of equity of multinational firms and 4.0% of domestic firms are held by institutional investors

outside U.S. Despite the increase in capital flow overseas, the difference in foreign ownership



8
  Issuing capital through a cross-listing rather than a private placement or a sale on the local exchange allows for
investors to receive communications in their home language and bonds the issuing firm to comply with local securities
laws. For a detailed discussion of the way cross-listings work and the regulations that affect them, see Karolyi (1998).


                                                          14
between multinational and domestic firms still remains significant. Like debt, the decision to raise

equity overseas is a financial decision that is usually made by multinational firms rather than

domestic ones.



4.2. Why Multinational Firms Have a Financing Advantage

       Jang (2017) addresses one way in which multinational firms have a financing advantage

over domestic firms. She considers the issue of whether the presence of an operation can facilitate

capital-raising in the country where the operation is located. Presumably, the foreign operations

can lower information asymmetry and monitoring costs to a capital provider. Jang (2017)

documents that firms are more likely to receive bank loans from foreign lenders in countries where

foreign subsidiaries are located. In addition, this better access to foreign capital markets can help

multinationals raise capital if there are financial market disruptions in one part of the world.

       For example, during the Financial Crisis of 2008, capital raising in the U.S. and Europe

became extremely difficult. Firms with Asian operations, where capital markets continued to

function more or less normally, consequently had an advantage in raising capital so were better

able to weather the Crisis. This funding advantage makes multinational firms' income more stable

than domestic firms' income. Consistent with this idea, Figure 4 documents that U.S.

multinationals' foreign income as a percentage of sales has been growing irrespective of business

cycles, while their domestic income declines during down cycles.

       Another way in which a multinational firm can take advantage of its foreign presence is by

taking advantage of interest rate differences across countries. If rates differ in countries and firms

do not perceive that the differences are offset by changes in expected currency movements, then

firms can benefit by issuing debt in countries with lower rates. In principle, domestic firms could




                                                 15
raise debt in any country. However, in practice it is much more likely that multinational firms raise

capital outside their own country, and as Jang (2017) documents, they are especially likely to raise

debt in countries where their foreign operations are located. Consistent with this idea, Henderson,

Jegadeesh, and Weisbach (2006) and McBrady, Mortal, and Schill (2010) find that firms are more

likely to issue bonds in countries with lower rates, and Keloharju and Niskanen (2001) find that a

sample of Finnish companies are more likely to issue foreign bank debt when interest rates in

Finland are relatively high. Allen (2019) links these decisions directly to monetary policy; he finds

that when the central bank lowers rates in one country, multinational firms in other countries

become more likely to raise debt in that country's currency.

       Multinational firms, even if they focus on one industry, are much like a multidivisional

firm in that each country's operation usually operates separately from the others and thus have

different exposures to country-specific shocks. Consequently, much of the analysis in the internal

capital markets literature is relevant to multinational firms as well. Diversifying operations and

using internal capital markets could in principle lead to cross-subsidization that lowers financial

constraints (see e.g., Stein (1997, 2003)). Since a firm's cash flows in different countries are

exposed to different shocks, international diversification could reduce the overall volatility of cash

flows and lower default risk through cross-subsidization across countries. The diversification of

cash flows across countries provides multinationals with a financing advantage over domestic

firms even if their marginal source of finance is from domestic sources.

       To examine the importance of the cross-country internal capital markets generated by

multinational firms, Desai, Foley, and Forbes (2008) compare the way in which large currency

depreciations affect multinational and domestic firms. Consistent with the notion that being

multinational helps diversify sources of capital, these authors find that U.S. multinational




                                                 16
corporations increase sales, assets, and investment significantly more than domestic firms during

and after these currency crises. They also provide direct evidence suggesting that one reason why

multinationals are better able to weather large currency depreciations is their ability to use their

internal capital markets to capitalize on the competitiveness benefits of large currency

depreciations. These results support the notion that multinationals are able to benefit from the

cross-country internal capital markets created by their operations in multiple countries.



4.3. Estimates of the Multinationals' Cost of Finance

4.3.1. The Cost of Debt

       Multinationals have a number of advantages over domestic firms in terms of financing

costs. Because they are diversified across multiple countries, shocks that affect one country but

not others have limited impact, lowering the volatility of their cash flows and decreasing the

likelihood of a default. In addition, a multinational can cross-subsidize across countries, allowing

it to take advantage of short-term borrowing opportunities and to retain access to external capital

if there is a "credit crunch" in one part of the world. However, as is discussed below, multinationals

also face additional costs not borne by domestic firms from political risk and exchange rate risk,

so it is not obvious whether, on net, multinationals' cost of capital should be higher or lower than

domestic firms.

       Reeb, Mansi, and Allee (2001) estimate the cost of debt for multinationals, focusing on

corporate bond markets. These authors compare the rates paid on newly issued bonds by

multinationals and domestic firms. They find that firms with international operations tend to have

better credit ratings and therefore higher debt capacities. This finding suggests that, consistent with

the diversification arguments, ceteris paribus, multinational firms have lower costs of debt than




                                                  17
otherwise identical domestic firms. In addition, the evidence in Reeb, Mansi and Allee (2011)

suggests that the lower cost of debt goes beyond what is conveyed by debt ratings, so that the

market incorporates the international aspects of firms' operations even more than analysts.

       Houston, Itzkowitz, and Naranjo (2007) analyze the time series of syndicated loans in ten

countries. These authors find that loans to European firms carry significantly lower spreads than

loans to North American firms. They find that multinationals enjoy this cheaper bank funding only

by using lead arrangers in Europe. They also find that larger firms on average pay lower spreads

on their loans when they borrow from a foreign lender. This evidence suggests that global

competition has helped reduce borrowing costs for multinational firms with greater access to

lending markets around the world.

       We present our own analysis of whether multinationals have a lower cost of debt than

domestic firms in Table 10. This analysis uses data from the Dealscan database, and presents

estimates of equations predicting loan spreads as a function of whether the firm is multinational,

as well as a host of other firm-level and loan-level factors that potentially affect spreads. In Column

(1), the coefficient on the multinational dummy is -4.4 and is statistically significantly different

from zero. This estimate implies that multinational firms pay about 4.4 basis points less on their

debt than an otherwise identical domestic firm. In Column (2), we replace the multinational

dummy with the fraction of foreign income; the coefficient is also negative (-8.2) and statistically

significantly different from zero. Overall, these equations suggest that when firms are more diverse

geographically, they pay lower lending rates.

       An important issue in interpreting these results is that of causality. The literature finds that

multinational firms pay lower lending rates than domestic firms, holding other things constant.

However, it is possible that there are other factors that are related both to a firm being multinational




                                                  18
and also to its lending rates that could potentially lead to a spurious correlation between

multinationality and lower rates. For example, if more profitable firms with more stable cash flows

are more likely to diversify internationally, then these firms would likely borrow at lower rates

regardless of the marginal impact of their being multinational. While the correlation between being

multinational and lending rates appears to be robust, we cannot definitively say that the causal

interpretation is appropriate. Identifying this relation more precisely would be an excellent topic

for future research.



4.3.2. The Cost of Equity

       Measuring the cost of equity is typically more difficult than measuring the cost of debt

since equity does not have an observable promised yield that equals the amount of interest the firm

will pay if it does not default. Perhaps for this reason, the literature's conclusion on the impact of

multinationality on the cost of equity is not as clear as it is for the cost of debt, with the results

varying depending on the method used.

       Baker, Foley, and Wurgler (2009) study the effect of domestic stock market valuations on

firms' foreign direct investment (FDI) decisions. The idea is that when valuations are unusually

high, the firm faces a particularly low cost of equity, so they have an incentive to use this low cost

of equity to make investments. The authors find that when multinationals appear to be overvalued

in their home country, they take advantage of their valuation and act as cross-border arbitragers by

investing overseas in Foreign Direct Investment. At least some of the time, Baker, Foley, and

Wurgler's results suggest that multinationals have a relatively low cost of equity.

       A more direct way to estimate the impact of multinationality on the cost of equity is by

considering the returns that are earned by multinationals relative to the returns on otherwise




                                                 19
identical domestic firms. Both Fillat and Garetto (2015) and Jang, Wang, and Zhang (2018) use

this approach. Both papers document that multinationals have return premiums relative to domestic

firms of about 23 basis point per month after controlling for local and global pricing factors. These

papers attribute multinationals' higher cost of equity to foreign operational risks that cannot be

easily reversed when hit by global downturn. Consistent with this idea, Fillat, Garetto, and

Oldenski (2015) and Jang, Wang, and Zhang (2018) find evidence that risk premia are higher for

firms operating in countries with higher entry and operational costs coming from factors such as

tax rates, development of financial markets, and property rights. Other papers focus on the

information costs investors have to pay to obtain and to process information as an explanation of

multinational firms' higher cost of equity. For example, Huang (2015) document that there is a

delay in the incorporation of global news into multinational firms' stock prices.

       This financing discussion does not include tax considerations. There is ample evidence that

taxes are an important factor affecting financing in multinationals, perhaps more than domestic

firms because of the possibility of tax arbitrage across countries. More detail on the way in which

taxes affect the corporate finance of multinational firms is other chapters of this volume.



5. Risk Profiles

As companies operate more globally, they face a number of additional risks beyond those faced

by domestic firms. In this section, we discuss two such sources of risk to which multinationals are

exposed: country risk (including political risk) and foreign exchange risk.




                                                 20
5.1. Country Risk

       The term Country Risk refers to any factor that varies by country (see Damodaran (2018)

for an extensive discussion). Country-level risk could occur because of uncertainty about economic

conditions that vary across countries ­ about the country's economic growth, the development and

stability of a country's political and legal institutions, and the extent to which the political system

favors local firms over foreign ones. Damodaran (2018) concludes that a firm's exposure to

country risk is not determined by where the firm is incorporated or traded; it is determined by

where a firm operates. Because multinational firms operate across many different countries,

multinational firms can face substantial country risk.

       Desai, Foley, and Hines (2008) study the effects of country-specific political risk on U.S.

multinational firms' capital structure. Investment returns for subsidiaries from the same parent

have different levels of risk in different countries. These returns are more volatile in countries with

greater political risk, and these volatile returns are reflected in aggregate foreign returns of the

multinational corporations. Desai, Foley and Hines document that parent companies adjust their

capital structure in response to this political risk by increasing leverage in subsidiaries operating

in politically risky countries. Therefore, to limit their aggregate leverage, they also end up reducing

their domestic leverage. In other words, multinationals mitigate country-level risks by passing

these risks to foreign capital providers for whom it is relatively less costly. They adjust their

operations accordingly as well. For example, U.S. MNCs serving customers in politically risky

countries are more likely to serve these customers through exports from the United States rather

than producing locally.

       Multinational firms often enter foreign markets through acquisitions. It is possible that

political and cultural differences can affect cross-border acquisitions, since there is often political




                                                  21
pressure to favor local companies over foreign acquirers. The possibility that this pressure will

affect the acquiring companies represents an important risk facing multinational firms.

        Dinc and Erel (2013) evaluate this risk by studying governments' reactions to merger and

acquisition (M&A) bids by foreign and domestic firms. They provide strong evidence on economic

nationalism in the M&A markets, in that many local governments prefer the target companies to

remain domestically-owned rather than foreign-owned. The authors show that governments

implement national policies against foreign acquisition bids through a number of methods,

including playing for time by delaying approvals by regulatory agencies, using golden shares in

previously privatized companies, moral persuasion by publicly opposing the deals, and providing

financing to the rival bidders from national bank. These nationalistic reactions by the governments

have both direct and indirect economic impacts on the functioning of the M&A markets. They not

only lead to active cross-border acquisition bids failing but also deter foreign companies from

bidding for other companies in that country in the future. Consequently, this type of political risk

can impede international capital flows. 9



5.2. Foreign Exchange Risk

        Foreign exchange risk can affect multinational firms because of the possibility that

currency fluctuations will affect the value of a firm's foreign earnings. 10 Adler and Dumas (1984)

and Dumas and Solnik (1995) show that, all firms, either domestic or multinational, are exposed

to currency risk to some extent. However, this risk tends to be larger for multinational firms

because a substantial fraction of their cash flows and costs are in foreign currencies. Consistent



9
  See also Ahern, Daminelli, and Fracassi (2015), which documents that the volume of cross-border mergers is lower
when countries of merging firms are culturally more distant.
10
   Shapiro (1975) presents a formal model of exposure to exchange rate changes for multinational firms.


                                                       22
with this idea, Jorion (1990) documents that exposure of U.S. multinationals to foreign exchange

risk increases with the fraction of their foreign operations.

       Dewenter, Schrand, and Wang (2016) study U.S. multinationals' net exposure to currency

risk by analyzing 23 countries that shifted from fixed to floating exchange rate regimes. Fifteen of

these currencies were tied to the U.S. dollars and eight were tied to other currencies. The authors

observe whether multinationals exposed to these currency regime shifts were hedging their FX

exposure either operationally or financially. Using a difference-in-differences design, which

exploits changes for currencies tied to the U.S. dollars versus other currencies for hedgers and non-

hedgers, the authors conclude that the net exposure to currency risk is significant for U.S.

multinational firms. While hedging offsets the exposure, the net currency risk positions are value-

relevant. However, factors such as strategic considerations appear to be dominating currency-risk

considerations in the multinationals' cross-border investment decisions.



6. Summary

       Multinational firms are becoming the predominate type of public corporation. They amount

to about half of publicly-traded firms in the U.S. and substantial fraction worldwide as well. Value-

weighted, the numbers are even higher, with multinationals accounting for 57% of the U.S. public

equity market. Understanding how multinational factors affect corporate financial decisions seems

to be an important task.

       Being multinational creates opportunities for a financial manager because multinational

firms can better access capital markets outside their home countries. They can take advantage of

interest rate differentials in different parts of the world when raising debt and equity externally.




                                                 23
However, multinational firms also face costs not borne by domestic firms: they face both country

risk and foreign exchange risk.

       As global markets become more integrated and firms become even more multinational, the

financial issues facing these firms are likely to become increasingly important. The ability of

financial managers to choose between alternative capital markets will increase, and capital markets

will become more competitive internationally. Unfortunately, the rise of nationalism is likely to

adversely affect multinational firms as well. Consequently, it seems evident that the issues raised

in this chapter will be increasingly important over time, so they should demand attention both from

practitioners seeking to manage their balance sheets and from academics wishing to study financial

management practices.




                                                24
                                           References

Adler, M., & Dumas, B. (1984). Exposure to Currency Risk: Definition and Measurement.
    Financial Management, 13(2), 41.

Ahern, K.R., D. Daminelli, and C. Fracassi (2015). Lost in Translation? The Effect of Cultural
    Values on Mergers Around the World, Journal of Financial Economics, 117 (1), 165-189.

Allen, Gregory D. (2019) Foreign Monetary Policy and the Currency Composition of Corporate
     Debt. Working Paper, Ohio State University.

Baker, M., Foley, C. F., & Wurgler, J. (2009). Multinationals as arbitrageurs: The effect of stock
    market valuations on foreign direct investment. Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 337­369.

Damodaran, A. (2017). Country Risk: Determinants, Measures and Implications ­ The 2017
   Edition. Ssrn, 1­100.

Denis, D. J., Denis, D. K., & Yost, K. (2002). Global Diversification, Industrial Diversification,
    and Firm Value. The Journal of Finance, 57(5), 1951­1979.

Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., & Forbes, K. J. (2008). Financial Constraints and Growth: Multinational
    and Local Girm Responses to Currency Depreciations. Review of Financial Studies, 21(6),
    2857­2888.

Desai, M. A., Foley, C. F., & Hines, J. R. (2008). Capital Structure with Risky Foreign Investment,
    Journal of Financial Economics, 88, 534-553.

Dewenter, K. L., Schrand, C. M., & Wang, C. (2016). The Impact of Currency Risk on US MNCs:
   Evidence from Currency Crises. Ssrn.

Dinc, S. and Isil Erel (2013). Economic Nationalism in Mergers and Acquisitions, The Journal of
    Finance, 68, 2471-2514.

Doidge, C., A. Karolyi and R. Stulz (2009) Has New York Become Less Competitive than London
    in Global Markets? Evaluating Foreign Listing Choices over Time. Journal of Financial
    Economics, 91, 253-287.

Doidge, C., A. Karolyi and R. Stulz (2017) The U.S. Listing Gap, Journal of Financial Economics,
    123, 464-487.

Dumas, B., & Solnik, B. (1995). The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk. The Journal of
   Finance, 50(2), 445­479.

Ferreira, M. and P. Matos (2008) The Colors of Investors' Money: The Role of Institutional
     Investors around the World. Journal of Financial Economics, 88, 499-533.




                                                25
Fillat, J. L., & Garetto, S. (2015). Risk, Returns, and Multinational Production. Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, 130(4), 2027­2073.

Fillat, J. L., Garetto, S., & Oldenski, L. (2015). Diversification, cost structure, and the risk
      premium of multinational corporations. Journal of International Economics, 96(1), 37­54.

Henderson, B., N. Jegadeesh, and M.S. Weisbach (2006) World Markets for Raising New Capital,
    Journal of Financial Economics, 82, 63-101.

Houston, J. F., Itzkowitz, J., & Naranjo, A. (2007). Borrowing Beyond Borders: The Geography
    and Pricing of Syndicated Bank Loans. Ssrn, (March).

Huang, Xing. "Thinking outside the borders: Investors' underreaction to foreign operations
    information." The Review of Financial Studies 28.11 (2015): 3109-3152.

Jang, Y. (2017). International Corporate Diversification and Financial Flexibility. Review of
     Financial Studies, 30(12), 4133­4178.

Jang, Y., X. Wang and X. Zhang (2018). The Multinational Return Premium:                 Investor's
     Perspective. Working Paper, University of New South Wales.

Jorion, P. (1990). The Exchange-Rate Exposure of U . S . Multinationals. The Journal of Business,
     63(3), 331­345.

Karolyi, A. (1998). Why do Companies List their Shares Abroad? A Survey of the Evidence and
    its Managerial Implications. Vol. 7, No. 1, Salomon Bros. Monograph Series, New York
    University.

Keloharju, Matti, and Mervi Niskanen, 2001, Why Do Firms Raise Foreign Currency
Denominated Debt? Evidence From Finland, European Financial Management 7, 481-496.

McBrady, Matthew R, Sandra Mortal, and Michael J Schill, 2010, Do Firms Believe in Interest
Rate Parity? The Review of Finance 14, 695-726.

Myers, Stewart and Nicholas Majluf, 1984, Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When
Firms Have Information Investors Do Not Have," Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221.

Pinkowitz, L., Stulz, R. M., & Williamson, R. (2016). Do U.S. Firms Hold More Cash than Foreign
    Firms Do? Review of Financial Studies, 29(2), 309-348.

Reeb, D., Mansi, S. A., & Allee, J. M. (2001). Firm Internationalization and the Cost of Debt
    Financing: Evidence from Non-Provisional Publicly Traded Debt. Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis, 36(3), 395­414.




                                                26
Shapiro, A. C. (1975). Exchange Rate Changes, Inflation, and the Value of the Multinational
    Corporation. The Journal of Finance, 30(2), 485­502.

Stein, J. (1997). Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources, The
     Journal of Finance, 52, 111-133.

Stein, J. (2003). Agency, Information and Corporate Investment, Chapter 2 in Handbook of the
     Economics of Finance, Edited by Constantinides, Harris and Stulz.

Sufi, A. (2007). Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evidence from Syndicated
     loans, The Journal of Finance, 62, 629-668.




                                            27
Figure 1: Number of Multinational Firms in the U.S.

This figure shows the proportion of multinational firms in the U.S. over the period of 1986 to 2017. The sample
includes all publicly traded firms in Compustat that are headquartered and incorporated in the U.S. and that have
positive total assets and positive sales. In a given year, a firm is defined as a multinational firm (MNC) if it reports
pre-tax foreign income (Compustat item: PIFO) at any point in the last three years, and as a domestic firm, otherwise.
The blue bar depicts the number of domestic firms and the orange bar the number of multinational firms each year.
The red dotted line shows the percentage of multinational firms, and the black solid line shows the average ratio of
foreign income to total income of multinational firms. The ratio of foreign income is calculated as the absolute value
of foreign income, divided by the sum of absolute values of domestic and foreign income.


                            Proportion of Multinational Firms in the U.S. 1986-2017
 8000                                                                                                             50%

                                                                                                                  45%
 7000
                                                                                                                  40%
 6000
                                                                                                                  35%
 5000
                                                                                                                  30%

 4000                                                                                                             25%

                                                                                                                  20%
 3000
                                                                                                                  15%
 2000
                                                                                                                  10%
 1000
                                                                                                                  5%

     0                                                                                                            0%
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
         2006
         2007
         2008
         2009
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015
         2016
         2017
                  # Domestic            # MNC             Average % Foreign Income of MNC             % MNC




                                                          28
Figure 2. Leverage and Cash Holding: Multinational vs. Domestic Firms
These scatter plots show the percentage of multinational firms and the differences in debt-to-asset ratio and cash-to-asset ratio of multinational firms and domestic
firms by country. In a given year, a firm is defined as a multinational firm (MNC) if it reports non-zero foreign income at any point in the last three years, and as a
domestic firm, otherwise. Each point represents a country. The x-axis represents the average percentage of multinational firms of each country based on the foreign-
income-based definition. The y-axis represents the differences in debt-to-asset ratios (Panel A) and cash-to-asset ratios (Panel B), which are calculated as the
average of debt-to-asset ratios (cash-to-asset ratios) of multinational firms minus that of domestic firms over 2000-2017. Developed countries are in orange squares
and emerging countries in blue circles. The red dotted line is the reference point where the ratios of multinational are equal to those of domestic firms.




                                                                                 29
Figure 3: Number of Multinational Firms by Industry

This figure shows the percentage of multinationals (MNC) and the average percentage of foreign income of
multinationals across industries in the U.S. (Panel A) and non-U.S. MSCI developed and emerging countries (Panel
B). In a given year, a firm is defined as a multinational firm (MNC) if it reports pre-tax foreign income at any point
in the last three years, and as a domestic firm, otherwise. Industries are based on the Fama-French 12 industry
classification.
                               Panel A. U.S. Multinational Firms by Industry 1986-2017
       70%
                                                 61%
       60%
                       48%      49%                     48%
       50%                                 44%
                                                  41%
       40%    33%        32%      34%                      33%                          33%                  32%
                31%                                                                                  29%
                                         27%                                      25% 24%                  25%
       30%                                                         22%
                                                                 15%        18% 19%
       20%
       10%                                                                                         5%
                                                                          1%
         0%




                       Panel B. International Multinational Firms by Industry 2000-2017
       40%                                 37%
       35%       30%     32%                                                                                 32%
                                  28%             29%      30%                              29%      30%
       30%                                                                  28%     27%
                                                                   23%
       25%
       20%                               17%
                       14%                              14%
       15%                      11%              11%                              11%
              10%                                                9%                       9%       9%      10%
       10%                                                                7%
         5%
         0%




                                        % MNC     Average % Foreign Income of MNC


                                                         30
Figure 4: Domestic Income vs. Foreign Income for U.S. Multinational Firms over NBER Business
Cycles

This figure documents the domestic income and foreign income for the U.S. multinational firms over the period of
1986 to 2017. The sample includes the U.S. multinational firms that report pre-tax foreign income at any point in the
last three years. The blue solid line depicts the average of the ratio of foreign income to sales and the orange dotted
line depicts the average of the ratio of domestic income to sales. The grey areas denote the NBER recession years.



                    Contribution of Foreign Operations for U.S. Multinational Firms 1986-2017
 8.0%                                                                                                           10.0%

                                                                                                                9.0%
 6.0%
                                                                                                                8.0%

                                                                                                                7.0%
 4.0%
                                                                                                                6.0%

 2.0%                                                                                                           5.0%

                                                                                                                4.0%
 0.0%
                                                                                                                3.0%
        1986
        1987
        1988
        1989
        1990
        1991
        1992
        1993
        1994
        1995
        1996
        1997
        1998
        1999
        2000
        2001
        2002
        2003
        2004
        2005
        2006
        2007
        2008
        2009
        2010
        2011
        2012
        2013
        2014
        2015
        2016
        2017
                                                                                                                2.0%
-2.0%
                                                                                                                1.0%

-4.0%                                                                                                           0.0%
                  NBER Recession            Foreign Income/Total Sales            Domestic Income/Total Sales




                                                         31
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics: Distribution of multinational firms
Tables show the descriptive statistics of multinational firms around the world. In Panel A, the sample covers 1986-
2017 for U.S. publicly-traded firms with positive total assets and sales in Compustat (U.S. firms). In Panel B, the
sample covers 2000-2017 for publicly-traded firms in 40 countries with positive total assets and sales in Worldscope
(international firms). We report statistics for 21 developed countries included in the MSCI World index (except U.S.)
as well as for 19 emerging countries in the MSCI Emerging Markets index (except Egypt, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, and
UAE). We use two ways to identify multinational firms (MNC). In the first definition (1), a firm is defined as
Multinational if it reports non-zero foreign income (Compustat item: PIFO; Worldscope item: WC07126) at any point
in the last three years, and as Domestic otherwise. In the second definition (2), a firm is flagged as a Multinational if
it has foreign sales (Geographic Segment data in Compustat; Worldscope item: WC07101) larger than or equal to 5%
of its total sales. In Panels A and B, the table shows the total number of firms, the percentage of multinational firms
based on two definitions, the average ratio of foreign sales to total sales, and the average ratio of foreign income to
total income across multinational firms by fiscal year. The ratio of foreign income is calculated as the absolute value
of foreign income, divided by the sum of absolute values of domestic and foreign income. In Panel C, we list the
percentage of multinationals across 41 countries including the U.S. based on two definitions. In the last four columns,
the averages of debt-to-asset and cash-to-asset ratios are reported separately for multinationals and domestic firms.
Statistics are averaged over the 2000-2017 time period.

Panel A: Number of Multinational Firms in the U.S.
                  Definition of MNC:        (1) Non-missing foreign            (2) Foreign sales
                                             income in past 3 years              5% total sales
                                                          Average %                       Average %
                                                            Foreign                        Foreign
                                                          Income of                        Sales of
                  Year        # Firms       % MNC            MNC             % MNC          MNC
                  1986         5149           20%             29%             18%            27%
                  1987         5376           20%             31%             19%            29%
                  1988         5189           20%             31%             19%            30%
                  1989         5024           20%             31%             20%            31%
                  1990         4979           20%             33%             20%            32%
                  1991         5090           21%             30%             21%            32%
                  1992         5273           22%             30%             22%            32%
                  1993         6364           22%             28%             20%            30%
                  1994         6707           20%             29%             21%            30%
                  1995         6834           20%             30%             22%            32%
                  1996         7233           21%             30%             23%            32%
                  1997         7208           21%             29%             24%            33%
                  1998         6824           22%             31%             26%            33%
                  1999         6625           22%             31%             29%            35%
                  2000         6323           21%             31%             31%            35%
                  2001         5683           23%             30%             33%            35%
                  2002         5284           26%             31%             34%            37%
                  2003         4998           27%             34%             35%            38%
                  2004         4936           30%             34%             36%            39%
                  2005         4844           32%             34%             36%            40%
                  2006         4726           33%             35%             36%            40%
                  2007         4554           35%             36%             36%            42%
                  2008         4271           36%             35%             37%            43%
                  2009         4065           38%             35%             38%            42%
                  2010         3923           39%             37%             38%            43%
                  2011         3822           41%             37%             39%            44%

                                                          32
                  2012          3771          42%              35%          39%              42%
                  2013          3824          43%              35%          39%              42%
                  2014          3929          44%              34%          39%              41%
                  2015          3878          43%              34%          38%              39%
                  2016          3752          44%              33%          39%              39%
                  2017          2647          48%              38%          40%              40%




Panel B: Number of Multinational Firms around the World

 Sample:           MSCI World (Developed) Countries                     MSCI Emerging Market Countries
 Definition
 of MNC:                 (1) Foreign Income   (2) Foreign Sales             (1) Foreign Income     (2) Foreign Sales
                                  Average             Average                        Average               Average
                                 % Foreign            % Foreign                     % Foreign              % Foreign
                          %      Income of     %       Sales of              %      Income of       %       Sales of
   Year       # Firms    MNC       MNC        MNC       MNC       # Firms   MNC       MNC          MNC       MNC
   2000        8767      17%        35%       39%       47%        3601      8%        28%         10%       39%
   2001        9221      19%        33%       40%       48%        3979      9%        28%         13%       39%
   2002        9330      20%        32%       40%       48%        5259     10%        23%         14%       39%
   2003        9691      20%        32%       40%       49%        6054      9%        23%         14%       40%
   2004        10248     20%        33%       39%       49%        6615      7%        27%         13%       42%
   2005        10814     21%        31%       37%       49%        8061      7%        31%         13%       42%
   2006        11094     21%        31%       36%       51%        8494      7%        30%         13%       44%
   2007        11116     20%        33%       36%       51%        8962      6%        30%         13%       43%
   2008        10928     20%        35%       36%       52%        9562      7%        32%         13%       45%
   2009        10742     20%        33%       37%       54%        10069     7%        32%         14%       43%
   2010        10718     19%        26%       37%       56%        10557     7%        23%         15%       47%
   2011        10709     18%        27%       37%       57%        11415     6%        13%         18%       48%
   2012        10999     13%        35%       41%       56%        11844     5%        19%         28%       44%
   2013        11020     12%        28%       41%       55%        12283     4%        23%         36%       45%
   2014        10981     11%        29%       40%       57%        12711     4%        22%         35%       45%
   2015        10890      8%        31%       36%       57%        12769     3%        24%         32%       44%
   2016        10717      7%        33%       35%       57%        12732     3%        25%         32%       44%
   2017        10473      5%        38%       34%       58%        12583     3%        26%         33%       44%




                                                          33
Panel C: Number of Multinational Firms across Countries

 Definition of MNC:             (1) Foreign Income        (2) Foreign Sales
                                         Average %                Average %
                                          Foreign                  Foreign      Debt/Assets     Cash/Assets
                      # Firm-            Income of                 Sales of      MNC vs.          MNC vs.
 Country                year    % MNC      MNC        % MNC         MNC          Domestic         Domestic
 AUSTRALIA             23851    16.2%      27.2%      18.3%         53.0%     0.164    0.143   0.225   0.282
 AUSTRIA               1141     18.8%      38.4%      70.9%         64.0%     0.249    0.240   0.118   0.131
 BELGIUM               1682     13.2%      40.4%      54.8%         60.1%     0.248    0.245   0.098   0.157
 BRAZIL                4182      2.6%      25.6%      14.5%         36.9%     0.346    0.322   0.147   0.121
 CANADA                21795    10.4%      35.6%      25.1%         64.6%     0.205    0.197   0.142   0.199
 CHILE                 2404      3.2%      40.4%      14.2%         50.1%     0.326    0.237   0.069   0.069
 CHINA                 38197     0.4%      24.5%      22.3%         33.7%     0.255    0.198   0.203   0.208
 COLOMBIA               448      0.7%       8.4%      15.2%         40.4%     0.410    0.173   0.033   0.084
 CZECH REPUBLIC         257      7.1%      16.1%      20.4%         29.9%     0.124    0.157   0.210   0.103
 DENMARK               2010      9.2%      36.3%      46.5%         68.4%     0.234    0.246   0.113   0.167
 FINLAND               2162     10.1%      37.7%      66.7%         61.6%     0.243    0.251   0.116   0.143
 FRANCE                10824    19.2%      35.5%      55.4%         49.2%     0.222    0.219   0.147   0.172
 GERMANY               10650    11.6%      35.3%      52.8%         51.5%     0.180    0.198   0.169   0.173
 GREECE                3180      7.7%      29.5%      22.9%         44.7%     0.389    0.343   0.088   0.085
 HONG KONG             2293     24.1%      30.6%      56.7%         66.4%     0.170    0.189   0.199   0.207
 HUNGARY                331      6.5%      38.0%      45.3%         50.2%     0.269    0.162   0.057   0.090
 INDIA                 32059     2.0%      37.0%      14.9%         47.1%     0.266    0.307   0.124   0.083
 INDONESIA             5500      3.3%      17.1%      14.3%         43.8%     0.286    0.311   0.131   0.109
 IRELAND                965     31.1%      43.3%      65.5%         67.2%     0.228    0.190   0.179   0.185
 ISRAEL                4109      4.7%      31.7%      27.0%         70.2%     0.291    0.252   0.200   0.250
 ITALY                 4061      7.0%      35.2%      48.9%         55.3%     0.263    0.277   0.096   0.118
 JAPAN                 51288    15.1%      23.8%      28.2%         35.2%     0.200    0.212   0.167   0.191
 MALAYSIA              14095    11.2%      21.7%      27.1%         41.4%     0.246    0.210   0.128   0.147
 MEXICO                1513     14.9%      24.5%      36.9%         40.0%     0.237    0.229   0.098   0.092
 NETHERLANDS           2193     20.7%      41.5%      72.0%         63.1%     0.230    0.237   0.134   0.132
 NEW ZEALAND           1864     19.5%      24.2%      28.1%         49.8%     0.281    0.232   0.085   0.119
 NORWAY                2816     10.3%      37.0%      45.9%         63.7%     0.277    0.274   0.152   0.193
 PHILIPPINES           2706      3.0%      23.6%      10.1%         35.8%     0.275    0.229   0.157   0.146
 POLAND                5488      2.7%      28.2%      21.9%         38.2%     0.204    0.181   0.079   0.114
 PORTUGAL               805     12.2%      38.8%      48.6%         47.5%     0.379    0.392   0.078   0.069
 RUSSIA                2882      1.4%      17.0%      15.1%         42.4%     0.382    0.264   0.056   0.099
 SINGAPORE             8467     12.3%      35.6%      56.1%         58.0%     0.180    0.206   0.196   0.205
 SOUTH AFRICA          4063     17.9%      24.1%      30.3%         36.8%     0.204    0.176   0.126   0.139
 SOUTH KOREA           14891     9.1%      17.1%      28.0%         40.9%     0.279    0.252   0.138   0.165
 SPAIN                 2148     15.1%      37.1%      61.8%         49.2%     0.352    0.298   0.096   0.101
 SWEDEN                7158      8.8%      35.2%      38.0%         62.9%     0.188    0.169   0.123   0.200
 SWITZERLAND           3213     15.3%      35.7%      73.4%         65.1%     0.189    0.204   0.165   0.184
 TAIWAN                24145    13.0%      28.7%      33.6%         58.7%     0.211    0.196   0.197   0.223
 THAILAND              7492      5.7%      23.1%      15.7%         46.0%     0.264    0.261   0.125   0.116
 TURKEY                3717      3.2%      26.4%      10.5%         37.7%     0.318    0.225   0.115   0.095
 UNITED KINGDOM        22963    31.1%      35.8%      48.4%         55.8%     0.181    0.180   0.167   0.199
 USA                   79230    34.4%      34.4%      36.4%         39.9%     0.211    0.235   0.200   0.167




                                                     34
Table 2: Industry Distribution of Multinational Firms around the World
Below we list the percentage of multinationals across industries in the U.S. (Panel A), in MSCI developed countries (Panel B), and in MSCI emerging countries
(Panel C). A firm is defined as Multinational if it reports non-zero foreign income (Compustat item: PIFO; Worldscope item: WC07126) at any point in the last
three years, and as Domestic otherwise. Industry is based on the Fama-French 12 industry classification. The first column lists the total number of firm-years, the
second column lists the percentage of multinational firms, and the third column lists the industry-level average ratio of foreign income for multinational firms. The
ratio of foreign income is calculated as the absolute value of foreign income, divided by the sum of absolute values of domestic and foreign income. Statistics are
for the 1986-2017 period for the U.S. sample (Panel A) and for the 2000-2017 period for the international sample (Panels B and C).

                                                             Panel A:                             Panel B:                                  Panel C:
                                                               U.S.                    MSCI World (Developed) Countries              MSCI Emerging Countries
                                                                        Average %                           Average %                                Average %
                                               # Firm-                   Foreign       # Firm-                Foreign           # Firm-                Foreign
 Industry                                        year      % MNC         Income          year   % MNC         Income              year     % MNC       Income
 Consumer Non-Durables                           8718      33.2%          30.8%         14173     17.4%        33.5%             22657      4.8%        23.1%
 Consumer Durables                               3905      47.5%          32.4%         5600      27.9%        32.9%             9715       5.2%        27.7%
 Manufacturing                                  16687      49.4%          33.8%         25115     18.7%        29.9%             38567      5.4%        24.9%
 Oil, Gas, and Coal Extraction                   6238      27.0%          43.8%         6086      25.1%        39.2%             3331       4.7%        18.3%
 Chemical and Allied Products                    3510      61.1%          40.8%         5473      24.6%        31.3%             10863      4.6%        22.3%
 Business Equipment                             28499      48.1%          33.3%         28062     17.9%        30.1%             27202      9.5%        28.9%
 Telephone and Television Transmission           3960      15.0%          21.5%         3541      13.5%        24.0%             3357       4.8%        20.3%
 Utilities                                       4693       1.3%          17.5%         2277      12.6%        27.8%             4163       2.4%        28.5%
 Wholesale and Retails                          16799      19.5%          24.8%         20641     13.8%        28.3%             11927      5.3%        20.2%
 Healthcare and Medical Equipment               15661      23.7%          32.9%         10574     15.1%        30.0%             8993       2.5%        23.6%
 Finance                                        34768       5.5%          28.8%         1127      12.2%        28.6%              815       6.8%        19.7%
 Other                                          19667      24.6%          31.6%         43714     13.5%        32.2%             25843      4.7%        24.9%




                                                                                35
Table 3. Characteristics of Multinationals

This table reports firm-level statistics for fundamental firm-level characteristics. In Panel A, the sample includes all publicly traded U.S. firms available in
Compustat with positive total assets and sales. Sample period covers 1986-2017. We report mean, median, and standard deviation. In Panel B, we report only the
means (to save space) for international firms available in Worldscope with positive total assets and sales. The sample covers 2000-2017 period for developed and
emerging MSCI countries. A firm is defined as Multinational if it reports non-zero foreign income (Compustat item: PIFO; Worldscope item: WC07126) at any
point in the last three years, and as Domestic otherwise. Total Assets and Market Capitalization are in US billions of dollars. Cash Flow and Cash are scaled by
total assets. Std of Cash Flow is calculated as the standard deviation of Cash Flow/Total Assets over previous five years with the minimum 3-year observations.
Rated is an indicator variable for a firm that has a S&P issuer rating. Investment Grade is an indicator of a firm that has a S&P investment grade issuer rating
(AAA, AA+, AA, or AA-) and Speculative Grade is an indicator of a firm that has a S&P speculative grade issuer rating (A+, A, A-, BBB+, BBB, or BBB-). Zero
Debt is an indicator for a firm-year with zero or missing long-term debt. Ratio variables are winsorized at 1 and 99%. The difference reported is based on t-test of
the mean. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A: U.S. Firms

                                                             Multinational                          Domestic                     Diff. in Mean
                                                     Mean      Median          Std         Mean      Median       Std           MNC - Domestic
                 Total Assets                        6.266      0.437        43.246         3.880    0.181       44.046           2.386***
                 Market Capitalization               4.902      0.479        22.140         1.332    0.106       8.223            3.570***
                 Sales Growth                        0.108      0.075         0.267         0.132    0.082       0.321            -0.024***
                 Cash Flow/Total Assets              0.115      0.124         0.147         0.074    0.078       0.168            0.041***
                 Std of Cash Flow                    0.070      0.046         0.078         0.076    0.042       0.103            -0.006***
                 Rated                               0.315      0.000         0.465         0.180    0.000       0.384            0.135***
                 Investment Grade                    0.152      0.000         0.359         0.080    0.000       0.272            0.071***
                 Speculative Grade                   0.135      0.000         0.341         0.082    0.000       0.274            0.053***
                 Cash/Total Assets                   0.189      0.114         0.197         0.158    0.061       0.215            0.031***
                 Total Debt/Total Assets             0.212      0.176         0.203         0.244    0.189       0.233            -0.033***
                 Zero Debt                           0.147      0.000         0.354         0.128    0.000       0.334            0.019***
                 # Firm-year Obs                     47337                                 115768
                 # Unique Firm                       5367                                  14736




                                                                                36
Panel B: International Firms

                                     MSCI World (Developed) Countries                    MSCI Emerging Countries
                                                                   Diff.                                      Diff. in Mean
                               Multinational    Domestic     MNC - Domestic   Multinational     Domestic    MNC - Domestic
    Total Assets                  4.806           1.640          3.166***        2.575            0.887          1.688***
    Market Capitalization         2.944           1.038          1.906***        1.638            0.771          0.867***
    Sales Growth                  0.070           0.070           -0.000         0.097            0.115         -0.018***
    Cash Flow/Total Assets        0.077           0.043          0.034***        0.112            0.102          0.010***
    Std of Cash Flow              0.110           0.147         -0.038***        0.062            0.078         -0.016***
    Cash/Total Assets             0.167           0.198         -0.031***        0.150            0.151            -0.000
    Total Debt/Total Assets       0.197           0.202         -0.005***        0.245            0.239           0.006**
    Zero Debt                     0.140           0.192         -0.052***        0.052            0.114         -0.062***
    # Firm-year Obs              30077           157433                          9298            157840
    # Unique Firm                 4126            17273                          1389             14969




                                                                37
Table 4. Capital Structure Characteristics (U.S. Sample)

This table reports details of capital structure for U.S. multinational firms vs. domestic firms. Panel A includes all firms. Panel B is for investment-grade firms while
Panel C is for speculative grade firms. The sample covers publicly-traded Compustat firms between 1997-2017 due to data availability in Capital IQ. A firm is
defined as Multinational it reports non-zero pre-tax foreign income (Compustat item: PIFO) at any point in the last three years, and as Domestic otherwise. All
debt structure variables are scaled by the total debt. Variables are winsorized at 1 and 99%. The difference reported is based on t-test of the mean. The symbols
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

           Panel A: All Firms                                 Multinational                                 Domestic                      Diff in Mean
                                                     Mean       Median           Std            Mean         Median         Std          MNC - Domestic
           Cash/Total Assets                         0.167       0.105          0.172           0.135        0.052         0.193           0.032***
           Total Debt/Total Assets                   0.237       0.211          0.200           0.265        0.208         0.235           -0.028***
           Long-Term Debt/Total Debt                 0.708       0.889          0.358           0.698        0.863         0.350           0.010***

           Debt Structure (% Total Debt)
           By type
             Sr. Bonds and Notes                     0.300         0.000        0.386           0.193         0.000        0.337             0.107***
             Sub. Bonds and Notes                    0.047         0.000        0.175           0.031         0.000        0.135             0.016***
             Commercial Paper                        0.009         0.000        0.056           0.003         0.000        0.029             0.006***
             Convertible Debt                        0.072         0.000        0.222           0.041         0.000        0.168             0.031***
             Bank Debt                               0.261         0.004        0.369           0.296         0.002        0.383             -0.034***
                Revolving Credit                     0.127         0.000        0.266           0.103         0.000        0.240             0.024***
                Term Loans                           0.140         0.000        0.279           0.196         0.000        0.329             -0.056***
             Cap. Leases                             0.046         0.000        0.183           0.037         0.000        0.163             0.009***
           By interest type
             Fixed Rate Debt                         0.365         0.116        0.406           0.321         0.000        0.396              0.044***
             Variable Rate Debt                      0.225         0.000        0.345           0.193         0.000        0.321              0.032***
             Zero Coupon Debt                        0.004         0.000        0.053           0.002         0.000        0.032              0.003***
           By priority
             Senior Debt                             0.620         0.987        0.462           0.560         0.848        0.466             0.060***
             Sub. Debt                               0.048         0.000        0.177           0.033         0.000        0.138             0.016***
             Secured Debt                            0.273         0.001        0.391           0.379         0.099        0.426             -0.106***
             Unsecured Debt                          0.404         0.133        0.440           0.247         0.000        0.364             0.157***
           # Firm-year Obs                           25031                                      52660
           # Unique Firm                              3197                                       7510


                                                                                  38
Panel B: Investment Grade               Multinational                   Domestic            Diff in Mean
                                Mean      Median         Std    Mean     Median     Std    MNC - Domestic
Cash/Total Assets               0.105      0.068        0.109   0.056    0.027     0.086     0.049***
Total Debt/Total Assets         0.257      0.242        0.143   0.289    0.292     0.179     -0.031***
Long-Term Debt/Total Debt       0.809      0.893        0.231   0.794    0.884     0.249      0.015**

Debt Structure (% Total Debt)
By type
  Sr. Bonds and Notes           0.584      0.744        0.388   0.459    0.536     0.400     0.125***
  Sub. Bonds and Notes          0.012      0.000        0.074   0.025    0.000     0.079     -0.013***
  Commercial Paper              0.044      0.000        0.112   0.025    0.000     0.075     0.019***
  Convertible Debt              0.032      0.000        0.130   0.016    0.000     0.084     0.016***
  Bank Debt                     0.064      0.000        0.149   0.112    0.000     0.204     -0.048***
     Revolving Credit           0.034      0.000        0.109   0.047    0.000     0.117     -0.013***
     Term Loans                 0.030      0.000        0.097   0.065    0.000     0.159     -0.035***
  Cap. Leases                   0.008      0.000        0.037   0.006    0.000     0.034       0.002*
By interest type
  Fixed Rate Debt               0.576      0.750        0.400   0.492    0.590     0.400     0.085***
  Variable Rate Debt            0.069      0.000        0.148   0.085    0.000     0.162     -0.016***
  Zero Coupon Debt              0.005      0.000        0.048   0.002    0.000     0.023     0.003***
By priority
  Senior Debt                   0.705      0.993        0.437   0.611    0.878     0.444     0.094***
  Sub. Debt                     0.012      0.000        0.074   0.025    0.000     0.079     -0.013***
  Secured Debt                  0.045      0.000        0.139   0.190    0.010     0.279     -0.145***
  Unsecured Debt                0.694      0.971        0.426   0.498    0.568     0.408     0.196***
# Firm-year Obs                 4527                            5074
# Unique Firm                    505                             629




                                                         39
Panel C: Speculative Grade              Multinational                   Domestic            Diff in Mean
                                Mean      Median         Std    Mean     Median     Std    MNC - Domestic
Cash/Total Assets               0.108      0.069        0.118   0.087    0.042     0.123     0.021***
Total Debt/Total Assets         0.394      0.369        0.200   0.478    0.459     0.225     -0.084***
Long-Term Debt/Total Debt       0.897      0.971        0.195   0.923    0.988     0.174     -0.025***

Debt Structure (% Total Debt)
By type
  Sr. Bonds and Notes           0.386      0.355        0.370   0.371    0.264     0.382        0.015*
  Sub. Bonds and Notes          0.119      0.000        0.251   0.109    0.000     0.241         0.009
  Commercial Paper              0.000      0.000        0.005   0.000    0.000     0.006         0.000
  Convertible Debt              0.109      0.000        0.247   0.072    0.000     0.198      0.037***
  Bank Debt                     0.287      0.180        0.318   0.240    0.102     0.297      0.047***
     Revolving Credit           0.079      0.000        0.167   0.083    0.000     0.162        -0.004
     Term Loans                 0.211      0.016        0.297   0.158    0.000     0.271      0.052***
  Cap. Leases                   0.018      0.000        0.086   0.014    0.000     0.060       0.005**
By interest type
  Fixed Rate Debt               0.513      0.562        0.373   0.483    0.539     0.384      0.030***
  Variable Rate Debt            0.256      0.108        0.313   0.221    0.062     0.290      0.035***
  Zero Coupon Debt              0.004      0.000        0.053   0.001    0.000     0.020      0.003***
By priority
  Senior Debt                   0.675      0.933        0.400   0.595    0.783     0.430      0.081***
  Sub. Debt                     0.120      0.000        0.252   0.110    0.000     0.242        0.010
  Secured Debt                  0.351      0.253        0.358   0.316    0.175     0.351      0.035***
  Unsecured Debt                0.474      0.495        0.386   0.432    0.414     0.390      0.042***
# Firm-year Obs                 4596                            5868
# Unique Firm                    837                            1171




                                                         40
Table 5. Capital Structure Characteristics ­ Subsamples based on Firm Size (U.S. Sample)

This table reports details of capital structure for large/small multinational firms vs. domestic firms. Large domestic firms, in Panel A, are identified as with total
assets larger than or equal to the median total assets of multinational firms, with the median estimated each year. In Panel B, smaller-than-median domestic firms
are compared with multinational firms with assets smaller than or equal to the median asset of the domestic firms, with the median estimated each year. All debt
structure variables are scaled by the total debt. The difference reported is based on t-test of the mean. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

           Panel A:                                      Large Multinational                            Large Domestic                    Diff in Mean
                                                     Mean      Median        Std                Mean        Median      Std              MNC - Domestic
           Cash/Total Assets                         0.125      0.079      0.131                0.067       0.033      0.101               0.058***
           Total Debt/Total Assets                   0.280      0.260      0.184                0.312       0.278      0.228               -0.032***
           Long-Term Debt/Total Debt                 0.815      0.934      0.270                0.786       0.925      0.285               0.029***

           Debt Structure (% Total Debt)
           By type
             Sr. Bonds and Notes                     0.441        0.461        0.396            0.283        0.000        0.372             0.159***
             Sub. Bonds and Notes                    0.054        0.000        0.180            0.039        0.000        0.139             0.015***
             Commercial Paper                        0.017        0.000        0.073            0.008        0.000        0.043             0.009***
             Convertible Debt                        0.073        0.000        0.212            0.034        0.000        0.140             0.039***
             Bank Debt                               0.201        0.017        0.300            0.278        0.097        0.338             -0.078***
                Revolving Credit                     0.084        0.000        0.197            0.079        0.000        0.181               0.005*
                Term Loans                           0.119        0.000        0.239            0.201        0.000        0.308             -0.082***
             Cap. Leases                             0.022        0.000        0.111            0.011        0.000        0.073             0.010***
           By interest type
             Fixed Rate Debt                         0.494        0.556        0.398            0.443        0.444        0.397              0.051***
             Variable Rate Debt                      0.185        0.000        0.289            0.168        0.026        0.262              0.017***
             Zero Coupon Debt                        0.005        0.000        0.055            0.001        0.000        0.023              0.004***
           By priority
             Senior Debt                             0.680        0.988        0.432            0.628        0.879        0.431             0.052***
             Sub. Debt                               0.055        0.000        0.181            0.040        0.000        0.141             0.015***
             Secured Debt                            0.188        0.001        0.311            0.365        0.199        0.389             -0.177***
             Unsecured Debt                          0.568        0.723        0.429            0.358        0.187        0.384             0.210***
           # Firm-year Obs                           13415                                      21904
           # Unique Firm                              1532                                       2832


                                                                                 41
Panel B:                            Small Multinational               Small Domestic          Diff in Mean
                                Mean      Median        Std   Mean       Median       Std    MNC - Domestic
Cash/Total Assets               0.233      0.177      0.206   0.205       0.102      0.236     0.028***
Total Debt/Total Assets         0.171      0.103      0.205   0.221       0.144      0.235     -0.050***
Long-Term Debt/Total Debt       0.537      0.652      0.409   0.595       0.729      0.387     -0.057***

Debt Structure (% Total Debt)
By type
  Sr. Bonds and Notes           0.120      0.000      0.283   0.131       0.000      0.295      -0.011**
  Sub. Bonds and Notes          0.027      0.000      0.138   0.022       0.000      0.118       0.005**
  Commercial Paper              0.001      0.000      0.028   0.000       0.000      0.005       0.001**
  Convertible Debt              0.062      0.000      0.217   0.047       0.000      0.186      0.015***
  Bank Debt                     0.349      0.000      0.434   0.312       0.000      0.419      0.036***
     Revolving Credit           0.179      0.000      0.325   0.126       0.000      0.282      0.053***
     Term Loans                 0.177      0.000      0.329   0.189       0.000      0.343      -0.012**
  Cap. Leases                   0.089      0.000      0.260   0.063       0.000      0.217      0.025***
By interest type
  Fixed Rate Debt               0.198      0.000      0.351   0.219       0.000      0.365     -0.021***
  Variable Rate Debt            0.283      0.000      0.405   0.219       0.000      0.366     0.064***
  Zero Coupon Debt              0.005      0.000      0.057   0.002       0.000      0.041      0.002**
By priority
  Senior Debt                   0.571      0.994      0.483   0.523       0.814      0.485      0.048***
  Sub. Debt                     0.030      0.000      0.144   0.024       0.000      0.124       0.005**
  Secured Debt                  0.407      0.023      0.457   0.404       0.002      0.457        0.003
  Unsecured Debt                0.194      0.000      0.355   0.155       0.000      0.317      0.039***
# Firm-year Obs                 8679                          23888
# Unique Firm                   1792                           4739




                                                       42
Table 6. Capital Structure Characteristics (International Sample)

This table reports details of capital structure for multinational firms vs. domestic firms in MSCI Developed Countries
in Panel A and in MSCI Emerging Countries in Panel B. The sample covers publicly-traded firms covered in
Worldscope and Capital IQ between 2000-2017. A firm is defined as Multinational if it reports non-zero foreign
income at any point in the last three years, and as Domestic otherwise. All debt structure variables are scaled by the
total debt. We report only the means and the difference in mean between multinational firms and domestic firms.
Variables are winsorized at 1 and 99%. The difference reported is based on t-test of the mean. The symbols ***, **,
and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A: MSCI World (Developed) Countries

                                                  Multinational         Domestic              Diff.
            Cash/Total Assets                        0.146               0.166             -0.019***
            Total Debt/Total Assets                  0.217               0.234             -0.017***
            Long-Term Debt/Total Debt                0.519               0.495             0.024***

            Debt Structure (% Total Debt)
            By type
              Sr. Bonds and Notes                     0.142               0.099            0.043***
              Sub. Bonds and Notes                    0.006               0.006               0.000
              Commercial Paper                        0.008               0.003            0.005***
              Convertible Debt                        0.043               0.036            0.008***
              Bank Debt                               0.520               0.520              -0.001
                 Revolving Credit                     0.115               0.103            0.013***
                 Term Loans                           0.406               0.419            -0.013***
              Cap. Leases                             0.056               0.063            -0.008***
            By interest type
              Fixed Rate Debt                         0.287               0.229            0.058***
              Variable Rate Debt                      0.183               0.162            0.021***
              Zero Coupon Debt                        0.008               0.010            -0.002***
            By priority
              Senior Debt                            0.759                0.697            0.062***
              Sub. Debt                              0.008                0.009              -0.001
              Secured Debt                           0.236                0.267            -0.031***
              Unsecured Debt                         0.534                0.454            0.080***
            # Firm-year Obs                          26799               133281
            # Unique Firm                            3862                 15867




                                                         43
Panel B: MSCI Emerging Countries

                                        Multinational   Domestic     Diff.
        Cash/Total Assets                  0.144         0.136     0.009***
        Total Debt/Total Assets            0.251         0.258     -0.006**
        Long-Term Debt/Total Debt          0.397         0.366     0.030***

        Debt Structure (% Total Debt)
        By type
          Sr. Bonds and Notes              0.132         0.072      0.060***
          Sub. Bonds and Notes             0.001         0.001       0.001**
          Commercial Paper                 0.011         0.005      0.006***
          Convertible Debt                 0.035         0.019      0.015***
          Bank Debt                        0.564         0.579     -0.015***
             Revolving Credit              0.159         0.155        0.003
             Term Loans                    0.409         0.434     -0.025***
          Cap. Leases                      0.028         0.030        -0.002
        By interest type
          Fixed Rate Debt                  0.191         0.175     0.017***
          Variable Rate Debt               0.276         0.184     0.092***
          Zero Coupon Debt                 0.019         0.015     0.004***
        By priority
          Senior Debt                      0.744         0.720      0.024***
          Sub. Debt                        0.002         0.001        0.001
          Secured Debt                     0.326         0.381     -0.055***
          Unsecured Debt                   0.447         0.357      0.090***
        # Firm-year Obs                    8921         142704
        # Unique Firm                      1364          14576




                                               44
Table 7. Sources of Bank Loans

This table presents the percentage of the number of loans that include at least one lender from each country in loan
syndicates. The sample includes syndicated bank loans issued to U.S. public firms in Compustat during the period
from 1990 to 2018 from Dealscan. Multinational is the indicator denoting a multinational borrower that reports non-
zero foreign income (PIFO) at any point in the last three years, and % Foreign Income is the absolute value of foreign
income (PIFO), divided by the sum of absolute values of domestic (PIDOM) and foreign income (PIFO). Each column
shows the percentage of number of loans to multinational firms and domestic firms, respectively, that include at least
one lender from each country in a loan syndicate. The list of lender countries is in descending order of loans to
multinational firms.

                     Lender Country:           Loans to Multinational      Loans to Domestic
                     Canada                           32.56%                     22.46%
                     United Kingdom                   31.79%                     15.76%
                     Japan                            28.76%                     16.37%
                     France                           24.50%                     16.31%
                     Germany                          22.40%                     13.39%
                     Netherlands                      16.30%                     7.86%
                     Switzerland                      14.22%                     9.27%
                     Italy                             7.34%                     1.51%
                     Australia                         4.55%                     1.60%
                     Belgium                           3.83%                     2.07%
                     Spain                             3.61%                     0.90%
                     China                             3.26%                     0.92%
                     Norway                            2.97%                     0.94%
                     Taiwan                            2.06%                     1.90%
                     Ireland                           1.64%                     0.96%
                     Sweden                            1.55%                     0.25%
                     Hong Kong                         1.50%                     0.64%
                     Israel                            1.43%                     1.30%
                     Denmark                           1.35%                     0.38%
                     Singapore                         1.27%                     0.42%
                     Observations                      15,051                    24,641




                                                         45
Table 8. Regressions: Access to Foreign Bank Loans

This table presents estimates of the relation between having multinational operations and access to foreign lenders in bank loans.
The estimation is from the OLS regression, where the dependent variable is the indicator that a syndicate includes at least one
foreign lender in columns (1) to (2) and the percentage of the foreign lenders in the syndicate in columns (3) to (4). The sample
includes syndicated bank loans issued to U.S. public firms in Compustat during the period from 1990 to 2018 from Dealscan. All
firm-level controls are obtained from Compustat and they are estimated in one year prior to the loan issuance year. Multinational
is the indicator denoting a multinational borrower that reports non-zero foreign income (PIFO) at any point in the last three years,
and % Foreign Income is the absolute value of foreign income (PIFO), divided by the sum of absolute values of domestic (PIDOM)
and foreign income (PIFO). We define Loan Size as log of loan amount in US million dollars, Maturity as log of maturity in months,
Secured as an indicator variable equal to one if the loan package is secured and equal to zero otherwise, Revolver as an indicator
variable equal to one if the loan package includes a revolver, Termloan as an indicator variable equal to one if the loan package
includes a term loan, # Lenders as log of the number of lenders in the syndicate, Firm Size as log of total assets (AT), Firm
Profitability as operating income before depreciation (OIBDP) scaled by total assets, and Firm Tangibility as property, plant and
equipment (PPENT) scaled by total assets. S&P rating is based on long-term public bond rating (SPLTICRM) coded into eight
categories as AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, B, CCC+ and below, and unrated. All regressions include loan issuance year fixed effects,
industry (measured in SIC 2-digit code) fixed effects, S&P rating fixed effects, and deal purpose fixed effects. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level and associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                           (1)              (2)                         (3)                (4)
      Dep. Var. =                     Borrow from Foreign Lender = 1                 % Foreign Lender in Syndicate

      Multinational                      0.050***                                      0.035***
                                           (7.35)                                        (7.19)
      % Foreign Income                                          0.108***                                      0.092***
                                                                   (9.07)                                      (10.26)
      Loan Size                           0.015***              0.015***                0.008***              0.008***
                                             (4.59)                (4.64)                 (3.09)                 (3.12)
      Maturity                           -0.018***              -0.018***              -0.010***              -0.010***
                                            (-4.57)                (-4.55)               (-3.56)                (-3.63)
      Secured                              0.012**                0.013**               0.010***              0.011***
                                             (2.00)                (2.05)                 (2.67)                 (2.80)
      Revolver                            -0.013**               -0.014**              -0.025***              -0.025***
                                            (-2.10)                (-2.19)               (-5.53)                (-5.50)
      Termloan                            0.025***              0.024***                0.026***              0.026***
                                             (4.18)                (4.01)                 (6.95)                 (6.83)
      # Lenders                           0.252***              0.252***                0.060***              0.059***
                                           (71.30)                (71.11)                (21.54)               (21.43)
      Firm Size                           0.029***              0.029***                0.034***              0.033***
                                             (9.69)                (9.71)                (14.63)               (14.53)
      Firm Profitability                     0.007                  0.008              -0.067***              -0.068***
                                             (0.28)                (0.30)                (-3.70)                (-3.76)
      Firm Tangibility                       0.006                  0.004                 -0.002                -0.001
                                             (0.34)                (0.25)                (-0.15)                (-0.11)

      Year FE                                 Y                      Y                      Y                      Y
      Industry FE                             Y                      Y                      Y                      Y
      Borrower Rating FE                      Y                      Y                      Y                      Y
      Deal Purpose FE                         Y                      Y                      Y                      Y

      Observations                         34,135                 33,717                 34,135                 33,717
      Adj-R2                               0.499                   0.499                 0.291                   0.294

                                                                46
Table 9. Equity Ownership

This table presents the percentage of foreign institutional ownership of equity of U.S. public firms. The sample
includes firm-year panel of publicly-traded U.S. firms in Compustat from 2000 to 2017 with positive total assets and
sales reported. A firm is defined as Multinational if it reports non-zero foreign income at any point in the last three
years, and as Domestic otherwise. The institutional holding information is obtained from Factset and we aggregate
mutual fund holdings and institutional holdings reported in 13F filings at the firm level to estimate the percentage of
number of shares held by foreign institutional investors. When a firm-year observation is not matched to the Factset
institutional holding data, we treat missing information as zero. The columns show the average of foreign ownership
and the ownership by institutional investors from each country as the percentage of total number of shares outstanding
of multinational firms (A) and domestic firms (B). The difference reported is based on t-test of the mean. The symbols
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                           Multinational (A)        Domestic (B)           Diff. (A) - (B)
         Foreign Ownership                      4.27%                   1.77%                  2.50***
         Ownership by Country
           United Kingdom                       1.41%                   0.62%                  0.79***
           Canada                               0.86%                   0.44%                  0.42***
           Germany                              0.41%                   0.26%                  0.15***
           Norway                               0.35%                   0.13%                  0.22***
           China                                0.24%                   0.13%                  0.12***
           Japan                                0.20%                   0.07%                  0.13***
           Netherlands                          0.18%                   0.07%                  0.12***
           France                               0.16%                   0.07%                  0.10***
           Sweden                               0.12%                   0.06%                  0.06***
         # Firm-year Obs                        25852                   49241




                                                         47
Table 10. Cost of Debt

This table presents estimates of the relation between having multinational operations and cost of debt. The estimation is from the
OLS regression, where the dependent variable is the all-in-drawn spread in basis points. The sample includes syndicated bank loans
issued to U.S. public firms in Compustat during the period from 1990 to 2018 from Dealscan. All firm-level controls are obtained
from Compustat and they are estimated in one year prior to the loan issuance year. Multinational is the indicator denoting a
multinational borrower that reports non-zero foreign income (PIFO) at any point in the last three years, and % Foreign Income is
the absolute value of foreign income (PIFO), divided by the sum of absolute values of domestic (PIDOM) and foreign income
(PIFO). We define Loan Size as log of loan amount in US million dollars, Maturity as log of maturity in months, Secured as an
indicator variable equal to one if the loan package is secured and equal to zero otherwise, Revolver as an indicator variable equal
to one if the loan package includes a revolver, Termloan as an indicator variable equal to one if the loan package includes a term
loan, # Lenders as log of the number of lenders in the syndicate, Firm Size as log of total assets (AT), Firm Profitability as operating
income before depreciation (OIBDP) scaled by total assets (AT), and Firm Tangibility as property, plant and equipment (PPENT)
scaled by total assets. S&P rating is based on long-term public bond rating (SPLTICRM) coded into eight categories as AAA, AA,
A, BBB, BB, B, CCC+ and below, and unrated. All regressions include loan issuance year fixed effects, industry (measured in SIC
2-digit code) fixed effects, S&P rating fixed effects, and deal purpose fixed effects. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of
observations at the firm level and associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                                                        (1)                 (2)
                                  Dep. Var.                                   Loan Spread

                                  Multinational                     -4.432**
                                                                     (-2.56)
                                  % Foreign Income                                      -8.235***
                                                                                          (-2.73)
                                  Loan Size                        -11.137***          -11.157***
                                                                     (-11.29)            (-11.32)
                                  Maturity                         -14.499***          -14.483***
                                                                     (-11.46)            (-11.39)
                                  Secured                           57.915***           57.770***
                                                                      (35.20)             (34.95)
                                  Revolver                          9.255***            9.443***
                                                                       (4.35)              (4.42)
                                  Termloan                          54.887***           54.722***
                                                                      (30.84)             (30.74)
                                  # Lenders                         -7.857***           -7.885***
                                                                      (-8.41)             (-8.45)
                                  Firm Size                         -6.626***           -6.769***
                                                                      (-7.31)             (-7.47)
                                  Firm Profitability              -230.751***         -231.976***
                                                                     (-26.90)            (-26.86)
                                  Firm Tangibility                     -0.580              -0.629
                                                                      (-0.13)             (-0.14)

                                  Year FE                               Y                    Y
                                  Industry FE                           Y                    Y
                                  Borrower Rating FE                    Y                    Y
                                  Deal Purpose FE                       Y                    Y

                                  Observations                       29,016               28,660
                                  Adj-R2                              0.549                0.550


                                                                  48
