                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FORWARD GUIDANCE AND HOUSEHOLD EXPECTATIONS

                                        Olivier Coibion
                                      Dimitris Georgarakos
                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                        Michael Weber

                                       Working Paper 26778
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26778


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We thank the Fama-Miller Center and the Initiative on Global Markets, both at the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support for conducting the surveys. Coibion,
Gorodnichenko, and Weber also thank the NSF for financial support. We are grateful to Narayana
Kocherlakota and seminar and conference participants at many institutions. We thank Jonas
Dalmazzo, Mathieu Pedemonte and Vitalia Yaremko for excellent research assistance. We also
thank Shannon Hazlett and Victoria Stevens at Nielsen for their assistance with the collection of
the PanelViews Survey. Results in this article are calculated based on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing Data
Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Information on availability and
access to the data is available at http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen. The randomized control
trial is registered at the AER RCT Registry (#AEARCTR- 0005378). The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Central
Bank, the Euro system, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Olivier Coibion, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Forward Guidance and Household Expectations
Olivier Coibion, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 26778
February 2020
JEL No. C83,D84,E31

                                           ABSTRACT

We compare the causal effects of forward guidance communication about future interest rates on
households' expectations of inflation, mortgage rates, and unemployment to the effects of
communication about future inflation in a randomized controlled trial using more than 25,000
U.S. individuals in the Nielsen Homescan panel. We elicit individuals' expectations and then
provide 22 different forms of information regarding past, current and/or future inflation and
interest rates. Information treatments about current and next year's interest rates have a strong
effect on household expectations but treatments beyond one year do not have any additional
impact on forecasts. Exogenous variation in inflation expectations transmits into other
expectations. The richness of our survey allows us to better understand how individuals form
expectations about macroeconomic variables jointly and the non-response to long-run forward
guidance is consistent with models in which agents have constrained capacity to collect and
process information.

Olivier Coibion                                   Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin                     530 Evans Hall #3880
2225 Speedway                                     University of California, Berkeley
Austin, TX 78712                                  Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                          and IZA
ocoibion@gmail.com                                and also NBER
                                                  ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
Dimitris Georgarakos
European Central Bank                             Michael Weber
Sonnemannstrasse 20 (Main Building)               Booth School of Business
60314 Frankfurt am Main                           University of Chicago
Germany                                           5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
dimitris.georgarakos@ecb.int                      Chicago, IL 60637
                                                  and NBER
                                                  michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5378
"Under the empirically reasonable assumption that what matters for aggregate spending is the entire
expected path of short-term rates rather than just the current level, [forward guidance] enables the Fed
to provide substantial additional accommodation during zero lower bound episodes. The strategy also
potentially supports aggregate demand by raising inflation expectations, thereby lowering real long-
term rates relative to a Taylor Rule type baseline."                    Janet Yellen, September 2018.1


1          Introduction
As monetary policy-makers in many advanced economies pushed short term interest rates to zero
during the financial crisis, attention quickly turned to other tools that could be used to further stimulate
economic activity. Along with quantitative easing, forward guidance about the path of future interest
rates became one of the main tools that central banks developed to address the exceptional
circumstances they were facing. Since the zero-bound period remains likely to return even in those
economies that were fortunate enough to eventually exit it, understanding how forward guidance
affects economic outcomes remains a central question in policy-making. But because the mechanism
of forward guidance is through expectations and these are not readily observable, it has been difficult
to establish how policy announcements about the future actually affect individual economic actors.
           In this paper, we implement a large-scale randomized control trial (RCT) on a representative
sample of about 25,000 U.S. consumers to whom we provide, in a randomized fashion, different pieces
of information about the evolution of future interest rates as well as about past and current rates and
inflation. This RCT approach provides a transparent way to assess whether the exogenous provision of
information about future interest rates changes households' economic expectations. The large scale of the
experiment allows us to characterize in unprecedented detail how the magnitude of the treatment as well
as the time horizon of the announcement affect the size of individuals' revisions as well as how they
change their views about different economic variables (e.g. long-term interest rates vs. inflation vs.
unemployment). We can also compare how the provision of different types of information (such as about
interest rates vs. inflation) translates into changes in households' expectations.
           We document a number of new results from this large-scale experiment. First, prior to any
information treatment, we find that households' knowledge about interest rates is limited: the cross-
sectional dispersion in their beliefs about the levels of interest rates is as high as previously
documented for their beliefs about inflation (e.g., Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber 2019). Second,
the provision of information about the current level of interest rates leads to large revisions in
households' expectations about interest rates over short horizons, but much less so over longer

1
    https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2018/09/14/comments-on-monetary-policy-at-the-effective-lower-bound/
                                                                                                                   1
horizons. Third, providing information about interest rates at longer horizons (such as two to three
years) has relatively small effects on households' expectations over future interest rates. Fourth,
households tend to revise their inflation expectations along with their interest rate expectations when
provided with information about interest rates, but not in a one-for-one fashion, so that their perceived
real interest rates still adjust. Fifth, treatments about recent or future inflation have even larger effects
on real interest rates than do most treatments about nominal interest rates. Sixth, we detect little
sensitivity in households' expectations about unemployment to treatments. Finally, these exogenous
changes in beliefs about future interest rates and inflation are associated with revisions in whether
households perceive that now is a good or bad time to purchase durable goods.
        To measure how households' expectations change in response to information treatments, we
first elicit households' expectations on a host of variables including inflation, mortgage rates, and the
unemployment rate. We then provide information treatments to households and finally, elicit household
expectations again, both shortly after the treatment as well as after three and six months. The latter
allows us to characterize how persistent the effects of different information treatments are on
households' expectations. Consistent with earlier work, we find that treatments about inflation have
relatively short-lived effects (strongly mitigated within three months and completely dissipated within
six months) while treatments about interest rates have much more long-lived effects. These results imply
that policy makers could choose different strategies for forward guidance depending on how persistent
they would like the effects to be (e.g. guidance about the instrument for persistent effects and guidance
about an inflation objective to have more transient effects).
        Because our survey has such a large cross-section, we are able to consider an exceptionally large
number of different treatments relative to previous work. Specifically, we vary (i) the variable on which
we provide information: policy rates, inflation, mortgage market rates; (ii) the horizon over which we
provide information: current, past, future periods up to three years into the future and for the longer run;
and (iii) the interest rate trajectories: central tendency, upper range, lower range. This variety in treatments
is the source of our ability to identify in such detail what types of information affect households' beliefs
most and which dimensions are less important. For example, we find no meaningful differences across
treatments depending on the specific path of interest rates provided. Informing households about the upper
range of FOMC members' projections about the future path of interest rates leads to very similar results
as providing them with the lower contour of those same projections. These results imply that the
communications arms race of central bankers could be important for financial markets but less so for the
broader public (Vissing-Jorgensen 2019). But as noted earlier, some dimensions are quite important,
                                                                                                              2
especially the time horizon about which the information is provided. The effects of information treatments
about interest rates far in the future are significantly smaller than those found for near-term interest rates.
        The fact that households do not adjust their expectations to a larger extent to information beyond
one year provides empirical support to theories that model decision makers with limited capacity to collect
and process information: e.g., limited planning horizons (Woodford 2018), bounded rationality (Gabaix
2019), level-k thinking (Farhi and Werning 2019), lack of common information (Angeletos and Lian
2018). While the exact micro foundations differ across studies, they share the feature that agents with
limited abilities react less to information in the far future relative to information about the current and
immediate future and hence possibly resolve the forward guidance puzzle.
        The recent focus of policymakers on forward guidance originates in part from the fact that
conventional monetary policy is no longer feasible once policy rates hit the effective lower bound. One
potential caveat of our survey could therefore be that we implemented it during a period in which the US
has already normalized interest rates to positive levels. We believe our findings still provide important
insights for several reasons. First, many households have expectations and perceptions of current interest
rates that deviate significantly from the actual rates so their reaction in the survey is informative about
how individuals would actually react to a forward guidance announcement. Second, the use of forward
guidance long predates the Great Recession and the extent to which forward guidance affects financial
markets has been studied not only during the zero bound but also outside of it (Guerkaynak et al. 2005).
Third, central bankers anticipate that forward guidance and other communications-based policies can
become a more conventional tool in the future (Blinder et al. 2017). Fourth, to the extent we exploit cross-
sectional variation, we can keep constant the level of interest rates and only exploit differences in the
reaction of individuals to different treatments.
        Randomized controlled trials have recently become more common in macroeconomics (e.g.,
Armona et al. 2019, Coibion et al. 2019a,b, Binder and Rodrigue 2018, Roth and Wohlfart 2018).
Following the design of research in applied micro and development, these papers typically study how
randomized treatments affect individuals' expectations and decisions in domains that are directly
affected by the treatments. Yet, in macroeconomic contexts, feedback effects, general equilibrium
effects, and the expectations on how other aggregate variables move in response to the treatment are
important for the overall response of individuals. A central innovation in our survey design is the fact
that we can jointly study the response of several economic expectations to our different treatments to
better predict how individuals form expectations jointly and how they might react to actual
announcements by central banks on how the future path of policy rates or inflation might evolve.
                                                                                                             3
Furthermore, we study how information about past, current, and future policy rates influences
expectations of households and contrast these responses with those of households who are informed
about inflation, a powerful force for moving households expectations about macroeconomic variables
(e.g., Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber 2019) as well as a strong determinant of households'
consumption (e.g., Coibion et al. 2019 and D'Acunto et al. 2016).
        Our paper is closely related to an extensive body of work on the effect of forward guidance (Del
Negro et al. 2015, Campbell et al. 2012, Andrade and Ferroni 2018). However, we differ from this work
along a number of dimensions. First, much of this work (e.g., Chodorow-Reich 2014) has concentrated
on how forward guidance affects financial markets and nominal interest rates of different maturities. This
focus reflects the common viewpoint among policymakers that the main channel through which forward
guidance operates is precisely via financial markets: changing expectations of future short-term interest
rates affects current long-term interest rates which, if inflation expectations are anchored, then leads to
changes in the real interest rates faced by households and firms, which in turn affects their behavior.
However, this viewpoint is incomplete. We show, for example, that providing information about future
interest rates changes not just the perceived path of nominal rates but also inflation expectations, so that
the pass-through to households' real interest rates is much less than one-for-one. Moreover, many
households do not adjust their propensities to take out loans to changes in interest rates (D'Acunto et al.
2018b). If households draw inference from forward guidance about the future state of the economy, this
can also affect their expectations of their future income and therefore their spending decisions. In addition,
households may be sensitive not just to the level of long-term interest rates but also to their expected path:
the timing of durable goods purchases is likely to depend on whether households expect interest rates to
rise or fall in the future because purchases of durable goods have a very high intertemporal elasticity of
substitution (e.g., House and Shapiro 2008). Understanding how households revise their views about the
path of future interest rates is therefore of interest independently of how financial markets revise their
views. We regard our results on the response of households' expectations as complementary to earlier
work focusing on financial markets by helping to identify additional channels through which forward
guidance shapes economic outcomes.
        Another strand of literature focuses on the aggregate effects of forward guidance, primarily using
time series analysis (e.g., Swanson 2018; see Bhattarai and Neely 2018 for a survey). This work is of
direct use in measuring how the economy responds to forward guidance, but it does not speak directly to
the underlying mechanisms at work. Our approach is complementary: we are able to identify how
households' expectations respond to information about current and future interest rates but are unable to
                                                                                                            4
speak directly to the general equilibrium effects that would obtain were all households to respond in a
similar fashion. However, by more precisely identifying the mechanisms, we hope that our work can be
used to differentiate between and quantify models of forward guidance, which in turn can then be used
for policy analysis and counterfactuals.
        Finally, our paper relates to a much broader literature on central bank communication and
how this communication shapes household expectations and decision-making. This literature has
emphasized two general stylized facts. One is that households (and firms) are often inattentive to
policy and relatively uninformed about macroeconomic aggregates. A second is that, despite this
inattention, households' expectations about future aggregate conditions affect their decisions (see
Coibion et al. 2018c for a survey of this literature). The results in this paper corroborate these two
stylized facts but do so in the specific context of forward guidance. This growing body of evidence
supports the recent interest among policy-makers in rethinking their communication strategies with
the broader public and suggests a need for more research to better understand the interplay between
policy announcements and the decision-making process of economic agents.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the survey and information treatments.
Section 3 lays out our empirical methodology for characterizing how treatments affect expectations.
Section 4 presents the empirical results while section 5 discusses them in the context of theory and broader
policy discussions. Section 6 concludes.



2.      Data and Survey Design

This section describes our survey design to elicit inflation expectations, the various treatments, and
provides descriptive statistics for a range of expectations and perceptions. We first detail the Nielsen
Homescan panel on which we run the survey and then provide more information on the structure of
the survey.


2.1 Nielsen Panel
In March, June, and September of 2019, we fielded three waves of the Chicago Booth Expectations and
Communications Survey inviting participation by all household members in the Kilts-Nielsen Consumer
Panel (KNCP). The KNCP represents a panel of approximately 80,000 households that report to Nielsen
(i) their static demographic characteristics, such as household size, income, ZIP code of residence, and
marital status, and (ii) the dynamic characteristics of their purchases, that is, which products they

                                                                                                          5
purchase, at which outlets, and at which prices. Panelists update their demographic information at an
annual frequency to reflect changes in household composition or marital status.
       Nielsen attempts to balance the panel on nine dimensions: household size, income, age of
household head, education of female household head, education of male household head, presence of
children, race/ethnicity, and occupation of the household head. Panelists are recruited online, but the
panel is balanced using Nielsen's traditional mailing methodology. Nielsen checks the sample
characteristics on a weekly basis and performs adjustments when necessary.
       Nielsen provides households with various incentives to ensure the accuracy and completeness
of the information they report. These incentives include monthly prize drawings, providing points for
each instance of data submission, and engaging in ongoing communication with households. Panelists
can use points to purchase gifts from a Nielsen-specific award catalog. Nielsen structures the incentives
to not bias the shopping behavior of their panelists. The KNCP has a retention rate of more than 80%
at the annual frequency. Nielsen validates the reported consumer spending with the scanner data of
retailers on a quarterly frequency to ensure high data quality and filters households that do not report a
minimum amount of spending over the previous 12 months.



2.2 Chicago Booth Expectations and Communication Survey
Nielsen runs surveys on a monthly frequency on a subset of panelists in the KNCP, the online panel,
but also offers customized solutions for longer surveys. Retailers and fast-moving consumer-good
producers purchase this information and other services from Nielsen for product design and target-
group marketing. At no point of the survey did Nielsen tell their panelists that the survey we fielded
was a part of academic research which minimizes the concerns of survey demand effects.
       In summer 2019, we designed a customized survey consisting of 34 questions in total in
cooperation with Nielsen, the Chicago Booth Expectations and Communication Survey. The survey also
contains 22 different information treatments, one placebo treatment as well as one control group. Our
survey design builds on the Michigan Survey of Consumers, the New York Fed Survey of Consumer
Expectations (SCE), the Dutch National Bank's Household Survey as well as D'Acunto et al. (2018),
Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019), and Coibion et al. (2018c).
       Nielsen fielded the first wave of the survey in March of 2019. The survey sample was 92,982
households. 26,929 individuals (from 24,886 households) responded for a response rate of 26.80% and
an average response time of 19 minutes and 35 seconds. The second and third waves were slightly

                                                                                                        6
shorter, consisting mostly of follow-up questions, with median response times of about 19 minutes and
28,580 unique respondents for the second wave (June 2019; 16,726 participated in the initial wave) and
15,912 unique respondents for the third wave (September 2019; 8,152 participated in the initial wave).
Nielsen provides weights to ensure representativeness of the households participating in the survey.
       The initial wave of the survey covers a wide range of questions. First, respondents are presented
with a series of questions about their demographic characteristics, which are more detailed relative to
the basic demographic information the KNCP provides. We collect information on employment status,
current occupation, financial constraints, savings and portfolio choice, homeownership status, past
spending behavior in various categories including expenses that are not covered in the KNCP, and we
identify the primary shopper of the household among all the responding members (D'Acunto et al.
2019). Participants are then asked a sequence of questions about their perceptions and expectations of
inflation. We follow the design in the recent New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE)
and ask specifically about inflation, because asking about prices might induce individuals to think about
specific items whose prices they recall rather than about overall inflation (see Crump et al. (2015) for a
recent paper using the SCE data). We first ask individuals about their perception of past inflation, that
is, inflation over the previous 12 months. We then ask them about their expectations for 12-month-
ahead inflation. We elicit a full probability distribution of expectations by asking participants to assign
probabilities to different possible levels of the inflation rate. In addition, we also ask about the
perception of the current unemployment rate and the expected unemployment rate in twelve months.
Finally, we also ask survey participants on their expectations regarding interest rates on a 30-years fixed
rate mortgage at the end of 2019, 2020, 2021, and in the next 5-10 years.
       Subsequent waves largely follow the same structure. Hence, the follow-up surveys are primarily
used to measure individuals' perceptions and expectations of inflation, mortgage rates, and the
unemployment rate over time.



2.3 Treatments
After respondents answered the initial set of questions in the first wave, they were assigned to one of 24
groups: a control group, one placebo treatment group, and 22 treatment groups. We designed the
treatments to disentangle the effects of different possible types of forward guidance. We vary the target
that is communicated: we not only communicate inflation forecasts or expected future policy rates but
we also vary the length of the forecast horizon, the exact information of the forecast, central tendency,

                                                                                                         7
upper range, or lower range, or all jointly, as well as different combinations. Moreover, some survey
participants only received information about current/past rates. The latter treatments allow us to study
the extent to which individuals might have differential responses to backward-looking vs. forward-
looking information. We also fielded a placebo treatment to differentiate true learning from spurious
anchoring effects. Each group consists of approximately 1/24th of the total sample that received the
survey and the treatments are randomly assigned. Appendix Table 3 confirms that assignment of
treatment was not predictable by respondents' observable household and individual characteristics.
       Our choice of treatments is motivated by a number of practical and theoretical considerations.
Central banks often give forward guidance directly about the future path of their policy instrument,
the fed funds rate (FFR) in the US, with the goal to influence contemporaneous long-term interest
rates via the expectations hypothesis for interest rates, i.e., changing financial market participants'
expectations of future short-term interest rates should be reflected in current long term interest rates.
The transmission to the real economy then occurs because these long-term rates affect households'
and firms' borrowing decisions and the purchase of durable goods and investment goods as the
introductory quote by former Fed Chair Janet Yellen indicates. Theoretically, forward guidance
typically operates through affecting household expectations of inflation and the consumer Euler
equation (Eggertson and Woodford 2003). Promises to keep interest rates low until after the end of
the liquidity trap will be inflationary in the future and hence, households should already update
upwards their inflation expectations today which during the liquidity trap period will translate into
lower real rates and stimulate consumption. Therefore, we directly provide treatments about the future
path of interest rates and inflation to study whether forecasts for inflation or the path of interest rates
are more effective in moving individuals' expectations. Moreover, given that central banks mainly
focus on a transmission mechanism through financial markets and household borrowing, we also
directly study the reaction of individuals' expectations regarding future mortgage rates and contrast
the effects with the reaction of inflation expectations that are the focus in the academic literature and
in virtually all models used in leading central banks.
       Empirically, forward guidance appears to be less powerful than standard theory predicts, a
phenomenon commonly referred to as the forward guidance puzzle (Del Negro et al. 2015, D'Acunto
et al. 2019a). Recent theoretical attempts (e.g., Woodford 2018, Gabaix 2019, Farhi and Werning
2019, Angeletos and Lian 2018) at resolving this puzzle that emerges in a representative agent New
Keynesian model propose deviations from rational expectations as a possible resolution. While the
exact microfoundations differ, they all attribute an important role to some form of limited cognition
                                                                                                         8
on the part of the decision maker. These models attribute lower effectiveness of communication in
the future on current day expectations to the fact that the agents in the model either do not plan that
far into the future or they discount the information heavily. While we do not aim to disentangle the
exact mechanism at play, the treatments with different horizons for the provided information can help
assess whether these models are broadly consistent with the data.
       Empirically, inflation expectations of households are widely dispersed suggesting some form of
information friction. Given the evidence that many individuals are not well informed about the
prevailing inflation rate and the possibility that agents form expectations adaptively, we also provided
treatments that only informed households about the current inflation rate and policy rate. We then
compare the reaction in forecasts to treatments about past, future or both pieces of information to better
understand whether forward- or backward-looking expectations are a better description of expectations
on average. The large cross-sectional component of our sample also allows us study which type of
individuals might have either forward- or backward-looking expectations.
       Mortgage rates play a key role in the practice of monetary policy, yet central bankers typically
do not directly communicate about mortgage rates or inflation. D'Acunto et al. (2018b) find many
households do not change their borrowing behavior in response to changes in policy rates, possibly
because they do not understand the implications of changes in policy rates on their borrowing rates.
We also directly provided some households with information about current mortgage rates with
reference to a 30 year fixed rate mortgage (i.e. the most prevalent mortgage product in the U.S.).
Thus, we examine whether direct communication about interest rates that are of direct interest to
households might be more effective in guiding households' expectations and decision making.
       Randomized-controlled trials have gained interest in recent empirical macro studies yet it is
not clear how the provision of information of one macro variable jointly affects agents' forecast for
other variables that also affect economic behavior. Andre et al. (2019) find many households differ
in their reaction to fundamental shocks compared to the reaction of experts and models because they
follow a `good-bad' heuristic in the sense that households consider several macroeconomic variables
jointly. Empirically, Coibion et al. (2019) find in an information provision experiment that households
with exogenously higher inflation expectations lowered their overall consumption after the treatment
because their overall economic outlook became more negative. Our setting allows us to study whether
treatments about inflation or interest rates might be a more promising communication tool for central
bank to stimulate household spending because we can directly compare their effects on expectations


                                                                                                        9
but crucially also study in a systematic fashion how these treatments affects individual expectations
about inflation, mortgage rates, household income and other variables jointly.
       Table 1 summarizes treatments. Specifically, the treatments are: (T3) the current fed funds
rate (FFR); (T4) the current FFR and the high path forecast by the FOMC for 2019, 2020, 2021, and
the long run; (T5) the current FFR and the low path forecast by the FOMC for 2019, 2020, 2021, and
the long run; (T6) the current FFR and the central path forecast by the FOMC for 2019, 2020, 2021,
and the long run; (T7) the current FFR and the 2019 central projection; (T8) the current FFR and the
2019 high projection; (T9) the current FFR and the 2019 low projection; (T10) the current FFR and
the 2019 and 2020 central projections; (T11) the current FFR, the 2019 central projection, and the
2020 high projection; (T12) the current FFR, the 2019 central projection, and the 2020 low projection;
(T13) the current FFR and the 2019, 2020, and 2021 central projections; (T14) the current FFR and
the 2019 and 2020 central projections, and the 2021 high projection; (T15) the current FFR and the
2019 and 2020 central projections, and the 2021 low projection; (T16) the current FFR, the 2019,
2020, and 2021 central projections, and the high long-run forecast; (T17) the current FFR, the 2019,
2020, and 2021 central projections, and the low long-run forecast; (T18) the current FFR, average
rates in 2015, 2016, and 2017, and the central path forecast by the FOMC for 2019, 2020, 2021, and
the long run; (T19) the current FFR and the average rates in 2015, 2016, and 2017; (T20) the current
CPI inflation rate (1.8%); (T21) the average annual CPI inflation rate over the years 2016 to 2018
(1.6%); (T22) the current CPI inflation rate and the expected inflation rate by the FOMC for 2019,
2020, 2021, and the longer run (1.8%, 1.9%, 2.1%, 2.1%, and 2.0%); (T23) the current CPI inflation
rate and the FOMC inflation target (1.8% and 2.0%); (T24) the average current 30-years fixed rate
mortgage rate (4.6%). Importantly, when we provided the different paths, we only mentioned that
these reflected one forecast by the Federal Reserve and never mentioned whether it corresponded to
the high, central, or low path. Also note that we use only Fed forecasts to avoid potential heterogeneity
in the responses due to differences in the credibility of sources (see Coibion, Gorodnichenko and
Weber 2019). Our placebo treatment provided the actual fact that the U.S. population grew by 2.2%
between 2015 and 2017. We report the treatments as part of the overall survey in the Online Appendix.
       Following each treatment (as well as for the control group), respondents were again asked
about their inflation forecasts, but this time in the form of a point estimate to avoid them having to
answer the exact same question twice. This allows us to measure the instantaneous revision in
expectations (if any) after the information treatments compared to the control group. The treatments
were only applied in the first wave of the survey. In subsequent waves, respondents were again asked
                                                                                                      10
for their inflation expectations and perceptions, but questionnaires were identical across all
respondents in the two follow-up waves. The first follow-up was three months after the initial wave
and the second follow-up was after six months.


2.4 Preliminary Facts and External Validity
Table 2 shows descriptive statistics on consumer perceptions and expectations, both from the raw data
and Huber-robust moments that filter out outliers, with reference to inflation, unemployment, and nominal
mortgage interest rates. The first panel (pre-treatment data) displays unconditional statistics before any
information treatment is provided. For completeness, the second panel (post-treatment data) shows
statistics collected after the information experiment. However, these are not directly comparable to pre-
treatment statistics as they are aggregated over various groups receiving different treatments and the
control group. To provide further insights into the heterogeneity of responses across consumers, we plot
the distributions of (pre-treatment) perceptions and expectations about inflation and unemployment rates
(Figure 1) and the distribution of expectations about interest rates (Figure 2).
         The (robust) mean of perceived inflation over the 12 months preceding the survey is 2.88% (i.e.,
almost 1 percentage point higher than the official inflation rate). This is in line with evidence from various
consumer surveys according to which consumers tend to over-estimate actual inflation (see, e.g.,
D'Acunto et al. 2019). As can be seen by the distribution of perceived inflation (Panel A, Figure 1), a non-
trivial fraction of respondents reports focal values in excess of 10% also in line with previous work
(D'Acunto et al. 2018a, 2019b).
         To measure expected inflation we use the probabilistic type of question asked by the NY FED
SCE in which respondents are invited to assign probabilities over a range of inflation/deflation bins.2 The
expected inflation (12 months ahead) implied from the reported probability distribution is 1.64%.
Comparable moments from the NY Fed's SCE and Michigan Survey of Consumers were 2.8% and 2.9%
respectively while professional forecasters were predicting CPI inflation of 2.3%. This figure is not
immediately comparable to the one regarding past inflation due to the different way that the two questions
are asked (point estimates vs. probability bins). This difference is also evident in the distribution of implied
means of expected inflation (Panel B, Figure 1) that is smoother than the corresponding one for perceived
inflation. When we use post-treatment point predictions for the control group in the initial wave, we find



2
 Probabilistic-type questions allow deducing, apart from the implied mean expectation, the implied variance that denotes,
in this context, consumer-specific inflation uncertainty.
                                                                                                                      11
that the Huber-robust average expected inflation is 2.24% and the (raw) average expected inflation is
4.8%, which brings our survey closer to other surveys.
        We also ask about the perception of the current unemployment rate in the U.S. and the
expected unemployment rate twelve months ahead. The mean perceived and expected unemployment
rates are 4.76% and 5.32%, respectively, above the national unemployment average (3.8%). The
distributions of answers (Figure 1, panels C and D) show these averages mask a significant amount
of cross-sectional heterogeneity.
        Moreover, the survey asks consumers about current and expected nominal interest rates with
reference to a fixed rate 30-year mortgage. Mortgages with a 30-year fixation period represent the most
popular mortgage product in the U.S., accounting for more than 70% of mortgages originated over the
period 2013-2016.3 In our survey, respondents are asked to provide an estimate of the nominal interest
rate for such a mortgage both at the time of the interview and over different time horizons (i.e., one year
ahead; two years ahead; three years ahead; and in the next five to ten years).4 The robust mean of the
(perceived) current mortgage rate is 4.55% and the median is 4.80%. These moments are comparable
to those derived from a similar question asked in the SCE (median: 4.3%; mean: 5.2%).5 Moreover,
they are in line with Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey, according to which the interest
rate for a 30-year fixed rate mortgage was on average between 4.06% and 4.41% in March 2019.6
        The expected mortgage rate one year ahead is 4.90% (i.e., 35 basis points higher, on average,
than the perceived one at the time of the interview). As regards longer horizons, expected interest rates
rise, on average, to 5.28%, 5.53% and 5.93% with reference to two years ahead, three years ahead and
next five to ten years, respectively. This implies that consumers expect somewhat higher mortgage rates
in future periods. These trends are well aligned with the respective ones recorded in the SCE. More
specifically, in the SCE the expected rate changes for one year ahead and three years ahead, compared




3
  According to data from the National Mortgage Database program, jointly managed by the Federal Housing Finance
Agency (FHFA) and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).
4
  Prior to our information treatments we ask respondents to give their estimates of the current and future (over different
horizons) "interest rates on a fixed-rate 30-year mortgage for someone like you". To avoid repeating the same wording
post-treatment, we ask this question with reference to "someone with excellent credit score". Not surprisingly, reported
interest rates to the latter question are somewhat lower to the pre-treatment ones, however they are not statistically
different if one compares them for the control group.
5
  In February 2019, the SCE asked the following question: "Assume that you applied for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage
today.       What      mortgage       rate    do    you      think     you     would       qualify     for?";     source:
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/sce/sce/downloads/data/frbny_sce_housing_chartpacket2019.pdf
6
  The survey is conducted over mortgage lenders originating loans in the U.S. See FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MORTGAGE30US
                                                                                                                       12
to the current ones, are on average, 37 and 130 basis points, respectively (the counterpart figures in our
survey are 35 and 98 basis points).
        In Appendix Figure 1 and Appendix Table 1, we show various correlations between inflation
expectations (one year ahead) and other expectations asked in our survey. The raw data suggest a positive
association between expected inflation and expected mortgage interest rate one year ahead, yet
considerable heterogeneity exists in this pattern. To this end, we examine not only how consumers respond
to (exogenously) elevated inflation and nominal interest rate expectations but also to updates in the real
rate expectations. The raw data also suggest some positive association with the national unemployment
rate, both expected and perceived at the time of the survey.
        In short, our survey results for Nielsen panelists are broadly consistent with those of other
surveys of households. Average levels of perceived and expected inflation, interest rates and
unemployment are somewhat higher than actual levels and, most strikingly, display large amounts of
cross-sectional heterogeneity. Unlike other surveys however, our results are based on a much larger
cross-section of households (approximately 25,000 vs 1,500 in the SCE and 500 in the MSC) and
allow for randomized information treatments that generate exogenous variation in beliefs within the
same survey population and time period.

3. Econometric framework
We now consider how randomized information treatments affect the beliefs of households. Because the
average pre-treatment expectations are relatively close to actual values of mortgage, unemployment, and
inflation rates, providing households with information about actual values should have little effect on
average beliefs. As a result, simply regressing forecast revisions on treatment indicator variables is not a
fruitful avenue to estimate the effect of information provision on households' beliefs. Instead, we follow
Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019) and Coibion et al. (2019) and use the following specification:
                        24                        24
                           ()                                        ()      
         =          +                         +                           ×      +   +  , (1)
                        =2                       =2

where  indexes respondents,  is a measure of expectations,  denotes expectations measured before
                                                                                ()
treatment,  denotes expectations measured after treatment,                           is an indicator variable
equal to one if individual  is provided with treatment ,  is a vector of household/individual




                                                                                                          13
characteristics.7 Intuitively, this specification assesses whether households put more or less weight on
their prior beliefs in forming their posteriors depending on whether they are provided with new
information or not. As discussed in Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar (2018), Bayesian updating of
information implies that  should be negative because respondents' posterior beliefs are a weighted
average of their prior beliefs and a signal. Furthermore,  should be more negative for more
informative/credible treatments, i.e., the weight on the prior is smaller. Coefficients  (the "level"
effects) may be positive or negative depending on where a signal is relative to the initial belief.
         While estimating specification (1), we use sampling weights to correct for possible imbalances
in the sample. Because expectations can take extreme values, we use Huber-robust regressions to
minimize the adverse effects of influential observations and outliers. Whether we include controls in
specification (1) affects only the precision of the estimates because the assignment of treatment is
random. To maximize statistical power and improve readability of our results, we estimate specification
(1) with some treatments aggregated to coarser groups.
         Note that coefficient  measures the persistence of expectations for the control group. Although
one may naturally expect  = 1 for post-treatment beliefs measured shortly after pre-treatment beliefs
are elicited (the control group receives no information), the design of the survey as well as the nature of
survey responses can result in estimates of  different from one. First, pre- and post-treatment responses
even in the control group can differ because respondents may have noise in their responses and one may
expect some mean-reversion in responses. Second, because households participating in surveys do not
like responding to the same question twice, we formulate pre- and post-treatment questions differently.
For example, to elicit inflation expectations before treatments, we ask respondents to assign
probabilities to a range of bins for possible inflation outcomes. We use the reported probability
distributions to compute the implied mean for expected inflation. In contrast, we gather the post-
treatment inflation expectations as point predictions. Because responses may vary with the design of
the survey questions (e.g., Bruine de Bruin et al. 2017), one may obtain   1.
         Because survey responses can take implausible values, we drop few extreme observations.
Specifically, for inflation forecasts we drop responses of 100% or -100% for point predictions and
responses that put 100% probability on a large deflation (more than 12% deflation). With these filters



7
 Individual characteristics are gender, age, age squared, employed/unemployed/out-of-labor-force indicator, and race.
Household characteristics are household income (binned; indicator variable for each bin), household size (indicator
variable for each size), census region (indicator variable for each region), male head education (indicator variable for each
group), female head education (indicator variable for each group).
                                                                                                                          14
we drop 1% of the sample. We drop observations with perceived/expected mortgage rates that are
greater than 50% (drop less than 0.1% of the sample) and we censor mortgage rates at 30% if the
responses are between 30% and 99% (applies to approximately 2% of the sample). We recode
unemployment responses as missing when the perceived/expected unemployment rate is greater than
30% (drop 11% of the sample).


4. Treatment Effects of Different Communication Tools
In this section, we present and discuss how different treatments affect the inflation expectations of
individuals. To preserve space, we focus on the reaction of expectations immediately after the
treatment and relegate results for beliefs in follow-up waves to the Online Appendix.

4.1 Mortgage rate expectations
Given that mortgages are the most important form of credit for U.S. households, we study how
forward guidance changes consumers' expectations about this key rate. We report results of
estimating specification (1) on perceived/expected nominal mortgage rates in Table 3. Survey
questions about mortgage rate expectations are similar both pre- and post-treatment and,
consequently, the slope linking pre-treatment expectations to post-treatment expectations for the
control group is close to one ( = 0.996), indicating that measurement error in these expectations is
quite small (as this would bias the estimated  to values smaller than one). The placebo treatment
(T2)--apprising respondents of the population growth over the last few years (approximately 2
percent)--has an "anchoring" effect on mortgage rate expectations, but this effect is generally small.
       Providing households with information on the current average mortgage rate (T24) has a large
effect on how households perceive the current mortgage rate. Effectively, the post-treatment belief is
reset to the provided statistic (the slope is -1 and the intercept is equal to the provided magnitude).
However, as we increase the forecast horizon, the slope gradually increases (i.e., becomes less
negative) and the level effect (measured with ) decreases. This pattern suggests that the treatment is
strongly informative about current conditions in the mortgage market but--in agreement with results
in Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019) and Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2020)--its
informativeness declines with the forecast horizon: the estimated slope  moves from -1 for the
nowcast (column 2 of Table 3) to -0.565 for the longer-run horizon (column 10 of Table 3).
       To appreciate the significance of these magnitudes, it is instructive to compare the strength of
the response to the treatment with information about the current policy rate (T3). The slope of the

                                                                                                    15
revision () for the nowcast is only -0.374 which is roughly a third of the revision one gets when
households are treated with information about actual mortgage rates. For the longer run, the
corresponding figures are -0.183 for T3 vs. -0.565 for T24. Similar to results for T24, the absolute size
of the revision relative to the control group (| |) decreases with the forecast horizon. Hence, informing
households about current mortgage rates rather than current policy rate is much more powerful for
influencing households' expectations and perceptions about current and future mortgage rates.
       We also study graphically the association between posterior expectations and priors pooling
across different treatments. Treating households with information about future policy rates has
weaker effects on perceived mortgage rates (Panel A of Figure 3) than treating households only with
information about the current policy rate. Although we observe variation in the size of revisions ()
across treatments within a horizon, there is little difference between short (e.g., 1-year-ahead) and
long horizon (e.g., 3-year-ahead) forward guidance for households' nowcast of mortgage rates. As
we consider households' longer forecast horizons to year 2020 (Panel B, Figure 3), 2021 (Panel C,
Figure 3) and longer run (Panel D, Figure 3), the differences in estimated slopes between treatments
with current policy rates only vs. future policy rates generally shrink (see also Appendix Table 6). In
fact, we find that providing households with information about current or future policy rates results
in similar revisions of longer-run forecasts for mortgage rates.
       Note that varying the magnitude of the FFR at the end of the provided forward guidance
horizon does not generate a systematic pattern for the response of mortgage rate expectations in terms
of slope () or level () effects. In other words, going from a central-high path (e.g., T7) to a central
path (T8) to a central-low path (T9) does not yield a monotonic change in estimated  and . This
finding is important because this kind of variation can tell us about the credibility/informativeness of
various policy paths (more negative values of  mean higher credibility/precision of provided
information) as well as the magnitude of the signal relative to initial beliefs (larger values of  suggest
that a signal is above initial beliefs) holding the horizon of forward guidance constant.
       Informing households about current, past and future inflation rates also has an effect on
perceptions and expectations of mortgage rates. For example, the size of  for T20 (treatment with
information about the current inflation rate) is similar to the size of  for forward guidance treatments.
However, there is heterogeneity in the size of the response across inflation treatments. For example,
informing households about the current and projected path of the inflation rate over the next three
years (T22) generates || nearly 50 percent smaller than || for T20. As we increase the forecast
horizon for mortgage rates, the estimated 's for inflation treatments become more uniform across
                                                                                                       16
treatments. Furthermore, the effect of inflation treatments becomes increasingly similar to the effect
of forward guidance treatments as we increase the forecast horizon for mortgage rates (Figure 4).
Specifically, the effects of pooled treatments at the longer horizon (5 years after 2019) are nearly
identical for treatments with forward guidance, inflation, or current rates (Panel D, Figure 4).
       We conclude that while supplying consumers with information about the future path of policy
rates is helpful in managing perceptions and expectations about mortgage rates, one can move
perceptions/expectations about this key consumer loan rate even more by other means. Specifically,
information about current mortgage rates is most powerful at short horizons. Alternatively, one can
apprise households of inflation which is as effective as providing households with information about
current or future FFR. We also observe a small (if any) marginal effect of supplying consumers with
information about the policy rate beyond the one-year-horizon. Finally, consistently positive values
of estimated  suggest that provided information contains signals greater in magnitude than what
households expect to observe in these signals.



4.2 Inflation expectations
Perceived/expected inflation and interest rates are positively correlated in our pre-treatment data and
so treatments about interest rates may affect inflation expectations as well as nominal interest rate
expectations, making the effect on real interest rates a priori ambiguous. To explore how/whether
households' inflation expectations respond to different treatments, we estimate specification (1) on
inflation expectations and report estimated coefficients in columns (1) and (2) of Table 4. The first
row of column (2) in Table 4 shows that the coefficient on the pre-treatment beliefs of the control
group is 0.216. This low magnitude likely reflects mean-reversion in the responses as well as
differences in the design of survey questions eliciting post-treatment (point predictions, which are
much more variable) and pre-treatment (based on probability distributions over a fixed set of bins
with possible outcomes for inflation) expectations. Nonetheless, the coefficient is highly statistically
significant and points to a strong correlation between post- and pre-treatment inflation expectations
for the control group. Panel A of Appendix Figure 2 contrasts the revision of inflation expectations
for the control and placebo groups. We find no significant difference for the estimated slope () for
the placebo group (T2), but there is an anchoring effect as the coefficient on the indicator variable for
this treatment () is positive and statistically significant.



                                                                                                      17
       Consistent with Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019), we find that treatment with
information about past inflation (T20 and T21) yields a strong downward revision in inflation
expectations: the estimated level and slope effects are negative (see Panel B of Appendix Figure 2).
Informing people about the average inflation rate over the last three years rather than the last year
makes no material difference for the estimated effects: both lead to strong revisions in expectations
toward the provided signal. In a similar spirit, providing respondents with past inflation and inflation
projected by the Fed (T22: path of projected inflation; T23: average value of inflation over the next
three years) is no different from providing respondents only with past inflation. Thus, the marginal
value of treating households with information about inflation in earlier years or with inflation
forecasts appears to be small in terms of moving inflation expectations.
       Treatment T3 (which informs respondents about the current policy rate) has an estimated
effect similar to what we observe for treatments providing information about inflation. These effects
are consistent with the view that respondents make inferences about the current inflation rate from
the level of the current policy rate. Specifically, a low policy rate appears to signal that inflation is
low. Interestingly, informing households about the current mortgage rate (treatment T24) does not
move inflation expectations.
       Adding a year of forward guidance on future policy rates (treatments T7, T8, T9) leads to
estimates similar to those for treatment T3 (current FFR rate), i.e., significant revisions in inflation
expectations in the same direction as the provided treatment. Moreover, providing households with a low
path of future policy rate (i.e., 2.4% in treatment T9 instead of 2.8% in the central path in T7 or 3.1% in
the high path in T8) results in a weaker weight on the prior beliefs (coefficient  becomes more negative),
although we cannot reject equality of the estimates across T7, T8, and T9. Adding yet another year of
forward guidance (treatments T10, T11, T12) appears to induce respondents to put an even lower weight
on their priors, which suggests that households treat this information as more precise. Again, this effect
is the strongest for the trajectory that provides the low value (2.4%) of FFR in 2020, while the effect is
the weakest for the trajectory that provides the high value (3.1%) of FFR in 2020. Hence, a one-year-
ahead forecast for policy rates seems to help to reduce variation in inflation expectations relative to the
case when only the current policy rate is provided.
       Providing information about policy rates projected for 2021 (three years ahead; T13, T14, T15)
or longer run (T16, T17) does not result in material improvements in the precision of signals as
perceived by households: the estimated slopes (weight on the priors) tend to be similar to the estimated
slopes for treatments that provide only the current rate or forward guidance up to two years. We also
                                                                                                        18
observe that low-path treatments generate lower weights on priors (i.e., estimated  is more negative)
relative to high-path treatments. Note that treatments T16 and T17 use the central path for years up to
"longer run" and vary only the policy rate forecast at the "longer-run" horizon. To assess how the whole
path of low- vs. high-trajectory policy rate forecasts influence inflation expectations, we use treatments
T4, T5, and T6 that give respondents a consistently high, low, or central tendency of the Fed forecast.
We find that the results for these treatments are similar to the results for treatments T16 and T17. Hence,
within the range of more-than-three-year trajectories we consider, the specifics of a trajectory do not
appear to have a tangible difference for how households revise their inflation expectations. Furthermore,
we find that treatment T19 (policy rates for the current period, previous three years, next three years
and longer run) is perceived as the most informative ( is the most negative) among the treatments that
provide households with information about policy rates (Panel D of Appendix Figure 2). These
revisions are larger than for the treatment that only provides current and future rates (treatment T18).
This result suggests that providing households with some historical background on policy decisions is
potentially effective in moving inflation expectations. We also note that the estimated level effects 
are generally negative suggesting that signals are below what households expect to see.
        To maximize statistical power, we aggregate treatments into coarser groups. Panel A of Figure
5 illustrates that informing households about the policy rate influences inflation expectations: the
fitted line for this aggregated group is flatter than the line fitted for the control group. However,
informing households about inflation (future/past values) tends to be more powerful (the slope of the
fitted line is the smallest). Panel B of Figure 5 also demonstrates that there is relatively little variation
in the effect of treatments across the horizons and there is little value in providing households with
information about policy rates more than two years out.



4.3 Real interest rate expectations
The revision of interest rate expectations in response to inflation treatments--a key result in Section
4.1--suggests that households recognize a positive correlation between nominal interest rates and
inflation. Given that households also revise their inflation expectations in response to forward guidance
treatments (previous section), we have evidence of causality flowing both ways: from inflation
expectations to expectations about nominal interest rates and vice versa. A key question is therefore
how the real interest rate--a central variable for consumer choices--responds to the treatments.



                                                                                                          19
        We measure the real interest rate as the expected/perceived nominal mortgage rate at a given
horizon minus the one-year-ahead inflation forecast. Because we have pre- and post-treatment
expectations for nominal mortgage rates and the inflation rate, we can estimate specification (1) for
real interest rates. We report estimated coefficients in Table 5 and visualize the effects for aggregated
treatments in Figure 6 and Figure 7.
        Similar to the responses for inflation and forward guidance treatments on inflation and
nominal interest rate expectations, our treatments dampen the variation in post-treatment beliefs about
real interest rates relative to the corresponding pre-treatment variation, i.e., estimated 's are generally
negative ( for the placebo group is generally small and does not exhibit any particular pattern across
forecast horizons). We also find that providing information about future policy rates beyond the one-
year horizon leads to no material differences relative to the case in which only current rates or one-
year-ahead forecast for policy rates are provided (Figure 6).
        However, there are some important differences. First, the magnitude of this effect is smaller
relative to the magnitudes of this effect for inflation and nominal rate expectations, i.e., | |'s are larger
in the latter cases. This reflects the fact that when households revise their nominal interest rate
expectations downwards, they also tend to revise their inflation expectations downward albeit by less
(and vice versa), so that their real interest rate expectations are less sensitive to news. This could
reflect an "information effect" in forward guidance: lower future interest rates do not signal that
monetary policy will be more accommodative (since this would be associated with higher
expectations of inflation) but rather that the low interest rates will be a response to weaker inflationary
pressures (hence the simultaneous reduction in inflation expectations). This type of information effect
for professional forecasters has similarly been documented in Nakamura and Steinsson (2018).
        Second, the size of the effect for real rates does not decline with the horizon as strongly as it
does for inflation and nominal rate expectations. Thus, the treatments appear to shift the whole "yield
curve" for expected real rates. Finally, estimated 's are similar across forward guidance, inflation,
and current/past rate treatments but we observe that the level effects (measured with 's) are
consistently positive with the largest level effects observed for inflation treatments. This likely
reflects the fact that information treatments with respect to inflation generally lead to larger revisions
in beliefs than those with respect to interest rates. This suggests that, to the extent that policy-makers
are ultimately trying to shape real interest rates via forward guidance announcements, providing
information about the future desired outcome (inflation) may be more powerful than providing


                                                                                                          20
information about the future instrument (interest rates), as suggested in Angeletos and Sastry (2019)
in the case when general equilibrium feedbacks are important.



4.4 Unemployment rate expectations
The fact that forward guidance about interest rates moves not just expectations about interest rates
but also about inflation is of course illustrative of a broader point, which is that agents form their
expectations about macroeconomic conditions jointly. Information treatments should not necessarily
be expected to only alter the expectations regarding the treated variable but could affect households'
broader economic outlook. How they respond to forward guidance could therefore reflect not just real
interest rates but also income effects. For example, Kamdar (2018) and Coibion et al. (2019) provide
evidence of this type of effect.
       To assess whether this is an important consideration in this setting, we estimate specification
(1) for expectations about the unemployment rate. Columns (3) and (4) in Table 4 report estimated
's and 's for the treatments. Note that because the structure of the questions eliciting unemployment
expectations before treatments (expected unemployment rate at the end of 2019) and after treatments
(expected unemployment rate in 12 months) is much closer than the counterparts for inflation
expectations, we observe that the link between post- and pre-treatment expectations for the control
group is tight:  = 0.984 in specification (1) is close to one. The placebo treatment (T2) has no
statistically significant estimate for the slope . While some treatments have a statistically significant
effect on unemployment rate expectations (see also Appendix Figure 3), the quantitative importance
of these effects is relatively small and there is no consistent pattern in the revisions. Generally, there
is little difference between treatment and control groups even for cases with differential treatment
effects. For example, treatment T6 (current fed fund rate and central-tendency forecast for the fed
fund rate over the next 3 years and beyond) has a modest effect on the revisions of expectations for
the unemployment rate. Indeed, when we pool treatments by type of information (forward guidance;
inflation; current/past interest rates; see Panel A, Figure 8) or by the horizon of forward guidance
(Panel B, Figure 8), we see no difference between treatment groups and the control group. In short,
these results suggest that for the specific information treatments considered here, the main interaction
in the expectations formation process is between nominal interest rates and inflation, with little
feedthrough from these expectations into households' views about unemployment.



                                                                                                       21
4.5 Persistence of treatment effects
Previous research (e.g., Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber 2019, Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-
Truglia 2017) documents that information treatments have short-lived effects on households'
expectations. We generally find a similar pattern in our results although the comparison across waves
is complicated by many treatments (i.e., we estimate many coefficients and some variation can be
attributed to sampling errors in the estimates) and some differences in the design of survey questions
(e.g., inflation expectations are elicited as point prediction immediately after the treatment while in
the follow-up waves' inflation expectations are based on reported probability distributions).8
           Specifically, for inflation and unemployment, the weight on the prior belief ( for the control
group and 's for other groups) decreases as time passes after the initial wave (see Appendix Table 9
and Appendix Table 12; columns 2 and 4). On the other hand, treatment effects have longer-lasting
effects on nominal mortgage rate expectations: we do not observe clear declines in  and  between
the first and second follow-up and estimated 's are broadly similar for expectations measured
immediately after the treatment and those measured in the second follow-up six months later
(Appendix Table 10 and Appendix Table 13). The response of perceptions/expectations on real
interest rate largely inherit the properties of nominal mortgage rates (Appendix Table 11 and
Appendix Table 14). These results suggest that while households may forget information about
unemployment and inflation, information about mortgage rates has much longer lasting effects on
expectations. One interpretation of this result is that depending on the desired persistence of the effect
of forward guidance, policy-makers may want to target different variables in their announcements:
inflation for larger but short-lived effects and interest rates for more persistent effects.



4.6 Heterogeneity in treatment effects
Jonung (1981), D'Acunto, Malmendier and Weber (2019) and others document that households have
highly heterogeneous expectations with some of this variation linked to demographics (e.g., Bryan and
Venkatu 2001; see also Appendix Table 5), cognitive capacity (D'Acunto et al. 2018a, 2019b), shopping
experience (e.g. D'Acunto et al. 2018), and other characteristics. One may conjecture that the reaction
to information treatments should be heterogeneous as well. Indeed, theories of rational inattention
emphasize costs and benefits of collecting and interpreting signals and these costs/benefits could vary
across households. As a result, one may anticipate that, for example, a consumer who plans to buy an

8
    We find no systematic evidence of attrition being related to treatments (Appendix Table 4).
                                                                                                       22
expensive durable good should have stronger incentives to be well-informed and thus potentially exhibit
a different (likely smaller) response in their expectations to an information treatment.9
         We generally find little variation in the means of pre-treatment beliefs across demographic
groups but there are statistically significant (yet relatively small in economic terms) differences in high-
order moments (disagreement, uncertainty). For example, we find that households who plan to buy a
durable good in the next 12 months have similar means for expectations and perceptions relative to
households without such a plan, but their disagreement is smaller (Appendix Table 2). When we estimate
the response of expectations to information treatments across different groups (Appendix Table 8), we
fail to find any systematic or economically significant differences across groups. "Planning" households
do not respond systematically more or less to treatments relative to "non-planning" households.10 This
pattern is consistent with the results in Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019) who also do not find
systematic variation in responses to information treatments across demographic groups.



4.6. Effects on consumer sentiment
Our results suggest that information treatments have a strong effect on expectations of both nominal
interest rates and inflation and therefore on perceived real interest rates. Economic theory predicts
that changes in the latter should affect households' consumption and saving decisions, thereby giving
policymakers a powerful lever over the economy. Specifically, by varying the real interest rate,
policymakers can influence consumption choices of households: an increase in the real interest rate
should depress consumer spending contemporaneously. To establish whether this prediction is borne
out by the data, we follow Coibion et al. (2019) and estimate the following regression:
                                                                  
                = 1             -          + 2              -          +   +  ,                           (2)

where  indexes respondents,  and  indicate the timing of measurement for
decisions/expectations,  is a dummy variable equal to one if a respondent says that now is a good
time to buy a durable good,11  is the expected mortgage rate in the end of 2020,  is the one-year-

9
   The strength of the reaction could be ambiguous, however. For example, if a high-incentive consumer is already
informed, he may respond little to the provided information because he has a strong prior. This weak reaction could be
similar to a weak response of a consumer who is poorly informed and not interested in receiving/interpreting information.
On the other hand, if information is new and valuable to an informed consumer, he should immediately incorporate it into
his beliefs. In contrast, a disinterested consumer will continue to exhibit a weak reaction.
10
   Because the number of treatments is large, we cannot decompose effects by group within each type of treatment due
to limited number of observations. Instead, we provide results for sub-groups using pooled treatment effects (e.g. those
receiving any type of information treatment about interest rates or any type of information treatment about inflation).
11
   We choose consumer sentiment as the outcome variable because it maximizes the sample size and consumer sentiment
predicts actual consumer spending (Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox 1994 and Georgarakos and Tatsiramos 2019).
                                                                                                                      23
ahead inflation forecast,  is a vector of household/individual characteristics. As discussed in
Coibion et al. (2019), estimating specification (2) with OLS is problematic because of mean-reversion
in responses and other forms of endogeneity. To address this issue, we estimate specification (2) with
an instrumental variables (IV) approach where the first stage is given by specification (1). In this case,
coefficient 1 yields a causal effect of changing expectations about real interest rates on consumer
sentiment. That is, the IV approach helps us isolate exogenous variation in beliefs due to the
randomized provision of information so that we can rule out endogenous co-movement in
expectations and sentiment.12
         In contrast to earlier work studying the effects of expectations on consumption, we have
different types of treatments which can induce differential responses to changes in expectations. For
example, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber (2019) and Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Ropele (2020)
document that economic agents can interpret provided information as signaling demand-side or supply-
side forces and therefore, depending on the interpretation, associate changes in inflation with either a
contracting or expanding level of economic activity. To control for this possibility, we estimate
specification (2) separately for each type of treatment (that is, we aggregate treatments to coarser
categories) and report results for each type of information treatment in Table 6. In addition, we report
results (column 4) for the case when we estimate specification (2) on the full sample, i.e., we put
together all treatment indicator variables (aggregated to coarser categories) and their interactions in
specification (1) and allow coefficients  and  in the first stage to vary across aggregated treatments
but we restrict coefficients in specification (2) to be the same across treatments.
         We find that, as we exogenously raise real interest rate expectations via information
treatments, households are more likely to report that now is not a good time to buy a house, car, or
appliance, as one might expect from theory. The economic magnitude of the effect is relatively large.
A one-standard-deviation increase in the expected real interest rate (2.15) reduces the probability of
reporting that now is a good time to buy any durable (column 4, Panel D) by -0.05 × 2.15  0.11
which is tangible given that the mean and standard deviation for the outcome variable are 0.61 and
0.49, respectively. We also observe that the effect depends on the source of variation in expectations.
For example, relative to the inflation treatment, the forward guidance treatment generates variation
in real interest rate expectations that more strongly affects the "good time to buy" outcome for houses
(Panel A) and cars (Panel B) and less strongly for appliances/electronics (Panel C), although the

12
  To deal with outliers and influential observations in IV estimation of specification (2), we adopt the jackknife procedure
described in Appendix C of Coibion et al. (2019).
                                                                                                                         24
differences are not statistically significant. Hence, consistent with theory and reduced form evidence
in D'Acunto et al (2018c), exogenous increases in expectations about real interest rates inhibit
consumer spending on durable goods and policy tools relying on management of expectations have
an effect on both expectations and actions of households.


5      Discussion
Our results speak directly to an extensive literature on the effects of forward guidance. One
implication of our results is that, contrary to the common wisdom that financial markets are the main
mechanism through which forward guidance affects the economy, forward guidance can also have
strong effects directly via households' expectations. In our experiments, market interest rates are
largely the same across all treatment groups, yet the provision of information about either inflation or
interest rates leads to a change in households' expectations and ultimately a change in whether they
believe that now is a good time to buy durable goods. In other words, even in the absence of a financial
transmission mechanism, communications about interest rates or inflation that reach households can
affect economic outcomes. Furthermore, the magnitude of this channel can be important: the revision
in households' expectations about interest rates and inflation in our treatments are quite large.
       Another interesting result for policy-makers is that the horizon of the guidance matters: for
households, information about distant interest rates has little additional effect on beliefs compared to
information about current or near-term interest rates. This is the opposite of the usual intuition for
financial markets. Market participants are generally confident in their very short-run predictions of
future interest rates but much less so in their longer-run forecasts. In the face of news, they should
therefore place higher weights on their prior beliefs about the short-run than about the long-run,
implying that signals about the long-run should move beliefs and financial assets more than signals
about the short-run. We find instead that households respond much more to guidance about near-term
interest rates than those in the distant horizon.
       Underlying this characteristic is that, unlike financial markets, households are quite
uninformed about the current level of interest rates, as documented in Table 1. Our forward guidance
treatments therefore affect expectations in two ways. First, they provide information about the current
level of interest rates. Second, they provide information about future changes in interest rates. The
high elasticity of beliefs with respect to treatments about current or near-term interest rates relative
to what we find for guidance about more distant interest rates suggests that the former is a much more
powerful force when it comes to households' expectations.
                                                                                                     25
       Finally, we also document that nominal interest rate expectations and inflation expectations
on the part of households are positively correlated, both unconditionally in the cross-section but also
conditionally on information treatments. When households receive news that interest rates are or will
be higher than they expected a priori, they revise both their expectations of future interest rates as
well as their expectations of underlying inflation. The latter changes less than one-for-one with the
former, however, meaning that households tend to revise their nominal and real interest rate
expectations in the same direction.
       One important caveat to these results, however, is that they speak to households' expectations
revisions conditional on being directly provided with the information. Because many households may
be unaware of policy announcements in real-time, our results are likely higher than the potential direct
effects of forward guidance treatments on households' expectations. Coibion et al. (2018) and
D'Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2019a) find little evidence of households' inflation expectations
responding to monetary policy announcements in the U.S. or abroad. Lamla and Vinogradov (2019)
similarly argue that households' expectation appear to be invariant to policy decisions and
announcements. In contrast, Lewis, Mertens, and Makridis (2019) use Gallup polling data and find
some response of households' economic expectations to monetary policy decisions. While the degree
to which households track monetary policy announcements therefore remains unclear, the evidence
strongly suggests that their degree of attention to macroeconomic news and policy is relatively
limited. Achieving effects of the orders we estimate here would therefore likely require
communications strategies on the part of central banks that pierce through households' veil of
inattention more successfully than current ones.


6      Conclusion
Forward guidance is often thought to be a powerful tool to stimulate aggregate demand especially
when policy rates are constrained by the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates and large
central bank balance sheets constrain further asset purchase programs (e.g., Eggertsson and Woodford
2003). However, evidence on the mechanisms through which forward guidance affect economic
outcomes remains limited, especially looking beyond the direct financial market channel. In
particular, evidence on how households' expectations respond to forward guidance announcements,
which is the key mechanism in standard New Keynesian models, has been sorely lacking. This paper
contributes to this area by providing clear causal evidence of how information about current and
future interest rates affects households' expectations.
                                                                                                     26
        We implement a large-scale randomized trial on a representative sample of roughly 25,000 US
households and find that communication about current and next period policy rates moves expectations
as much as communicating about current inflation or mortgage rates. Communications beyond one or
two years into the future, especially about policy rates, do not move expectations much at all, which
suggests a much more limited effect for forward guidance than standard New Keynesian theory predicts
but is consistent with historical evidence (Del Negro et al. 2015) as well as recent work emphasizing
cognitive constraints of economic agents. Thus, our results support a growing body of evidence that
limits on the information processing capacities of individuals can have pronounced economic effects.
        We also study how exogenous variation in the expectations of one variable affects individuals'
expectations about other macroeconomic variables. Consistent with information effects, we find that
households revise their views about nominal interest rates and inflation in the same direction, thereby
dampening the response of real interest rates to new information. This result can provide an additional
rationale for the forward guidance puzzle.
        Finally, our results have implications for the design of forward guidance, such as the optimal
horizon to provide guidance over or whether policy-makers should provide guidance about future
instruments or targets. With respect to the former, our results indicate that information about shorter
horizons are much more effective in altering the expectations of households since they also impart
information about the current levels of variables, which households are otherwise quite uninformed
about. With respect to the latter, we find that the persistence of treatment effects on expectations differs
significantly depending on which variable households are being informed about. Above and beyond the
strength of general equilibrium effects emphasized in Angeletos and Sastry (2019), whether forward
guidance policy should be done in terms of interest rate announcements or inflation targets may therefore
also depend on how persistent or transient policy-makers would like the policy intervention to be.
        The literature on the forward guidance puzzle has exclusively focused on trying to reduce the
implied effects of forward guidance in theoretical models to conform to the empirical evidence of its
effects. However, perhaps part of the puzzle comes instead from its implementation by policy-makers:
alternative designs and strategies for forward guidance could yield much larger effects. With a better
understanding of how to design forward guidance in a way that maximizes its effect on expectations,
one might resolve the forward guidance puzzle in the opposite direction: by making its empirical
effects rise to the levels predicted by standard theory.




                                                                                                         27
References
Andrade, Philippe, and Filippo Ferroni, 2018. "Delphic and Odyssean Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence
       from the Euro Area," Working Paper Series WP-2018-12, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Andre, Peter, Carlo Pizzinelli, Chris Roth, and Johannes Wohlfart, 2019. "Subjective Models of the
       Macroeconomy: Evidence from Experts and a Representative Sample," manuscript.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian. 2018. "Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge."
       American Economic Review 108 (9): 2477-2512.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Karthik A. Sastry. 2019. "Managing Expectations: Instruments vs
       Targets." Manuscript.
Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster, and Basit Zafar, 2019. "Home Price Expectations and Behavior: Evidence
       from a Randomized Information Treatment," Review of Economic Studies 86(4): 1371-1410.
Bhattarai, Saroj and Christopher J. Neely, 2018. "An Analysis of the Literature on International
       Unconventional Monetary Policy," manuscript.
Binder, Carola and Alex Rodrigue, 2018. "Household Informedness and Long-Run Inflation
       Expectations: Experimental Evidence," Southern Economic Journal 85(2): 580-598.
Blinder Alan, Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan, and David-Jan Jansen, 2017. "Necessity as the
       mother of invention: monetary policy after the crisis," Economic Policy 32(92): 707-755.
Bruine de Bruin, Wändi, Wilbert van der Klaauw, Maarten van Rooij, Federica Teppa, and Klaas de
       Vos. 2017. "Measuring expectations of inflation: Effects of survey mode, wording, and
       opportunities to revise," Journal of Economic Psychology 59: 45-58.
Bryan, Michael F., and Guhan Venkatu, 2001 "The Demographics of Inflation Opinion Surveys."
       Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano, 2012.
       "Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance," Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity 43(Spring): 1-80.
Carroll, Christopher D., Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, and David W. Wilcox. 1994. "Does Consumer Sentiment
       Forecast Household Spending? If So, Why?" American Economic Review 84(5): 1397-1408.
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, 2017. "Inflation Expectations,
       Learning, and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments," American Economic
       Journal: Macroeconomics 9(3): 1-35.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2014. "Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial
       Institutions," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 45(1 (Spring): 155-227.
                                                                                                  28
Coibion, Olivier, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Maarten van Rooij, 2019. "How
       Does Consumption Respond to News About Inflation? Field Evidence from a Randomized
       Control Trial," NBER Working Paper 26106.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber, 2019. "Monetary Policy Communications
       and their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations," NBER Working Paper 25482.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rupal Kamdar, 2018. "The Formation of Expectations,
       Inflation and the Phillips Curve," Journal of Economic Literature 56(4): 1447-1491.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar, 2018a. "How Do Firms Form their
       Expectations? New Survey Evidence," American Economic Review 108(9): 2671-2713.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele, 2020. "Inflation Expectations and Firm
       Decisions: New Causal Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(1): 165­219.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar and Mathieu Pedemonte, 2018c. "Inflation
       Expectations as a Policy Tool?" forthcoming in Journal of International Economics.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Jane Ryngaert, 2018b. "Do you know that I
       know that you know...? Higher order beliefs in survey data," NBER Working Paper 24987.
Crump, Richard, Stefano Eusepi, Andrea Tambalotti, and Giorgio Toppa, 2015 "Subjective
       Intertemporal Substitution," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports N 734.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber, 2016. "The Effect of Unconventional
       Fiscal Policy on Consumption Expenditure," NBER Working Paper 22563.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber, 2019. "Managing Households'
       Expectations with Simple Economic Policies," manuscript.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber, 2018c. "Unconventional Fiscal Policy,"
       AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 519-23.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber, 2018a. "IQ,
       Expectations, and Choice," manuscript.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber, 2018b. "Human
       Frictions to the Transmission of Economic Policy," manuscript.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber, 2019b. "Cognitive
       Abilities and Inflation Expectations," AEA Papers and Proceedings 109, 562-66.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, and Michael Weber, 2019. "Traditional Gender Norms
       Distort Women's Economic Expectations," manuscript.


                                                                                                29
D'Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber, 2018. "Exposure to
       Daily Price Changes and Inflation Expectations," manuscript.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Christina Patterson. 2015. "The forward guidance puzzle, "
       Staff Reports 574, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford. 2003. "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
       Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34(1): 139-235.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2019. "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete
       Markets." American Economic Review, 109 (11): 3887-3928.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2019. "A Behavioral New Keynesian Model," manuscript.
Georgarakos, Dimitris and Konstantinos Tatsiramos. 2019. "Monetary Policy Transmission to
       Consumer Financial Stress and Durable Consumption." IZA Discussion Paper 12359.
Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack and Eric T. Swanson. 2005. "Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words?
       The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements." International Journal
       of Central Banking, 1(1): 55-93.
House, Christopher L., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2008. "Temporary Investment Tax Incentives: Theory
       with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation." American Economic Review, 98(3): 737-768.
Jonung, Lars, 1981 "Perceived and Expected Rates of Inflation in Sweden," American Economic
       Review 71(5): 961-968
Kamdar, Rupal, 2018. "The Inattentive Consumer: Sentiment and Expectations" Manuscript.
Lamla, Michael J., and Dmitri V. Vinogradov. 2019. "Central bank announcements: Big news for
       little people?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 108: 21-38.
Lewis, Daniel J., Karel Mertens, and Christos Makridis. 2019. "Do Monetary Policy Announcements
       Shift Household Expectations?" Staff Reports 897, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Roth, Christopher and Johannes Wohlfart, 2018. "How do expectations about the economy affect
       personal expectations and behavior?" manuscript.
Swanson, Eric T., 2018. "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset
       Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper 23311.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2019. "Central Banking with Many Voices: The Communications Arms
       Race" Manuscript.
Woodford, Michael, 2018. "Monetary Policy Analysis When Planning Horizons Are Finite," NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual 2018(33): 1-50.


                                                                                                  30
                                             Table 1. Description of treatments.

                                                                       Horizon of provided information
Treatment                                                               Future years                   Past years
                                                   Current
                                                                `19     `20     `21     LR         `15   `16      `17
T2 (Population growth)                             2.2%

T3 (Current FFR)                                   2.5%

T4 (FG: LR high)                                   2.5%       3.1%      3.6%       3.6%   3.5%

T5 (FG: LR low)                                    2.5%       2.4%      2.4%       2.4%   2.5%

T6 (FG: LR central)                                2.5%       2.8%      3.1%       3.0%   2.8%

T7 (FG: 1yr central)                               2.5%       2.8%

T8 (FG: 1yr high)                                  2.5%       3.1%

T9 (FG: 1yr low)                                   2.5%       2.4%

T10 (FG: 2yr central)                              2.5%       2.8%      3.1%

T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)                         2.5%       2.8%      3.6%

T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                          2.5%       2.8%      2.4%

T13 (FG: 3yr central)                              2.5%       2.8%      3.1%       3.0%

T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)                         2.5%       2.8%      3.1%       3.6%

T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                          2.5%       2.8%      3.1%       2.4%

T16 (FG: LR central-high)                          2.5%       2.8%      3.1%       3.0%   3.5%

T17 (FG: LR central-low)                           2.5%       2.8%      3.1%       3.0%   2.5%

T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)                    2.5%       2.8%      3.1%       3.0%   2.8%   0.1%    0.4%   1.0%

T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)                       2.5%                                          0.1%    0.4%   1.0%

T20 (Inflation last year)                          1.8%

T21 (Average inflation over last 3 years)                                                                1.6%

T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead inflation     1.8%       1.9%      2.1%       2.1%   2.0%
     path forecast)
T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead inflation     1.8%                      2.0%
     average forecast)
T24 (Current mortgage rate)                        4.6%


Notes: the table shows information provided in each treatment. FFR is fed funds rate. FG is forward guidance.




                                                                                                                    31
                                                                      Table 2. Descriptive statistics.

                                                                                                 Robust moments                           Moments
                                                                                                 Mean     St. Dev             Mean        Median          St. Dev
                                                                                                  (1)       (2)                (3)          (4)             (5)
   Pre-treatment data
    Perceived inflation, previous 12 months                                                        2.88      2.41              7.41           3.00         13.23
    Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                                             1.64      2.56              1.75           1.36          5.13
    Perceived unemployment rate, current                                                           4.76      2.16             13.26           5.00         17.09
    Expected unemployment rate, 12-month ahead                                                     5.32      2.79             13.57           6.00         16.95
    Perceived and expected mortgage rate for a "person like you"
        Current                                                                                    4.55      1.19              7.13           4.80          8.63
        End of 2019                                                                                4.90      1.44              7.59           5.00          8.74
        End of 2020                                                                                5.28      1.65              8.20           5.50          9.26
        End of 2021                                                                                5.53      1.92              8.74           6.00         10.07
        Next 5-10 years                                                                            5.95      2.35              9.78           6.00         11.71

   Post-treatment data
    Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                                             1.89      1.54              4.06           2.00          9.63
    Expected inflation, next 3-5 years                                                             2.42      1.79              4.65           3.00          9.47
    Expected unemployment rate, end of 2019                                                        4.57      2.16             10.59           5.00         13.70
    Expected unemployment rate, next 3-5 years                                                     5.29      2.70             11.83           6.00         14.97
    Perceived and expected mortgage rate for a "person with excellent credit"
         Current                                                                                   4.13      1.07              5.72           4.00          7.33
         End of 2019                                                                               4.39      1.09              6.02           4.50          6.96
         End of 2020                                                                               4.73      1.37              6.52           5.00          7.40
         End of 2021                                                                               4.97      1.57              6.88           5.00          7.83
         Next 5-10 years                                                                           5.36      1.90              7.70           5.50          9.24
Notes: pre-treatment expected inflation (12 months ahead) is computed as mean implied from the reported probability distribution over a range of bins. All other
measures of inflation are reported as point predictions. Perceived and expected mortgage rates are elicited for "a person line you" at the pre-treatment stage and for "
someone with excellent credit" at the post-treatment stage. Moments in columns (1) and (2) are computed using the Huber-robust method. The number of observations
is 26,891.



                                                                                                                                                                     32
                                                                      Table 3. Posterior beliefs (nominal mortgage rates) by treatment.
                                                  Current                       one-year [2019]                    two-year [2020]              Three-year [2021]                Longer run
Treatment                              Intercept (b)      Slope ()        Intercept (b)     Slope ()         Intercept (b)    Slope ()     Intercept (b)    Slope ()     Intercept (b)   Slope ()
                                             (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)           (9)          (10)
Control                                  -0.193***         0.996***         -0.121***         0.968***          0.803***        0.767***      0.465***        0.843***      0.106*         0.921***
                                         (0.024)          (0.004)           (0.045)          (0.009)           (0.045)         (0.007)       (0.054)         (0.009)       (0.054)        (0.009)
Relative to control
T2 (Population growth)                   0.009           -0.008              0.447***      -0.115***          -0.318***       0.064***        0.293***      -0.057***       0.310***      -0.053***
                                        (0.041)          (0.007)            (0.058)        (0.010)            (0.064)        (0.010)         (0.074)        (0.012)        (0.078)        (0.012)
T3 (Current FFR)                         1.540***        -0.374***           1.533***      -0.344***           1.442***      -0.300***        0.576***      -0.123***       0.886***      -0.183***
                                        (0.050)          (0.009)            (0.062)        (0.011)            (0.072)        (0.011)         (0.069)        (0.010)        (0.083)        (0.012)
T4 (FG: LR high)                         2.287***        -0.542***           2.167***      -0.475***           1.343***      -0.271***        1.152***      -0.228***       1.708***      -0.326***
                                        (0.056)          (0.010)            (0.076)        (0.014)            (0.074)        (0.012)         (0.087)        (0.014)        (0.084)        (0.012)
T5 (FG: LR low)                          0.917***        -0.230***           1.510***      -0.353***           0.825***      -0.190***        0.390***      -0.087***       1.356***      -0.277***
                                        (0.056)          (0.011)            (0.069)        (0.012)            (0.089)        (0.015)         (0.081)        (0.013)        (0.086)        (0.012)
T6 (FG: LR central)                      2.343***        -0.562***           2.402***      -0.536***           1.965***      -0.419***        1.376***      -0.307***       0.737***      -0.167***
                                        (0.052)          (0.009)            (0.070)        (0.013)            (0.075)        (0.012)         (0.092)        (0.015)        (0.094)        (0.014)
T7 (FG: 1yr central)                     0.141***        -0.026***           1.247***      -0.280***           1.259***      -0.256***        0.933***      -0.173***       1.610***      -0.291***
                                        (0.051)          (0.010)            (0.066)        (0.012)            (0.072)        (0.011)         (0.090)        (0.015)        (0.091)        (0.013)
T8 (FG: 1yr high)                        1.754***        -0.415***           2.225***      -0.494***           0.972***      -0.207***        0.149*        -0.040***       0.930***      -0.171***
                                        (0.060)          (0.011)            (0.067)        (0.012)            (0.066)        (0.010)         (0.090)        (0.015)        (0.083)        (0.012)
T9 (FG: 1yr low)                         1.445***        -0.353***           1.171***      -0.280***           1.020***      -0.219***        1.794***      -0.370***       0.546***      -0.112***
                                        (0.043)          (0.007)            (0.060)        (0.010)            (0.076)        (0.012)         (0.075)        (0.011)        (0.076)        (0.011)
T10 (FG: 2yr central)                    0.816***        -0.210***           0.982***      -0.239***          -0.134**        0.015*          0.871***      -0.191***       1.214***      -0.234***
                                        (0.052)          (0.010)            (0.063)        (0.011)            (0.057)        (0.008)         (0.075)        (0.011)        (0.070)        (0.009)
T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)               0.737***        -0.189***           0.725***      -0.173***          -0.094          0.013           0.226***      -0.047***       0.610***      -0.116***
                                        (0.046)          (0.008)            (0.058)        (0.010)            (0.070)        (0.011)         (0.072)        (0.011)        (0.081)        (0.012)
T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                0.973***        -0.244***           0.414***      -0.112***          -0.561***       0.110***        0.168**       -0.049***       0.984***      -0.215***
                                        (0.059)          (0.012)            (0.071)        (0.014)            (0.065)        (0.011)         (0.072)        (0.012)        (0.089)        (0.013)
T13 (FG: 3yr central)                    1.622***        -0.389***           2.204***      -0.491***           1.090***      -0.233***        2.068***      -0.412***       1.675***      -0.328***
                                        (0.046)          (0.007)            (0.067)        (0.012)            (0.083)        (0.013)         (0.080)        (0.012)        (0.084)        (0.012)
T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)               2.622***        -0.626***           1.995***      -0.450***           1.599***      -0.331***        1.270***      -0.255***       2.507***      -0.471***
                                        (0.060)          (0.011)            (0.064)        (0.011)            (0.079)        (0.013)         (0.083)        (0.013)        (0.089)        (0.013)
T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                1.361***        -0.341***           1.371***      -0.329***           1.189***      -0.268***        0.562***      -0.139***       1.034***      -0.219***
                                        (0.052)          (0.009)            (0.063)        (0.011)            (0.069)        (0.010)         (0.083)        (0.013)        (0.078)        (0.011)
T16 (FG: LR central-high)                0.580***        -0.155***           1.717***      -0.404***           0.597***      -0.134***        0.918***      -0.194***       1.704***      -0.330***
                                        (0.038)          (0.006)            (0.062)        (0.011)            (0.068)        (0.010)         (0.076)        (0.012)        (0.085)        (0.012)
T17 (FG: LR central-low)                 2.943***        -0.694***           0.350***      -0.097***           1.962***      -0.406***        0.593***      -0.141***       0.697***      -0.162***
                                        (0.054)          (0.010)            (0.075)        (0.015)            (0.083)        (0.013)         (0.089)        (0.014)        (0.093)        (0.014)
T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)          2.377***        -0.562***           0.903***      -0.213***          -0.024         -0.011           0.864***      -0.183***       0.755***      -0.164***
                                        (0.048)          (0.008)            (0.078)        (0.015)            (0.070)        (0.011)         (0.081)        (0.013)        (0.092)        (0.014)
T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)             2.101***        -0.513***           2.243***      -0.505***           1.025***      -0.225***        1.284***      -0.275***       1.956***      -0.374***
                                        (0.037)          (0.005)            (0.076)        (0.014)            (0.067)        (0.010)         (0.075)        (0.011)        (0.089)        (0.013)
T20 (Inflation last year)                1.768***        -0.413***           0.643***      -0.124***           0.111         -0.011           0.612***      -0.099***       0.761***      -0.143***
                                        (0.053)          (0.010)            (0.068)        (0.013)            (0.079)        (0.014)         (0.081)        (0.013)        (0.097)        (0.015)
T21 (Inflation last 3 years)            -0.001           -0.005              1.093***      -0.248***           0.245***      -0.046***        0.532***      -0.107***       0.780***      -0.138***
                                        (0.042)          (0.007)            (0.065)        (0.012)            (0.077)        (0.013)         (0.084)        (0.014)        (0.074)        (0.011)
T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     0.991***        -0.238***           1.128***      -0.248***          -0.013         -0.001           1.116***      -0.224***       1.053***      -0.203***
      inflation path forecast)          (0.047)          (0.008)            (0.069)        (0.012)            (0.073)        (0.012)         (0.093)        (0.015)        (0.084)        (0.012)
T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     0.034           -0.002              0.470***      -0.110***           0.493***      -0.105***       -0.082          0.023*         0.707***      -0.140***
      inflation average forecast)       (0.038)          (0.006)            (0.058)        (0.011)            (0.082)        (0.013)         (0.077)        (0.013)        (0.075)        (0.011)
T24 (current mortgage rate)              4.503***        -0.994***           4.657***      -0.969***           3.791***      -0.728***        3.443***      -0.646***       3.162***      -0.565***
                                        (0.042)          (0.006)            (0.057)        (0.010)            (0.069)        (0.011)         (0.082)        (0.013)        (0.078)        (0.011)
Observations                                    22,519                              22,822                            23,108                         23,066                        22,960
R-squared                                        0.937                               0.908                             0.895                          0.896                         0.912
  Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for nominal mortgage rates for various horizons. All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use
  sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                             33
                                    Table 4. Posterior beliefs (inflation and unemployment rate) by treatment.
                                                                       Inflation expectations        Unempl. rate expectations
                  Treatment                                        Intercept (b) Slope ()           Intercept (b) Slope ()
                                                                         (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
                  Control                                              1.814***        0.216***        -0.066*         0.984***
                                                                      (0.050)         (0.014)          (0.035)        (0.005)
                  Relative to control
                  T2 (Population growth)                               0.158**        -0.022           -0.000         -0.002
                                                                      (0.076)         (0.021)          (0.055)        (0.008)
                  T3 (Current FFR)                                    -0.163**        -0.135***        -0.009         -0.002
                                                                      (0.078)         (0.020)          (0.055)        (0.008)
                  T4 (FG: LR high)                                     0.158**        -0.110***         1.026***      -0.234***
                                                                      (0.077)         (0.021)          (0.058)        (0.009)
                  T5 (FG: LR low)                                     -0.206***       -0.136***         0.864***      -0.222***
                                                                      (0.073)         (0.019)          (0.056)        (0.008)
                  T6 (FG: LR central)                                 -0.061          -0.108***         0.402***      -0.103***
                                                                      (0.074)         (0.019)          (0.062)        (0.010)
                  T7 (FG: 1yr central)                                -0.144*         -0.097***         0.018          0.008
                                                                      (0.075)         (0.020)          (0.050)        (0.006)
                  T8 (FG: 1yr high)                                   -0.091          -0.100***        -0.031          0.007
                                                                      (0.075)         (0.019)          (0.050)        (0.006)
                  T9 (FG: 1yr low)                                    -0.180**        -0.123***         0.024          0.000
                                                                      (0.079)         (0.020)          (0.054)        (0.007)
                  T10 (FG: 2yr central)                               -0.103          -0.177***         0.082         -0.010
                                                                      (0.075)         (0.020)          (0.056)        (0.008)
                  T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)                          -0.052          -0.148***        -0.038          0.018***
                                                                      (0.076)         (0.019)          (0.050)        (0.006)
                  T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                           -0.041          -0.184***        -0.065          0.008
                                                                      (0.075)         (0.019)          (0.051)        (0.007)
                  T13 (FG: 3yr central)                               -0.025          -0.139***        -0.021         -0.002
                                                                      (0.075)         (0.019)          (0.055)        (0.008)
                  T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)                           0.004          -0.142***         0.033          0.003
                                                                      (0.076)         (0.020)          (0.052)        (0.007)
                  T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                           -0.032          -0.138***        -0.062          0.002
                                                                      (0.076)         (0.020)          (0.054)        (0.008)
                  T16 (FG: LR central-high)                           -0.049          -0.155***        -0.033          0.004
                                                                      (0.077)         (0.020)          (0.055)        (0.007)
                  T17 (FG: LR central-low)                            -0.086          -0.095***        -0.105**        0.013**
                                                                      (0.078)         (0.019)          (0.051)        (0.006)
                  T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)                      0.006          -0.151***        -0.042          0.013**
                                                                      (0.074)         (0.019)          (0.048)        (0.006)
                  T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)                         0.117          -0.210***        -0.003          0.011*
                                                                      (0.078)         (0.019)          (0.052)        (0.006)
                  T20 (Inflation last year)                           -0.153**        -0.174***        -0.044          0.009
                                                                      (0.067)         (0.017)          (0.050)        (0.006)
                  T21 (Inflation last 3 years)                        -0.173**        -0.153***        -0.068          0.004
                                                                      (0.068)         (0.018)          (0.054)        (0.007)
                  T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead                -0.080          -0.205***         0.707***      -0.164***
                        inflation path forecast)                      (0.069)         (0.018)          (0.065)        (0.011)
                  T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead                -0.165**        -0.149***        -0.087*         0.016***
                        inflation average forecast)                   (0.071)         (0.018)          (0.048)        (0.006)
                  T24 (current mortgage rate)                         -0.025           0.007            0.056         -0.003
                                                                      (0.079)         (0.020)          (0.055)        (0.007)
                  Observations                                                 24,323                          20,517
                  R-squared                                                     0.081                           0.975
Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for one-year-ahead inflation expectations (columns 1 and 2) and
for one-year-ahead unemployment rate expectations (columns 3 and 4). Posterior unemployment rate expectations (point predictions)
are for one-year ahead. Prior unemployment rate expectations (point predictions) are for "the end of 2019". Posterior inflation
expectations are point predictions. Prior inflation expectations are measured as implied means from the reported probability distributions.
All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                        34
                                                                      Table 5. Posterior beliefs (real mortgage rates) by treatment.
                                                  Current                      one-year [2019]                    two-year [2020]              Three-year [2021]                Longer run
Treatment                              Intercept (b)      Slope ()      Intercept (b)     Slope ()          Intercept (b)    Slope ()     Intercept (b)    Slope ()     Intercept (b)   Slope ()
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)           (9)           (10)
Control                                   1.280***         0.147***        1.531***         0.143***           1.705***        0.189***      1.897***        0.182***      2.199***       0.188***
                                         (0.057)          (0.009)         (0.058)          (0.008)            (0.063)         (0.009)       (0.064)         (0.008)       (0.073)        (0.010)
Relative to control
T2 (Population growth)                   0.062            -0.029**        -0.181*         0.092***           -0.084          0.048***       -0.054          0.032**       -0.080          0.004
                                        (0.090)           (0.015)         (0.092)        (0.012)             (0.101)        (0.014)         (0.102)        (0.013)        (0.114)        (0.015)
T3 (Current FFR)                         0.518***         -0.064***        0.544***      -0.041***            0.529***      -0.054***        0.494***      -0.035**        0.798***      -0.097***
                                        (0.089)           (0.014)         (0.090)        (0.013)             (0.099)        (0.016)         (0.103)        (0.015)        (0.118)        (0.015)
T4 (FG: LR high)                         0.175**          -0.050***        0.193**       -0.037***            0.275***      -0.068***        0.293***      -0.075***       0.016         -0.011
                                        (0.088)           (0.014)         (0.091)        (0.013)             (0.097)        (0.014)         (0.098)        (0.012)        (0.113)        (0.015)
T5 (FG: LR low)                          0.581***         -0.097***        0.629***      -0.129***            0.683***      -0.155***        0.602***      -0.128***       0.554***      -0.129***
                                        (0.091)           (0.015)         (0.092)        (0.012)             (0.098)        (0.013)         (0.101)        (0.012)        (0.115)        (0.014)
T6 (FG: LR central)                      0.302***         -0.009           0.411***      -0.068***            0.284***      -0.043***        0.235**       -0.033**        0.141         -0.032**
                                        (0.086)           (0.014)         (0.089)        (0.013)             (0.093)        (0.014)         (0.097)        (0.013)        (0.106)        (0.014)
T7 (FG: 1yr central)                     0.331***         -0.027**         0.287***      -0.026**             0.456***      -0.085***        0.551***      -0.075***       0.550***      -0.075***
                                        (0.086)           (0.012)         (0.087)        (0.012)             (0.092)        (0.012)         (0.097)        (0.013)        (0.110)        (0.013)
T8 (FG: 1yr high)                        0.337***         -0.066***        0.316***      -0.056***            0.377***      -0.079***        0.360***      -0.059***       0.312***      -0.057***
                                        (0.093)           (0.016)         (0.095)        (0.015)             (0.099)        (0.015)         (0.100)        (0.013)        (0.109)        (0.012)
T9 (FG: 1yr low)                         0.499***         -0.016           0.469***      -0.039***            0.474***      -0.049***        0.441***      -0.043***       0.183          0.030**
                                        (0.091)           (0.013)         (0.092)        (0.013)             (0.099)        (0.014)         (0.105)        (0.015)        (0.114)        (0.015)
T10 (FG: 2yr central)                    0.483***         -0.047***        0.343***       0.001               0.510***      -0.070***        0.503***      -0.038***       0.209*         0.029*
                                        (0.088)           (0.013)         (0.090)        (0.013)             (0.098)        (0.014)         (0.097)        (0.012)        (0.117)        (0.015)
T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)               0.445***         -0.103***        0.518***      -0.132***            0.618***      -0.162***        0.542***      -0.127***       0.457***      -0.090***
                                        (0.091)           (0.013)         (0.094)        (0.013)             (0.099)        (0.013)         (0.103)        (0.013)        (0.114)        (0.014)
T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                0.354***         -0.068***        0.315***      -0.084***            0.462***      -0.132***        0.388***      -0.107***       0.354***      -0.087***
                                        (0.086)           (0.013)         (0.089)        (0.013)             (0.095)        (0.013)         (0.099)        (0.014)        (0.111)        (0.015)
T13 (FG: 3yr central)                    0.605***         -0.122***        0.428***      -0.061***            0.505***      -0.088***        0.428***      -0.065***       0.426***      -0.070***
                                        (0.089)           (0.013)         (0.089)        (0.013)             (0.095)        (0.013)         (0.100)        (0.013)        (0.113)        (0.015)
T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)               0.281***         -0.010           0.319***      -0.056***            0.403***      -0.076***        0.627***      -0.126***       0.343***      -0.033**
                                        (0.087)           (0.015)         (0.089)        (0.011)             (0.092)        (0.012)         (0.099)        (0.012)        (0.111)        (0.014)
T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                0.440***         -0.087***        0.321***      -0.058***            0.482***      -0.129***        0.330***      -0.115***       0.268**       -0.091***
                                        (0.090)           (0.014)         (0.093)        (0.014)             (0.098)        (0.013)         (0.102)        (0.013)        (0.111)        (0.014)
T16 (FG: LR central-high)                0.426***         -0.080***        0.396***      -0.060***            0.447***      -0.089***        0.396***      -0.069***       0.330***      -0.051***
                                        (0.089)           (0.013)         (0.093)        (0.013)             (0.097)        (0.012)         (0.102)        (0.013)        (0.115)        (0.015)
T17 (FG: LR central-low)                 0.242***         -0.071***        0.340***      -0.119***            0.453***      -0.146***        0.491***      -0.149***       0.326***      -0.128***
                                        (0.090)           (0.014)         (0.093)        (0.012)             (0.101)        (0.014)         (0.103)        (0.013)        (0.118)        (0.015)
T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)          0.333***         -0.035***        0.221**       -0.009               0.379***      -0.071***        0.321***      -0.050***       0.215*        -0.031**
                                        (0.086)           (0.013)         (0.089)        (0.013)             (0.093)        (0.012)         (0.098)        (0.012)        (0.111)        (0.014)
T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)             0.514***         -0.131***        0.550***      -0.134***            0.562***      -0.136***        0.587***      -0.148***       0.630***      -0.151***
                                        (0.091)           (0.014)         (0.096)        (0.014)             (0.101)        (0.015)         (0.100)        (0.012)        (0.115)        (0.014)
T20 (Inflation last year)                0.681***         -0.036**         0.697***      -0.036***            0.762***      -0.062***        0.786***      -0.069***       0.713***      -0.056***
                                        (0.085)           (0.015)         (0.083)        (0.011)             (0.091)        (0.014)         (0.095)        (0.014)        (0.113)        (0.016)
T21 (Inflation last 3 years)             0.688***         -0.046***        0.650***      -0.002               0.813***      -0.066***        0.769***      -0.037**        0.848***      -0.049***
                                        (0.080)           (0.014)         (0.081)        (0.012)             (0.087)        (0.014)         (0.094)        (0.014)        (0.106)        (0.014)
T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     0.758***         -0.082***        0.743***      -0.071***            0.758***      -0.064***        0.754***      -0.051***       0.719***      -0.043***
      inflation path forecast)          (0.082)           (0.013)         (0.086)        (0.014)             (0.090)        (0.014)         (0.093)        (0.014)        (0.105)        (0.014)
T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     0.707***         -0.076***        0.688***      -0.078***            0.721***      -0.083***        0.773***      -0.115***       0.648***      -0.085***
      inflation average forecast)       (0.084)           (0.013)         (0.087)        (0.013)             (0.092)        (0.013)         (0.095)        (0.012)        (0.109)        (0.013)
T24 (current mortgage rate)              0.175*           -0.091***        0.162*        -0.077***            0.224**       -0.128***        0.209**       -0.108***       0.097         -0.065***
                                        (0.092)           (0.013)         (0.094)        (0.013)             (0.098)        (0.013)         (0.102)        (0.013)        (0.114)        (0.015)
Observations                                     24,202                           24,170                             24,184                         24,234                        24,227
R-squared                                        0.107                             0.135                              0.157                          0.159                         0.202
  Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for real mortgage rates (nominal mortgage rate minus one-year-ahead inflation forecast) for various horizons.
  All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
  ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                             35
                                          Table 6. Consumer sentiment as a function of real interest rate

                                                                                    Type of treatment
                                                           Forward                              Current/past
                                                                               Inflation                            Pooled
                                                           guidance                            interest rates
                                                              (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
                Panel A: Good time to buy a house
                Post-treatment  -                           -0.071**            -0.020              -0.015           -0.026
                                                            (0.031)             (0.030)             (0.026)          (0.019)
                Pre-treatment  -                             0.010**             0.002              -0.002            0.003
                                                            (0.004)             (0.005)             (0.004)          (0.002)
                Observations                                17,071               5,378               3,384           23,114
                R-squared                                   -0.044               0.045               0.065            0.029
                1st stage F-statistic                        16.87               48.94               36.12            38.51

                Panel B: Good time to buy a car
                Post-treatment  -                           -0.065**            -0.029              -0.045*          -0.047**
                                                            (0.032)             (0.030)             (0.026)          (0.019)
                Pre-treatment  -                             0.012***            0.006               0.005            0.009***
                                                            (0.004)             (0.005)             (0.004)          (0.003)
                Observations                                17,065               5,376               3,382           23,107
                R-squared                                   -0.032               0.024               0.011           -0.000
                1st stage F-statistic                        15.62               49.34               36.12            37.56

                Panel C: Good time to buy a large home appliance or electronics
                Post-treatment  -                    -0.015           -0.058*                       -0.016           -0.064***
                                                     (0.032)          (0.030)                       (0.026)          (0.019)
                Pre-treatment  -                      0.005             0.010**                      0.002            0.011***
                                                     (0.004)          (0.005)                       (0.004)          (0.002)
                Observations                         17,087            5,375                         3,385           23,099
                R-squared                             0.029            -0.008                        0.055           -0.031
                1st stage F-statistic                 16.70            49.02                         39.23            38.48

                 Panel D: Good time to buy a durable good
                 Post-treatment  -                         -0.093***           -0.072**          -0.005              -0.050***
                                                           (0.030)             (0.030)           (0.028)             (0.019)
                 Pre-treatment  -                           0.015***            0.011**          -0.001                0.010***
                                                           (0.004)             (0.005)           (0.004)             (0.002)
                 Observations                              17,071               5,370             3,387              23,081
                 R-squared                                 -0.107              -0.023             0.061               -0.001
                 1st stage F-statistic                      18.39               48.19             37.52               37.21
Notes: The table reports instrumental variable (IV) estimates of coefficients 1 and 2 in specification (2). The first stage is given
by specification (1). The dependent variable is equal to one if a respondent says that it is a good time to buy a particular durable
good and zero otherwise. In Panel D, the dependent variable is equal to one if a respondent says that it is a good time to buy either
house, car, or appliance/electronics. The treatment of outliers and influential observations is described in Appendix C of Coibion
et al. (2019). The sample in column (1) includes only the treatment group and treatments classified as forward guidance treatments
(T4-T19). The sample in column (2) includes only the treatment group and treatments classified as inflation treatments (T20-T23).
The sample in column (3) includes only the treatment group and treatments classified as current/past interest rate treatments (T3,
T19, T24). The sample in column (4) covers all treatment groups. In this column, coefficients 1 and 2 are restricted to be the
same across treatment groups but coefficients  and  in the first stage are allowed to vary across treatment groups. All regressions
use sampling weights. Household/respondent controls are included but not reported. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. "1st
stage F-statistic" reports the Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic for the first stage. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and
10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                     36
                                                           Figure 1. Distribution of pre-treatment perceptions and expectations of inflation and unemployment rates.


                                                 Panel A: Perceived inflation                                                                  Panel B: Expected inflation


                             .25




                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                      1.89 actual inflation

                             .2




                                                                                                                         .15
                  .1 .15
                  Density




                                                                                                                  Density
                                                                                                                   .1        .05
                             .05
                             0




                                                                                                                             0
                                           -10    -5          0       5       10       15        20     25                                 -14-12-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14


                                                 Panel C: Perceived UE rate                                                                    Panel D: Expected UE rate
                  0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3




                                                                                                                  0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3
                                                       3.8 current UE rate
                          Density




                                                                                                                          Density


                                           0           5           10          15           20         25                                  0       5      10     15      20     25


Notes: Unemployment (UE) rate expectations (point prediction) and perceptions (point prediction) are censored at 25 percent. Perceived inflation rate (point
prediction) is censored at -10 percent and 25 percent. The blue vertical line shows actual unemployment rate at the time of the survey. The red vertical line shows
actual inflation rate (over the previous 12 months) at the time of the survey. Expected inflation rate is based on the mean implied by the reported probability
distribution for the one-year ahead inflation forecast. Expected unemployment rate is for the end of 2019.

                                                                                                                                                                                      37
                                                   Figure 2. Distribution of pre-treatment perceptions and expectations of interest rates.

                              Panel A: Current                                     Panel B: End of 2019                                          Panel C: End of 2020




                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                        .3
                .3

                              4.27 current rate




                                                                          .2




                                                                                                                                        .2
                .2
      Density




                                                                Density




                                                                                                                              Density
                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                        .1
                .1
                0




                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                        0
                     0    5      10    15     20   25      30                  0    5   10      15       20      25      30                  0    5   10   15   20   25   30
                         Panel D: End of 2021                                      Panel E: Longer run
                .3




                                                                          .3
                .2




                                                                          .2
      Density




                                                                Density
                .1




                                                                          .1
                0




                                                                          0




                     0    5      10    15     20   25      30                  0    5   10      15       20      25      30

Notes: Panels A-E report perceptions and expectations for mortgage rates. Mortgage rates are censored at 30 percent.


                                                                                                                                                                               38
                                 Figure 3. Response of nominal mortgage rate expectations by the forecast horizon and the horizon of forward guidance (FG).

                                      Panel A: end of 2019                                                                    Panel B: end of 2020




                                                                                                     25
               25               Control
                                Treatment (current)




                                                                                                10 15 20
          10 15 20

                                Treatment (1y FG)




                                                                                              posterior E[i]
        posterior E[i]



                                Treatment (2y FG)
                                Treatment (3y FG)
                                Treatment (LR FG)




                                                                                                     5
               5




                                                                                                     0
               0




                         0                10                     20                      30                    0                10                       20            30
                                                    prior E[i]                                                                          prior E[i]
                                      Panel C: end of 2021                                                               Panel D: 5 years after 2019
               25




                                                                                                     25
         10 15 20




                                                                                              10 15 20
                                                                                              posterior E[i]
        posterior E[i]
               5




                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                     0
               0




                         0                10                     20                      30                    0                10                       20            30
                                                    prior E[i]                                                                          prior E[i]

Notes: each panel shows binscatter plots for revisions in nominal mortgage rates when treatments are combined into information provision about current rates ("current": T3, T19,
T24), 1-year forward guidance ("1y FG": T7, T8, T9), 2-year forward guidance ("2y FG": T10, T11, T12), 3-year forward guidance ("3y FG": T13, T14, T15), longer-run forward
guidance ("LR FG": T4, T5, T6, T16, T17, T18). The title of each panel indicates the horizon of the forecasts for mortgage rates. Estimated regression coefficients are reported in
Appendix Table 7.
                                                                                                                                                                                 39
                                                 Figure 4. Response of nominal mortgage rate expectations by treatment and horizon.

                                Panel A: end of 2019                                                                     Panel B: end of 2020




                                                                                                 25
       25                Control
                         Treatment (FG)




                                                                                            10 15 20
  10 15 20

                         Treatment (Inflation)




                                                                                          posterior E[i]
posterior E[i]



                         Treatment (current/past rates)




                                                                                                 5
       5




                                                                                                 0
       0




                 0                 10                        20                      30                    0               10                      20           30
                                            prior E[i]                                                                                prior E[i]
                               Panel C: end of 2021                                                                 Panel D: 5 years after 2019
       25




                                                                                                 25
 10 15 20




                                                                                          10 15 20
                                                                                          posterior E[i]
posterior E[i]
       5




                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                 0
       0




                 0                 10                        20                      30                    0               10                      20           30
                                            prior E[i]                                                                                prior E[i]

Notes: each panel shows binscatter plots for revisions in nominal mortgage rates when treatments are combined into information provision about current rates ("Current/past
rates": T3, T19, T24), forward guidance ("FG": T4-T19), inflation ("Inflation": T20-T-23). The title of each panel indicates the horizon of the forecasts for mortgage rates.
Estimated regression coefficients are reported in Appendix Table 6.

                                                                                                                                                                          40
             Figure 5. Response of inflation expectations by treatment type and by the horizon of forward guidance.
                                                 Panel A: By treatment type




                  5
                                  Control
                                  Treatment (FG)
                                  Treatment (Inflation)

                  4
                                  Treatment (current/past rates)
                       3
           posterior E
                 21
                  0
                  -1




                           -20             -10                    0                      10                    20
                                                              prior E

                                     Panel B: By the horizon of forward guidance
                  5




                                  Control
                                  Treatment (current)
                                  Treatment (1y FG)
                  4




                                  Treatment (2y FG)
                                  Treatment (3y FG)
                                  Treatment (LR FG)
                       3
           posterior E
                2 1
                  0
                  -1




                           -20             -10                    0                      10                    20
                                                              prior E

Notes: Panel A shows binscatter plots for revisions in inflation forecasts when treatments are combined into forward guidance
(T4-T19), inflation (T20-T23), and current/past interest rates (T3, T19, T24). Panel B shows binscatter plots for revisions in
inflation forecasts when treatments are combined into information provision about current rates ("current": T3, T19, T24), 1-
year forward guidance ("1y FG": T7, T8, T9), 2-year forward guidance ("2y FG": T10, T11, T12), 3-year forward guidance
("3y FG": T13, T14, T15), longer-run forward guidance ("LR FG": T4, T5, T6, T16, T17, T18). Estimated regression
coefficients are reported in Appendix Table 6 and Appendix Table 7.

                                                                                                                           41
                             Figure 6. Response of real mortgage rate expectations by the forecast horizon and the horizon of forward guidance (FG).

                                Panel A: end of 2019                                                                     Panel B: end of 2020




                                                                                                 10
         10               Control
                          Treatment (current)
               8




                                                                                                        8
                          Treatment (1y FG)




                                                                                         posterior E[r]
posterior E[r]



                          Treatment (2y FG)
          6




                                                                                                   6
                          Treatment (3y FG)
                          Treatment (LR FG)
    4




                                                                                            4
         2




                                                                                                 2
         0




                                                                                                 0
                    -10     0                    10              20                 30                      -10      0                10               20           30
                                              prior E[r]                                                                           prior E[r]
                                Panel C: end of 2021                                                                Panel D: 5 years after 2019




                                                                                                 10
         10     8




                                                                                                        8
                                                                                         posterior E[r]
 posterior E[r]
           6




                                                                                                   6
     4




                                                                                             4
2




                                                                                                 2
         0




                                                                                                 0



                    -10     0                    10              20                 30                      -10      0                10               20           30
                                              prior E[r]                                                                           prior E[r]

Notes: each panel shows binscatter plots for revisions in real mortgage rates (nominal mortgage rate minus one-year ahead inflation forecast) when treatments are combined into
information provision about current rates ("current": T3, T19, T24), 1-year forward guidance ("1y FG": T7-T9), 2-year forward guidance ("2y FG": T10-T12), 3-year forward
guidance ("3y FG": T13- T15), longer-run forward guidance ("LR FG": T4-T6, T16-T18). The title of each panel indicates the horizon of the forecasts for mortgage rates. Estimated
regression coefficients are reported in Appendix Table 7.
                                                                                                                                                                              42
                                                    Figure 7. Response of real mortgage rate expectations by treatment and horizon.

                                 Panel A: end of 2019                                                                       Panel B: end of 2020




                                                                                                    10
         10               Control
                          Treatment (FG)
               8




                                                                                                           8
                          Treatment (Inflation)




                                                                                            posterior E[r]
posterior E[r]



                          Treatment (current/past rates)
          6




                                                                                                      6
   4




                                                                                               4
         2




                                                                                                    2
         0




                                                                                                    0
                    -10     0                   10                  20                 30                      -10      0                10        20             30
                                             prior E[r]                                                                               prior E[r]
                                Panel C: end of 2021                                                                  Panel D: 5 years after 2019




                                                                                                    10
         10     8




                                                                                                           8
                                                                                            posterior E[r]
 posterior E[r]
           6




                                                                                                      6
     4




                                                                                                4
2




                                                                                                    2
         0




                                                                                                    0



                    -10     0                   10                  20                 30                      -10      0                10        20             30
                                             prior E[r]                                                                               prior E[r]

Notes: each panel shows binscatter plots for revisions in real mortgage rates (nominal mortgage rate minus one-year ahead inflation forecast) when treatments are combined into
information provision about current rates ("Current/past rates": T3, T19, T24), forward guidance ("FG": T4-T19), inflation ("Inflation": T20-T-23). The title of each panel
indicates the horizon of the forecasts for mortgage rates. Estimated regression coefficients are reported in Appendix Table 6.

                                                                                                                                                                            43
       Figure 8. Response of unemployment rate expectations by treatment type and by the horizon of forward guidance.
                                                                  Panel A: By treatment type




                                   30
                                                           Control
                                                           Treatment (FG)
                                                           Treatment (Inflation)

                posterior E(UE rate); one-year ahead
                                                           Treatment (current/past rates)

                         10        0      20




                                                       0                10                         20           30
                                                                        prior E(UE rate); end of 2019

                                                             Panel B: By the horizon of forward guidance
                                   30




                                                           Control
                                                           Treatment (current)
                                                           Treatment (1y FG)
                posterior E(UE rate); one-year ahead




                                                           Treatment (2y FG)
                                                           Treatment (3y FG)
                                          20




                                                           Treatment (LR FG)
                         10        0




                                                       0                10                         20           30
                                                                        prior E(UE rate); end of 2019

Notes: Panel A shows binscatter plots for revisions in unemployment rate forecasts when treatments are combined into forward
guidance (T4-T19), inflation (T20-T23), and current/past interest rates (T3, T19, T24). Panel B shows binscatter plots for
revisions in unemployment rate forecasts when treatments are combined into information provision about current rates
("current": T3, T19, T24), 1-year forward guidance ("1y FG": T7, T8, T9), 2-year forward guidance ("2y FG": T10, T11, T12),
3-year forward guidance ("3y FG": T13, T14, T15), longer-run forward guidance ("LR FG": T4, T5, T6, T16, T17, T18).
Estimated regression coefficients are reported in Appendix Table 6 and Appendix Table 7.

                                                                                                                         44
ONLINE APPENDIX




                  45
                                                Appendix Table 1. Correlation coefficients for pre-treatment perceptions and expectations.

                                                                                             (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)     (6)       (7)     (8)     (9)
               Perceived inflation, previous 12 months                               (1)   1.00
               Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                    (2)   0.13     1.00
               Perceived unemployment rate, current                                  (3)   0.33    -0.02    1.00
               Expected unemployment rate, 12-month ahead                            (4)   0.35     0.01    0.80      1.00
               Perceived and expected mortgage rate for "a person like you"
                     Current                                                         (5)   0.21    -0.00    0.33      0.33      1.00
                     End of 2019                                                     (6)   0.23     0.01    0.34      0.35      0.91    1.00
                     End of 2020                                                     (7)   0.25     0.03    0.33      0.35      0.86    0.93      1.00
                     End of 2021                                                     (8)   0.26     0.04    0.34      0.36      0.82    0.89      0.94    1.00
                     Next 5-10 years                                                 (9)   0.26     0.06    0.33      0.36      0.74    0.81      0.87    0.91    1.00
Notes: the table reports the coefficient matrix for pre-treatment expectations and perceptions. Sampling weights are applied. Extreme observations are removed for all variables
(e.g., recode inflation perceptions as missing if perceived inflation is reported at 100% or -100%) and then all variables are winsorized at bottom and top 0.5%.




                                                                                                                                                                               46
                                          Appendix Table 2. Descriptive statistics by plan to buy a durable vs. no plans to buy a durable.

                                                                                                                   Plan                           No plan
                                                                                                              (# obs = 4,927)                 (# obs = 21,964)
                                                                                                             Mean        St. Dev             Mean        St. Dev
                                                                                                              (1)          (2)                (3)          (4)
                Pre-treatment data
                 Perceived inflation, previous 12 months                                                      2.89            2.35            2.87        2.42
                 Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                                           1.58            2.47            1.65        2.58
                 Perceived unemployment rate, current                                                         4.79            2.10            4.76        2.17
                 Expected unemployment rate, 12-month ahead                                                   5.35            2.76            5.31        2.79
                 Perceived and expected mortgage rate for "a person like you"
                     Current                                                                                  4.54            1.10            4.55        1.21
                     End of 2019                                                                              4.88            1.33            4.90        1.46
                     End of 2020                                                                              5.26            1.54            5.29        1.67
                     End of 2021                                                                              5.50            1.80            5.54        1.95
                     Next 5-10 years                                                                          5.88            2.20            5.97        2.38

                Post-treatment data
                 Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                                           1.93            1.51            1.89        1.55
                 Expected inflation, next 3-5 years                                                           2.46            1.76            2.41        1.80
                 Expected unemployment rate, end of 2019                                                      4.56            2.08            4.57        2.17
                 Expected unemployment rate, next 3-5 years                                                   5.30            2.64            5.28        2.72
                 Perceived and expected mortgage rate for "someone with excellent credit"
                      Current                                                                                 4.09            1.00            4.13        1.08
                      End of 2019                                                                             4.35            1.02            4.39        1.10
                      End of 2020                                                                             4.67            1.29            4.75        1.38
                      End of 2021                                                                             4.91            1.50            4.99        1.59
                      Next 5-10 years                                                                         5.29            1.82            5.38        1.92


Notes: pre-treatment expected inflation (12 months ahead) is computed as mean implied from the reported probability distribution over a range of bins. All other
measures of inflation are reported as point predictions.




                                                                                                                                                                   47
                                             Appendix Table 3. Predictability of treatment status.

             Treatment                                                                               F-statistic    p-value
             T1 (control)                                                                               0.98         0.50
             T2 (Population growth)                                                                     1.01         0.45
             T3 (FG)                                                                                    1.28         0.10
             T4 (FG)                                                                                    1.16         0.22
             T5 (FG)                                                                                    1.08         0.34
             T6 (FG)                                                                                    1.07         0.34
             T7 (FG)                                                                                    0.83         0.78
             T8 (FG)                                                                                    1.13         0.25
             T9 (FG)                                                                                    1.14         0.25
             T10 (FG)                                                                                   1.00         0.48
             T11 (FG)                                                                                   0.63         0.97
             T12 (FG)                                                                                   0.78         0.85
             T13 (FG)                                                                                   0.88         0.69
             T14 (FG)                                                                                   1.09         0.31
             T15 (FG)                                                                                   1.16         0.22
             T16 (FG)                                                                                   0.96         0.55
             T17 (FG)                                                                                   0.97         0.52
             T18 (FG)                                                                                   0.94         0.58
             T19 (FG)                                                                                   1.01         0.46
             T20 (Past inflation last year)                                                             1.24         0.14
             T21 (Past inflation last 3 years)                                                          1.19         0.18
             T22 (Past inflation last year + 3yr ahead inflation path forecast)                         0.94         0.58
             T23 (Past inflation last year + 3yr ahead inflation average forecast)                      0.64         0.96
             T24 (current mortgage rate)                                                                0.68         0.95


Notes: The table reports results for estimating the following linear-probability regression for each treatment  separately:
            ( )                                                                    ( )
  =  () +  where  indexes respondents,   is a dummy variable equal to one if household  is
provided with treatment  and zero otherwise,  is a vector of household/individual characteristics. Individual characteristics are gender,
age, age squared, employed indicator, unemployment indicator, and race. Household characteristics are household income (binned;
indicator variable for each bin), household size (indicator variable for each size), census region (indicator variable for each region), male
head education (indicator variable for each group), female head education (indicator variable for each group). The table reports F-
statistic for the joint statistical significance of .




                                                                                                                                          48
                                       Appendix Table 4. Sample attrition as a function of treatment.
                                                                                       Missing in:
                                                                 1st follow-up        2nd follow-up      1st or 2nd follow-
                                                                      wave                 wave               up wave
                                                                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)
                  T2 (Population growth)                             0.013               -0.028               -0.002
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T3 (Current FFR)                                   0.012               -0.011                0.007
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T4 (FG: LR high)                                   0.006                0.023                0.030
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.022)              (0.021)
                  T5 (FG: LR low)                                   -0.014               -0.009               -0.000
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T6 (FG: LR central)                               -0.068***            -0.032               -0.035
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.023)
                  T7 (FG: 1yr central)                              -0.001                0.015                0.018
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.022)              (0.022)
                  T8 (FG: 1yr high)                                 -0.053**             -0.028               -0.026
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.024)              (0.023)
                  T9 (FG: 1yr low)                                   0.000                0.014                0.041**
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.022)              (0.021)
                  T10 (FG: 2yr central)                              0.012                0.010                0.021
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.022)              (0.021)
                  T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)                        -0.008                0.010                0.015
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.022)              (0.022)
                  T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                          0.000               -0.017               -0.005
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T13 (FG: 3yr central)                             -0.033               -0.029               -0.012
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)                        -0.004               -0.003                0.012
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.022)              (0.021)
                  T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                         -0.047*              -0.022               -0.019
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T16 (FG: LR central-high)                         -0.003               -0.020                0.004
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T17 (FG: LR central-low)                          -0.024                0.011                0.017
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.022)              (0.022)
                  T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)                   -0.043*              -0.052**             -0.042*
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.023)
                  T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)                       0.017               -0.007                0.001
                                                                    (0.026)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T20 (Inflation last year)                         -0.030               -0.012                0.007
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T21 (Inflation last 3 years)                       0.013                0.007                0.027
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead               0.003               -0.028               -0.003
                      inflation path forecast)                      (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead              -0.021               -0.012                0.007
                      inflation average forecast)                   (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  T24 (current mortgage rate)                        0.008               -0.032               -0.010
                                                                    (0.025)              (0.023)              (0.022)
                  Constant                                           0.403***             0.717***             0.745***
                                                                    (0.016)              (0.014)              (0.014)
                  Observations                                       26,891               26,891               26,891
                  R-squared                                           0.002               0.002                 0.002
Notes: the table reports estimates of a linear probability model where the regressand is a dummy variable equal to one if a respondent is
missing in a follow-up wave and zero otherwise. All regressors are dummy variables for various treatments. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. Sampling weights are applied. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent.


                                                                                                                                      49
                               Appendix Table 5. Predictors of pre-treatment expectations and perceptions.

                                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                        Expected                           Expected
                                         Perceived                            Perceived                      Perceived    Expected
                                                        inflation                           unempl.
                                          current                              current                        current     mortgage
                                                        rate, 12-                          Rate, 12-
                                         inflation                             unempl.                       mortgage    rate, end of
                                                         month                               month
                                            rate                                 rate                           rate        2019
                                                          ahead                              ahead
                                             (1)           (2)                    (3)          (4)               (5)         (6)
male                                    -0.314***      -0.018                -0.519***    -0.650***          -0.127***   -0.171***
                                        (0.045)        (0.045)               (0.040)      (0.050)            (0.022)     (0.026)
age                                      0.081***       0.056***             -0.006        0.002              0.011***    0.021***
                                        (0.007)        (0.007)               (0.007)      (0.008)            (0.004)     (0.004)
age2                                    -0.061***      -0.035***             -0.005       -0.015**           -0.008**    -0.015***
                                        (0.006)        (0.006)               (0.006)      (0.007)            (0.003)     (0.004)
employed                                 0.174***      -0.157***              0.115***     0.138***           0.043**     0.077***
                                        (0.039)        (0.038)               (0.036)      (0.045)            (0.019)     (0.022)
unemployed                               0.450***      -0.256***              0.303***     0.471***           0.075       0.048
                                        (0.098)        (0.085)               (0.092)      (0.114)            (0.049)     (0.059)
Household income (less than $12,000 is the omitted category)
    $12,000-$14,999                      0.627***       0.038                 0.408***         0.720***       0.455***    0.509***
                                        (0.149)        (0.127)               (0.140)          (0.182)        (0.086)     (0.104)
    $15,000-$19,999                      0.637***       0.398***              0.596***         0.593***       0.109       0.204**
                                        (0.124)        (0.109)               (0.118)          (0.151)        (0.067)     (0.081)
    $20,000-$24,999                      0.531***       0.360***              0.266**          0.330**        0.069       0.104
                                        (0.109)        (0.096)               (0.107)          (0.137)        (0.059)     (0.072)
    $25,000-$29,999                      0.731***       0.371***              0.341***         0.161          0.083       0.117
                                        (0.113)        (0.101)               (0.112)          (0.143)        (0.063)     (0.075)
    $30,000-$34,999                      0.850***       0.342***              0.352***         0.271*         0.154**     0.215***
                                        (0.113)        (0.099)               (0.110)          (0.141)        (0.061)     (0.073)
    $35,000-$39,999                      0.388***       0.273***              0.480***         0.475***      -0.105*     -0.069
                                        (0.113)        (0.098)               (0.115)          (0.143)        (0.061)     (0.073)
    $40,000-$44,999                      0.638***       0.409***              0.329***         0.260*        -0.065       0.000
                                        (0.112)        (0.101)               (0.112)          (0.140)        (0.060)     (0.072)
    $45,000-$49,999                      0.671***       0.097                 0.030           -0.075         -0.032      -0.011
                                        (0.112)        (0.102)               (0.107)          (0.136)        (0.059)     (0.071)
    $50,000-$59,999                      0.735***       0.254***              0.086           -0.065         -0.064      -0.025
                                        (0.097)        (0.089)               (0.099)          (0.125)        (0.054)     (0.065)
    $60,000-$69,999                      0.508***       0.189**              -0.185*          -0.346***      -0.142***   -0.096
                                        (0.099)        (0.091)               (0.100)          (0.127)        (0.055)     (0.065)
    $70,000-$99,999                      0.376***       0.209***             -0.076           -0.241**       -0.174***   -0.172***
                                        (0.090)        (0.081)               (0.092)          (0.117)        (0.051)     (0.061)
    $100,000 or more                    -0.162*         0.095                -0.710***        -0.975***      -0.276***   -0.291***
                                        (0.090)        (0.081)               (0.092)          (0.117)        (0.051)     (0.061)
Household size
    2                                   -0.056         -0.152***              0.062            0.090          0.015       0.020
                                        (0.050)        (0.051)               (0.045)          (0.057)        (0.024)     (0.029)
    3                                   -0.166***      -0.273***             -0.021           -0.102          0.025       0.043
                                        (0.063)        (0.061)               (0.056)          (0.072)        (0.030)     (0.036)
    4                                   -0.201***      -0.320***              0.140**         -0.073          0.037       0.003
                                        (0.070)        (0.069)               (0.065)          (0.081)        (0.033)     (0.040)
    5 or more                           -0.134*        -0.608***              0.018            0.001         -0.018      -0.017
                                        (0.078)        (0.073)               (0.073)          (0.091)        (0.036)     (0.043)
Race (white is the omitted category)

                                                                                                                                50
   Black                                -0.144**       -0.391***         0.285***        0.670***     -0.061**     0.006
                                        (0.059)        (0.054)          (0.054)         (0.068)       (0.028)     (0.034)
   Asian                                 0.324***      -0.077           -0.025           0.039        -0.088***   -0.188***
                                        (0.071)        (0.071)          (0.064)         (0.083)       (0.033)     (0.039)
   Other                                 0.038         -0.343***        -0.009           0.090        -0.067**    -0.046
                                        (0.074)        (0.065)          (0.064)         (0.086)       (0.033)     (0.040)
Census region [New England is omitted category]
   Mid-Atlantic                         -0.222***      -0.007            0.079          -0.007        -0.005       0.037
                                        (0.085)        (0.082)          (0.075)         (0.097)       (0.040)     (0.048)
   East North Central                    0.011         -0.014            0.233***        0.175*       -0.026       0.081*
                                        (0.083)        (0.080)          (0.074)         (0.096)       (0.039)     (0.046)
   West North Central                    0.129          0.065           -0.057          -0.190*        0.027       0.168***
                                        (0.093)        (0.091)          (0.082)         (0.104)       (0.044)     (0.052)
   South Atlantic                       -0.155*        -0.123           -0.045          -0.249***     -0.011       0.064
                                        (0.082)        (0.079)          (0.071)         (0.092)       (0.038)     (0.045)
   East South Central                   -0.366***      -0.327***        -0.105          -0.361***     -0.036       0.048
                                        (0.097)        (0.094)          (0.088)         (0.112)       (0.046)     (0.055)
   West South Central                   -0.203**       -0.288***        -0.093          -0.314***      0.004       0.084*
                                        (0.091)        (0.085)          (0.078)         (0.101)       (0.042)     (0.050)
   Mountain                             -0.200**       -0.030           -0.102          -0.356***     -0.061      -0.006
                                        (0.094)        (0.090)          (0.081)         (0.105)       (0.043)     (0.051)
   Pacific                              -0.189**        0.086            0.076           0.049        -0.114***   -0.046
                                        (0.085)        (0.082)          (0.075)         (0.098)       (0.039)     (0.047)
Education of male head (more than college is the omitted category)
   No male head (or missing)            -0.428***      -0.196***        -0.263***       -0.260***     -0.098***   -0.102***
                                        (0.066)        (0.068)          (0.061)         (0.077)       (0.032)     (0.039)
   Less than high school                -0.206*        -0.335***         0.045          -0.105        -0.140***   -0.157**
                                        (0.112)        (0.099)          (0.109)         (0.136)       (0.054)     (0.063)
   High school                          -0.237***      -0.268***        -0.070          -0.177**      -0.114***   -0.104***
                                        (0.059)        (0.063)          (0.055)         (0.069)       (0.030)     (0.036)
   Some college                         -0.096*        -0.102*          -0.085*         -0.150**      -0.131***   -0.135***
                                        (0.054)        (0.059)          (0.049)         (0.062)       (0.027)     (0.033)
   College                               0.015         -0.196***         0.000          -0.022        -0.102***   -0.148***
                                        (0.050)        (0.058)          (0.047)         (0.060)       (0.026)     (0.031)
Education of male head (more than college is the omitted category)
   No female head (or missing)          -0.688***      -0.361***        -0.578***       -0.756***     -0.134***   -0.213***
                                        (0.071)        (0.075)          (0.065)         (0.081)       (0.035)     (0.042)
   Less than high school                -1.266***      -0.781***        -0.551***       -0.798***     -0.222***   -0.402***
                                        (0.130)        (0.115)          (0.145)         (0.181)       (0.071)     (0.083)
   High school                          -0.685***      -0.396***        -0.273***       -0.522***     -0.077***   -0.140***
                                        (0.060)        (0.060)          (0.056)         (0.070)       (0.028)     (0.034)
   Some college                         -0.077         -0.061           -0.130**        -0.198***     -0.045*     -0.105***
                                        (0.055)        (0.057)          (0.053)         (0.065)       (0.026)     (0.031)
   College                               0.160***       0.013            0.120**         0.054         0.000      -0.026
                                        (0.052)        (0.055)          (0.052)         (0.064)       (0.025)     (0.030)
Constant                                -0.243         -0.238            4.970***        5.593***      4.294***    4.232***
                                        (0.201)        (0.192)          (0.209)         (0.264)       (0.108)     (0.130)
Observations                           23,706          25,249          21,901          22,487         23,308      23,737
R-squared                                0.049          0.043            0.073           0.074         0.023       0.027
 Notes: Huber robust regression. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                        51
                                                         Appendix Table 6. Response of expectations by aggregated by treatment horizons.
                                                                             Nominal mortgage rate                                                      Real mortgage rate
                                       Unempl.
                         Inflation                                   One-year     Two-year Three-year         Longer                            One-year    Two-year Three-year             Longer
                                         rate            Current                                                               Current
                                                                      [2019]        [2020]        [2021]        run                              [2019]      [2020]        [2021]             run
                            (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)              (8)               (9)        (10)          (11)             (12)

Intercept
  Control                1.859***      0.327***         -0.197***      0.486***      0.798***      -0.065        -0.127**          1.117***      1.369***      1.615***      1.680***      1.931***
                         (0.053)       (0.046)           (0.025)       (0.042)       (0.062)       (0.054)       (0.054)           (0.064)       (0.066)       (0.068)       (0.072)       (0.080)
   Current Rate          -0.030       -0.458***          2.980***      2.729***      1.569***      1.188***      1.282***          0.502***      0.482***      0.518***      0.614***      0.610***
                         (0.064)       (0.051)           (0.044)       (0.059)       (0.078)       (0.073)       (0.073)           (0.078)       (0.080)       (0.084)       (0.088)       (0.098)
   1-year FG             -0.161**     -0.473***          0.743***      0.808***      0.659***      1.417***      1.518***          0.476***      0.446***      0.473***      0.604***      0.484***
                         (0.063)       (0.050)           (0.038)       (0.056)       (0.074)       (0.069)       (0.076)           (0.078)       (0.080)       (0.083)       (0.088)       (0.097)
   2-year FG             -0.087       -0.474***          0.733***       0.126**      -0.121*       0.759***      1.144***          0.498***      0.468***      0.534***      0.569***      0.488***
                         (0.062)       (0.050)           (0.041)       (0.056)       (0.072)       (0.069)       (0.072)           (0.077)       (0.080)       (0.083)       (0.088)       (0.097)
   3-year FG             -0.044       -0.516***          0.762***      0.720***      0.551***      1.537***      1.508***          0.572***      0.479***      0.510***      0.555***      0.448***
                         (0.063)       (0.050)           (0.039)       (0.059)       (0.075)       (0.072)       (0.073)           (0.078)       (0.080)       (0.084)       (0.088)       (0.097)
   Longer-run FG         -0.064       -0.523***          0.656***      0.794***      0.430***      0.958***      1.416***          0.450***      0.441***      0.368***      0.419***      0.305***
                         (0.058)       (0.048)           (0.033)       (0.050)       (0.069)       (0.063)       (0.065)           (0.071)       (0.074)       (0.076)       (0.081)       (0.089)
Slope
  Control                0.202***      0.899***          0.993***      0.825***      0.767***      0.946***       0.961***         0.207***      0.198***      0.210***      0.250***       0.259***
                         (0.015)       (0.007)           (0.004)       (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.009)        (0.008)          (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.012)
   Current Rate         -0.126***      0.097***         -0.689***     -0.579***     -0.325***     -0.253***      -0.252***        -0.130***     -0.104***     -0.129***     -0.154***      -0.128***
                         (0.017)       (0.007)           (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.014)       (0.012)        (0.011)          (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.014)
   1-year FG            -0.095***      0.098***         -0.183***     -0.187***     -0.149***     -0.291***      -0.286***        -0.070***     -0.073***     -0.077***     -0.110***      -0.068***
                         (0.017)       (0.007)           (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.011)        (0.011)          (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.014)        (0.014)
   2-year FG            -0.157***      0.100***         -0.188***     -0.043***       0.013       -0.165***      -0.230***        -0.104***     -0.101***     -0.115***     -0.122***      -0.086***
                         (0.017)       (0.007)           (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.011)        (0.011)          (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.014)        (0.014)
   3-year FG            -0.129***      0.099***         -0.197***     -0.176***     -0.133***     -0.323***      -0.300***        -0.125***     -0.101***     -0.105***     -0.131***      -0.091***
                         (0.017)       (0.007)           (0.007)       (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.012)        (0.011)          (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.014)        (0.014)
   Longer-run FG        -0.116***      0.098***         -0.170***     -0.189***     -0.109***     -0.208***      -0.287***        -0.101***     -0.097***     -0.077***     -0.099***      -0.074***
                         (0.016)       (0.007)           (0.006)       (0.009)       (0.012)       (0.010)        (0.010)          (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.013)
Observations             19,437        17,582            18,584        19,029        19,134        19,045         19,095           19,391        19,356        19,364        19,398         19,417
R-squared                 0.056         0.989             0.907         0.838         0.822         0.856          0.855            0.096         0.094         0.114         0.143          0.199

Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for various expectations when treatments are aggregated by horizon of forward guidance (FG). Coefficients for groups other than
the control group are relative to the coefficient for the control group. All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are
included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
Aggregation treatments:
       Current rate: T3, T19, T24
       1-year forward guidance: T7, T8, T9
       2-year forward guidance: T10, T11, T12
       3-year forward guidance: T13, T14, T15
       Longer-run forward guidance: T4, T5, T6, T16, T17, T18




                                                                                                                                                                                                     52
                                                                      Appendix Table 7. Response of expectations by treatment types.

                                                                                  Nominal mortgage rate                                                     Real mortgage rate
                                         Unempl.
                           Inflation                                       One-year    Two-year Three-year           Longer                         One-year    Two-year Three-year            Longer
                                           rate             Current                                                                    Current
                                                                            [2019]      [2020]        [2021]          run                            [2019]      [2020]        [2021]            run
                              (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)                (8)           (9)        (10)          (11)            (12)

 Intercept
   Control                  1.815***      0.332***         -0.192***       0.486***      0.795***     -0.068        -0.128**           1.132***     1.383***       1.626***      1.695***      1.936***
                            (0.050)       (0.046)           (0.024)        (0.042)       (0.062)      (0.053)       (0.054)            (0.063)      (0.065)        (0.067)       (0.071)       (0.079)
   Forward guidance         -0.061       -0.509***          0.679***       0.658***      0.439***     1.281***      1.395***           0.477***     0.443***       0.445***      0.500***      0.399***
                            (0.052)       (0.047)           (0.027)        (0.046)       (0.065)      (0.057)       (0.059)            (0.066)      (0.068)        (0.070)       (0.074)       (0.083)
   Inflation               -0.144***     -0.550***           0.036         0.250***      0.305***     1.233***      1.313***           0.830***     0.800***       0.804***      0.895***      0.832***
                            (0.055)       (0.049)           (0.030)        (0.053)       (0.073)      (0.067)       (0.069)            (0.070)      (0.073)        (0.076)       (0.081)       (0.091)
   Current/past rates       -0.018       -0.464***          3.006***       2.714***      1.585***     1.181***      1.281***           0.490***     0.472***       0.512***      0.598***      0.609***
                            (0.061)       (0.051)           (0.043)        (0.059)       (0.078)      (0.072)       (0.073)            (0.076)      (0.079)        (0.082)       (0.086)       (0.097)
 Slope
   Control                  0.216***      0.897***          0.994***       0.825***      0.767***     0.947***       0.961***           0.205***     0.195***      0.209***      0.248***      0.260***
                            (0.014)       (0.007)           (0.003)        (0.008)       (0.011)      (0.009)        (0.008)            (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.012)
   Forward guidance        -0.135***      0.100***         -0.174***      -0.160***     -0.108***    -0.270***      -0.277***          -0.098***    -0.091***     -0.090***     -0.111***     -0.079***
                            (0.014)       (0.007)           (0.004)        (0.008)       (0.011)      (0.009)        (0.009)            (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.012)
   Inflation               -0.172***      0.102***          -0.007        -0.050***     -0.062***    -0.239***      -0.247***          -0.097***    -0.077***     -0.074***     -0.106***     -0.078***
                            (0.015)       (0.007)           (0.005)        (0.010)       (0.013)      (0.011)        (0.010)            (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.013)
   Current/past rates      -0.137***      0.099***         -0.695***      -0.576***     -0.328***    -0.252***      -0.252***          -0.128***    -0.102***     -0.128***     -0.151***     -0.129***
                            (0.016)       (0.007)           (0.008)        (0.010)       (0.013)      (0.012)        (0.011)            (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.014)
 Observations               23,388        21,244            22,202         22,930        23,071       23,033         23,053             23,304       23,269        23,282        23,313        23,369
 R-squared                   0.057         0.989             0.935          0.841         0.823        0.846          0.855              0.101        0.103         0.124         0.150         0.206


Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for various expectations when treatments are aggregated by type of treatment. Coefficients for groups other than the control group
are relative to the coefficient for the control group. Treatments are combined into information provision about current rates ("Current/past rates": T3, T19, T24), forward guidance ("FG": T4-T19),
inflation ("Inflation": T20-T-23). All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                                                                                        53
                                   Appendix Table 8. Response of expectations by treatment types and plans to buy a durable good in the next 12 months.

                                                                                                                                         Mortgage rate expectations,
                                                        Inflation expectations                 Unemployment expectations
                                                                                                                                               end of 2020
                                                        Plan             No plan                  Plan             No plan                Plan             No plan
                                                         (1)               (2)                     (3)               (4)                   (5)               (6)
                 Intercept
                    Control                            2.407***           1.717***               0.280***          -0.077**                1.385***         0.685***
                                                      (0.133)            (0.054)                (0.089)            (0.035)                (0.101)          (0.067)
                    Forward guidance                  -0.636***           0.033                 -0.372***          -0.017                 -0.161            0.525***
                                                      (0.137)            (0.056)                (0.092)            (0.036)                (0.109)          (0.071)
                    Inflation                         -0.666***          -0.064                 -0.371***          -0.068*                 0.039            0.016
                                                      (0.143)            (0.060)                (0.098)            (0.040)                (0.123)          (0.077)
                    Current/past rates                -0.542***           0.063                 -0.380***           0.019                  1.201***         1.636***
                                                      (0.155)            (0.066)                (0.100)            (0.043)                (0.140)          (0.085)
                 Slope
                    Control                            -0.018              0.255***             0.908***         0.988***             0.635***         0.792***
                                                       (0.035)            (0.015)              (0.015)          (0.005)              (0.016)          (0.012)
                      Forward guidance                  0.110***          -0.176***             0.083***         0.003                0.021           -0.126***
                                                       (0.036)            (0.015)              (0.015)          (0.005)              (0.017)          (0.013)
                      Inflation                         0.067*            -0.212***             0.085***         0.007               -0.000           -0.004
                                                       (0.037)            (0.016)              (0.015)          (0.005)              (0.019)          (0.014)
                      Current/past rates                0.056             -0.168***             0.091***        -0.001               -0.219***        -0.345***
                                                       (0.041)            (0.018)              (0.015)          (0.006)              (0.023)          (0.015)
                   Observations                         4,219              19,167               3,524            15,885               4,167            18,880
                   R-squared                            0.052              0.062                0.980            0.980                0.850            0.829
Notes: the table reports estimated coefficients of specification (1) for responses of expectations immediately after treatments by whether a household plans to buy a durable good
(house, car, electronics) in the next 12 months or not. Treatments are aggregated by type as in Appendix Table 7. All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions
use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent
levels.




                                                                                                                                                                               54
                    Appendix Table 9. Posterior beliefs (inflation and unemployment rate) in the 1st follow-up wave by treatment.
                                                                       Inflation expectations           Unempl. rate expectations
                    Treatment                                       Intercept (b) Slope ()             Intercept (b) Slope ()
                                                                         (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)
                    Control                                            0.842***        0.468***           1.363***        0.649***
                                                                      (0.073)         (0.018)            (0.092)         (0.015)
                    Relative to control
                    T2 (Population growth)                             0.337***       -0.186***          -0.164           0.055**
                                                                      (0.121)         (0.034)            (0.147)         (0.025)
                    T3 (Current FFR)                                   0.191          -0.249***           0.603***       -0.137***
                                                                      (0.117)         (0.029)            (0.165)         (0.028)
                    T4 (FG: LR high)                                   0.046          -0.046              0.243          -0.093***
                                                                      (0.117)         (0.032)            (0.160)         (0.028)
                    T5 (FG: LR low)                                    0.371***       -0.207***           0.931***       -0.238***
                                                                      (0.111)         (0.030)            (0.151)         (0.024)
                    T6 (FG: LR central)                                0.102          -0.148***           0.785***       -0.172***
                                                                      (0.115)         (0.031)            (0.140)         (0.024)
                    T7 (FG: 1yr central)                               0.057          -0.169***           0.630***       -0.159***
                                                                      (0.114)         (0.032)            (0.163)         (0.029)
                    T8 (FG: 1yr high)                                  0.232**        -0.338***           1.452***       -0.331***
                                                                      (0.118)         (0.032)            (0.155)         (0.025)
                    T9 (FG: 1yr low)                                   0.414***       -0.288***           0.901***       -0.207***
                                                                      (0.118)         (0.030)            (0.146)         (0.024)
                    T10 (FG: 2yr central)                             -0.030          -0.165***           0.759***       -0.192***
                                                                      (0.113)         (0.033)            (0.150)         (0.025)
                    T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)                        -0.189          -0.050              0.287**        -0.047**
                                                                      (0.118)         (0.034)            (0.145)         (0.023)
                    T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                          0.199*         -0.271***           0.293**        -0.081***
                                                                      (0.116)         (0.030)            (0.148)         (0.025)
                    T13 (FG: 3yr central)                              0.359***       -0.223***           1.242***       -0.315***
                                                                      (0.108)         (0.029)            (0.155)         (0.026)
                    T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)                         0.168          -0.149***           0.683***       -0.173***
                                                                      (0.118)         (0.031)            (0.141)         (0.023)
                    T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                         -0.075          -0.175***          -0.232           0.055**
                                                                      (0.116)         (0.030)            (0.147)         (0.026)
                    T16 (FG: LR central-high)                          0.175          -0.217***           1.133***       -0.267***
                                                                      (0.113)         (0.031)            (0.143)         (0.022)
                    T17 (FG: LR central-low)                           0.130          -0.229***           0.543***       -0.104***
                                                                      (0.115)         (0.030)            (0.141)         (0.022)
                    T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)                    0.028          -0.170***           0.911***       -0.210***
                                                                      (0.112)         (0.032)            (0.156)         (0.026)
                    T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)                       0.091          -0.179***           0.053          -0.023
                                                                      (0.116)         (0.031)            (0.141)         (0.021)
                    T20 (Inflation last year)                          0.306***       -0.343***           0.114          -0.036
                                                                      (0.108)         (0.027)            (0.139)         (0.023)
                    T21 (Inflation last 3 years)                       0.276**        -0.223***           1.198***       -0.296***
                                                                      (0.116)         (0.028)            (0.156)         (0.025)
                    T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead               0.337***       -0.224***           1.286***       -0.276***
                          inflation path forecast)                    (0.117)         (0.032)            (0.166)         (0.026)
                    T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead               0.182*         -0.282***           1.703***       -0.411***
                          inflation average forecast)                 (0.107)         (0.028)            (0.133)         (0.020)
                    T24 (current mortgage rate)                        0.251**        -0.212***           0.563***       -0.148***
                                                                      (0.118)         (0.034)            (0.151)         (0.025)
                    Observations                                               15,397                             13,212
                    R-squared                                                   0.232                              0.665
Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for one-year-ahead inflation expectations (columns 1 and 2)
and for one-year-ahead unemployment rate expectations (columns 3 and 4). Posterior unemployment rate expectations (point
predictions) are for one-year ahead. Prior unemployment rate expectations (point predictions) are for "the end of 2019". Posterior
inflation expectations are point predictions. Prior inflation expectations are measured as implied means from the reported
probability distributions. All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No
household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at
1, 5 and 10 percent levels.

                                                                                                                                     55
                                                     Appendix Table 10. Posterior beliefs (nominal mortgage rates) in the 1st follow-up wave by treatment.
                                                  Current                        one-year [2019]                   two-year [2020]                   Three-year [2021]                 Longer run
Treatment                              Intercept (b)      Slope ()        Intercept (b)      Slope ()       Intercept (b)       Slope ()        Intercept (b)    Slope ()     Intercept (b)    Slope ()
                                             (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)             (8)           (9)            (10)
Control                                   3.114***         0.317***           2.008***         0.548***         2.899***          0.409***         2.093***        0.587***      1.600***        0.691***
                                         (0.079)          (0.014)            (0.105)          (0.019)          (0.091)           (0.012)          (0.112)         (0.016)       (0.137)         (0.018)
Relative to control
T2 (Population growth)                   0.581***         -0.162***           1.451***      -0.299***           0.365**       -0.058**            0.587***      -0.096***        0.630***      -0.077***
                                        (0.108)           (0.019)            (0.143)        (0.025)            (0.153)        (0.023)            (0.192)        (0.028)         (0.216)        (0.029)
T3 (Current FFR)                        -0.765***          0.148***           1.680***      -0.344***           0.865***      -0.162***           1.915***      -0.351***        2.139***      -0.360***
                                        (0.117)           (0.021)            (0.161)        (0.028)            (0.167)        (0.025)            (0.172)        (0.024)         (0.228)        (0.031)
T4 (FG: LR high)                        -0.141            -0.007              1.142***      -0.272***           0.384***      -0.096***           0.995***      -0.207***        1.973***      -0.373***
                                        (0.117)           (0.021)            (0.147)        (0.025)            (0.143)        (0.020)            (0.170)        (0.023)         (0.197)        (0.027)
T5 (FG: LR low)                         -0.452***          0.069***           0.821***      -0.178***          -0.670***       0.126***           0.581***      -0.103***        2.514***      -0.428***
                                        (0.116)           (0.021)            (0.149)        (0.025)            (0.162)        (0.024)            (0.189)        (0.027)         (0.207)        (0.027)
T6 (FG: LR central)                     -0.313**           0.039*             1.196***      -0.267***           0.870***      -0.185***           2.191***      -0.426***        2.173***      -0.358***
                                        (0.124)           (0.024)            (0.148)        (0.026)            (0.152)        (0.023)            (0.163)        (0.024)         (0.199)        (0.027)
T7 (FG: 1yr central)                    -0.044            -0.029              1.381***      -0.296***           0.126         -0.038*             0.580***      -0.110***        0.773***      -0.140***
                                        (0.119)           (0.022)            (0.147)        (0.025)            (0.145)        (0.020)            (0.180)        (0.026)         (0.204)        (0.028)
T8 (FG: 1yr high)                       -0.638***          0.086***           1.167***      -0.266***           0.583***      -0.135***           1.160***      -0.237***        0.272         -0.048*
                                        (0.112)           (0.020)            (0.146)        (0.026)            (0.147)        (0.022)            (0.188)        (0.028)         (0.204)        (0.028)
T9 (FG: 1yr low)                        -0.573***          0.095***           1.196***      -0.255***          -0.581***       0.104***           0.467***      -0.097***        0.900***      -0.178***
                                        (0.116)           (0.021)            (0.141)        (0.024)            (0.154)        (0.023)            (0.175)        (0.026)         (0.199)        (0.027)
T10 (FG: 2yr central)                    0.122            -0.078***           1.351***      -0.312***           0.235         -0.085***           0.148         -0.069**         0.557***      -0.109***
                                        (0.111)           (0.020)            (0.144)        (0.025)            (0.161)        (0.024)            (0.190)        (0.029)         (0.207)        (0.028)
T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)              -0.945***          0.174***           0.303*        -0.080**           -0.492***       0.088***           1.456***      -0.279***        0.908***      -0.176***
                                        (0.126)           (0.023)            (0.174)        (0.031)            (0.150)        (0.021)            (0.186)        (0.026)         (0.219)        (0.030)
T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)               -0.612***          0.080***           0.442***      -0.132***          -0.803***       0.112***           0.144         -0.079***        0.692***      -0.153***
                                        (0.124)           (0.024)            (0.145)        (0.026)            (0.155)        (0.024)            (0.185)        (0.029)         (0.211)        (0.030)
T13 (FG: 3yr central)                   -0.027            -0.026              1.661***      -0.371***           0.271         -0.071***           1.386***      -0.269***        0.653***      -0.093***
                                        (0.133)           (0.025)            (0.139)        (0.024)            (0.166)        (0.026)            (0.177)        (0.026)         (0.205)        (0.028)
T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)              -0.266**           0.013              1.062***      -0.253***           0.128         -0.046**            0.406**       -0.104***        1.716***      -0.314***
                                        (0.127)           (0.025)            (0.135)        (0.023)            (0.149)        (0.022)            (0.181)        (0.027)         (0.196)        (0.026)
T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)               -1.425***          0.289***           0.730***      -0.154***          -0.357**        0.050**            0.260         -0.080***        2.196***      -0.416***
                                        (0.106)           (0.018)            (0.153)        (0.027)            (0.153)        (0.022)            (0.180)        (0.027)         (0.212)        (0.029)
T16 (FG: LR central-high)               -1.029***          0.188***           0.868***      -0.199***          -0.858***       0.132***           0.507***      -0.127***        1.014***      -0.191***
                                        (0.128)           (0.025)            (0.142)        (0.025)            (0.143)        (0.021)            (0.167)        (0.024)         (0.202)        (0.029)
T17 (FG: LR central-low)                 0.858***         -0.230***           1.732***      -0.365***           1.428***      -0.298***           0.988***      -0.226***        1.943***      -0.376***
                                        (0.115)           (0.021)            (0.145)        (0.025)            (0.151)        (0.022)            (0.191)        (0.028)         (0.204)        (0.027)
T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)         -1.430***          0.277***           0.892***      -0.193***          -0.039          0.007              1.048***      -0.199***        1.024***      -0.191***
                                        (0.106)           (0.019)            (0.159)        (0.029)            (0.147)        (0.021)            (0.179)        (0.026)         (0.228)        (0.032)
T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)             0.263**          -0.070***           1.383***      -0.291***           0.233         -0.033              1.536***      -0.274***        2.564***      -0.408***
                                        (0.114)           (0.020)            (0.143)        (0.025)            (0.145)        (0.021)            (0.168)        (0.024)         (0.203)        (0.027)
T20 (Inflation last year)               -0.530***          0.089***           0.843***      -0.180***           0.892***      -0.175***           0.845***      -0.148***        2.209***      -0.389***
                                        (0.125)           (0.023)            (0.142)        (0.024)            (0.146)        (0.021)            (0.166)        (0.023)         (0.201)        (0.027)
T21 (Inflation last 3 years)            -0.829***          0.150***          -0.018          0.008              0.017         -0.013              0.859***      -0.181***        0.851***      -0.153***
                                        (0.135)           (0.026)            (0.189)        (0.036)            (0.142)        (0.021)            (0.170)        (0.024)         (0.202)        (0.027)
T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead    -1.121***          0.215***           0.451***      -0.124***          -0.065         -0.017              0.045         -0.031           0.925***      -0.172***
      inflation path forecast)          (0.114)           (0.020)            (0.149)        (0.026)            (0.183)        (0.029)            (0.187)        (0.028)         (0.219)        (0.030)
T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     1.025***         -0.267***           1.820***      -0.412***           0.650***      -0.168***           1.700***      -0.363***        2.037***      -0.385***
      inflation average forecast)       (0.103)           (0.017)            (0.139)        (0.023)            (0.150)        (0.022)            (0.163)        (0.023)         (0.218)        (0.030)
T24 (current mortgage rate)              0.958***         -0.251***           2.150***      -0.460***           0.046         -0.034              1.982***      -0.399***        0.845***      -0.197***
                                        (0.114)           (0.019)            (0.137)        (0.023)            (0.149)        (0.022)            (0.166)        (0.023)         (0.203)        (0.027)
Observations                                     14,758                              14,875                            14,998                            15,074                         15,097
R-squared                                         0.608                               0.472                             0.535                             0.528                          0.572
  Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for nominal mortgage rates for various horizons. All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use
  sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   56
                                                      Appendix Table 11. Posterior beliefs (real mortgage rates) in the 1st follow-up wave by treatment.
                                                  Current                        one-year [2019]                     two-year [2020]                  Three-year [2021]                Longer run
Treatment                              Intercept (b)      Slope ()         Intercept (b)      Slope ()        Intercept (b)      Slope ()        Intercept (b)    Slope ()     Intercept (b)   Slope ()
                                             (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)             (8)           (9)          (10)
Control                                   1.912***         0.301***           1.801***          0.365***          2.184***         0.348***         2.357***        0.353***      2.825***       0.348***
                                         (0.115)          (0.017)            (0.114)           (0.017)          (0.121)           (0.018)          (0.130)         (0.019)       (0.147)        (0.019)
Relative to control
T2 (Population growth)                   0.057            -0.033              0.378**       -0.146***            0.301         -0.116***           0.371*        -0.105***        0.127         -0.080**
                                        (0.186)           (0.031)            (0.185)        (0.027)             (0.191)        (0.026)            (0.208)        (0.029)         (0.232)        (0.032)
T3 (Current FFR)                        -0.162             0.073***           0.119         -0.020               0.066         -0.026              0.150         -0.051*         -0.026         -0.006
                                        (0.174)           (0.025)            (0.180)        (0.027)             (0.191)        (0.028)            (0.201)        (0.028)         (0.225)        (0.032)
T4 (FG: LR high)                        -0.103             0.037              0.369**       -0.103***            0.331         -0.113***           0.189         -0.084**         0.529**       -0.209***
                                        (0.179)           (0.030)            (0.185)        (0.030)             (0.203)        (0.034)            (0.211)        (0.034)         (0.232)        (0.032)
T5 (FG: LR low)                          0.277            -0.077***           0.330*        -0.091***            0.216         -0.058**            0.073         -0.037           0.189         -0.081***
                                        (0.175)           (0.029)            (0.177)        (0.026)             (0.191)        (0.027)            (0.209)        (0.030)         (0.229)        (0.030)
T6 (FG: LR central)                      0.265            -0.055*             0.429**       -0.105***            0.283         -0.062**            0.200         -0.065**         0.223         -0.068**
                                        (0.174)           (0.029)            (0.175)        (0.027)             (0.186)        (0.027)            (0.198)        (0.028)         (0.221)        (0.029)
T7 (FG: 1yr central)                     0.240            -0.031              0.327*        -0.059**             0.438**       -0.091***           0.277         -0.041           0.609**       -0.181***
                                        (0.185)           (0.033)            (0.182)        (0.028)             (0.206)        (0.033)            (0.214)        (0.032)         (0.239)        (0.034)
T8 (FG: 1yr high)                        0.796***         -0.169***           1.077***      -0.250***            0.978***      -0.205***           1.088***      -0.225***        0.677***      -0.154***
                                        (0.175)           (0.029)            (0.176)        (0.028)             (0.188)        (0.029)            (0.199)        (0.028)         (0.226)        (0.029)
T9 (FG: 1yr low)                         0.089            -0.027              0.635***      -0.152***            0.411**       -0.114***           0.231         -0.100***        0.240         -0.128***
                                        (0.182)           (0.029)            (0.184)        (0.028)             (0.192)        (0.028)            (0.197)        (0.028)         (0.223)        (0.030)
T10 (FG: 2yr central)                    0.412**          -0.063**            0.661***      -0.125***            0.385**       -0.065**            0.247         -0.045           0.301         -0.080**
                                        (0.178)           (0.029)            (0.180)        (0.027)             (0.196)        (0.030)            (0.210)        (0.032)         (0.234)        (0.034)
T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)               0.070             0.079**            0.428**       -0.026               0.199          0.041              0.482**       -0.040          -0.275          0.083**
                                        (0.183)           (0.032)            (0.181)        (0.029)             (0.193)        (0.031)            (0.201)        (0.030)         (0.237)        (0.034)
T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                0.093            -0.063**            0.286         -0.104***            0.512***      -0.181***           0.486**       -0.169***        0.381*        -0.152***
                                        (0.169)           (0.030)            (0.174)        (0.031)             (0.178)        (0.030)            (0.193)        (0.032)         (0.218)        (0.032)
T13 (FG: 3yr central)                    0.319*           -0.076***           0.549***      -0.171***            0.498***      -0.144***           0.318         -0.086***        0.020         -0.012
                                        (0.176)           (0.029)            (0.173)        (0.026)             (0.189)        (0.028)            (0.198)        (0.029)         (0.221)        (0.031)
T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)              -0.279             0.027              0.090         -0.047*             -0.102          0.008             -0.086          0.023          -0.051         -0.059*
                                        (0.172)           (0.028)            (0.175)        (0.025)             (0.189)        (0.028)            (0.200)        (0.031)         (0.229)        (0.032)
T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                0.311*           -0.017              0.551***      -0.080***            0.398**       -0.057**            0.535***      -0.105***        0.150         -0.055*
                                        (0.176)           (0.027)            (0.179)        (0.028)             (0.191)        (0.028)            (0.198)        (0.027)         (0.219)        (0.028)
T16 (FG: LR central-high)                0.179            -0.049              0.439**       -0.120***            0.391**       -0.146***           0.117         -0.092***       -0.297         -0.005
                                        (0.181)           (0.031)            (0.187)        (0.032)             (0.198)        (0.031)            (0.213)        (0.033)         (0.232)        (0.034)
T17 (FG: LR central-low)                 0.143             0.084***           0.404**        0.030               0.687***      -0.147***           0.656***      -0.161***        0.404*        -0.130***
                                        (0.178)           (0.030)            (0.180)        (0.029)             (0.190)        (0.030)            (0.201)        (0.030)         (0.223)        (0.029)
T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)          0.466***         -0.055*             1.019***      -0.224***            0.872***      -0.170***           0.929***      -0.167***        0.912***      -0.222***
                                        (0.167)           (0.030)            (0.174)        (0.030)             (0.185)        (0.030)            (0.198)        (0.030)         (0.226)        (0.031)
T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)             0.332*           -0.014              0.597***      -0.118***            0.370*        -0.044              0.544***      -0.092***        0.726***      -0.131***
                                        (0.180)           (0.027)            (0.182)        (0.026)             (0.193)        (0.027)            (0.204)        (0.029)         (0.230)        (0.030)
T20 (Inflation last year)                0.557***         -0.103***           0.945***      -0.216***            0.866***      -0.173***           1.018***      -0.184***        0.584***      -0.093***
                                        (0.169)           (0.029)            (0.174)        (0.029)             (0.186)        (0.028)            (0.199)        (0.031)         (0.225)        (0.030)
T21 (Inflation last 3 years)             0.259             0.004              0.442**       -0.045               0.449**       -0.064**            0.480**       -0.065**         0.355         -0.055*
                                        (0.178)           (0.029)            (0.184)        (0.030)             (0.192)        (0.030)            (0.206)        (0.029)         (0.224)        (0.030)
T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     0.034             0.036             -0.002         -0.010               0.062         -0.044              0.367*        -0.084**         0.114         -0.024
      inflation path forecast)          (0.171)           (0.033)            (0.171)        (0.029)             (0.188)        (0.031)            (0.208)        (0.034)         (0.235)        (0.036)
T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     0.576***         -0.084***           0.811***      -0.145***            0.912***      -0.221***           0.829***      -0.210***        0.514**       -0.145***
      inflation average forecast)       (0.173)           (0.028)            (0.178)        (0.029)             (0.186)        (0.026)            (0.198)        (0.027)         (0.226)        (0.031)
T24 (current mortgage rate)             -0.146             0.088***           0.177         -0.038               0.123         -0.035             -0.079          0.006          -0.493**        0.076**
                                        (0.186)           (0.027)            (0.193)        (0.027)             (0.204)        (0.029)            (0.212)        (0.030)         (0.239)        (0.033)
Observations                                     15,226                              15,146                             15,125                            15,130                         15,105
R-squared                                         0.272                               0.268                              0.250                             0.250                          0.243
   Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for real mortgage rates (nominal mortgage rate minus one-year-ahead inflation forecast) for various horizons.
   All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
   ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   57
                 Appendix Table 12. Posterior beliefs (inflation and unemployment rate) in the 2nd follow-up wave by treatment.
                                                                     Inflation expectations          Unempl. rate expectations
                  Treatment                                       Intercept (b) Slope ()            Intercept (b) Slope ()
                                                                       (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
                  Control                                            1.250***        0.205***          2.304***        0.428***
                                                                    (0.115)         (0.031)           (0.110)         (0.013)
                  Relative to control
                  T2 (Population growth)                            -0.120           0.084*           -0.811***        0.207***
                                                                    (0.179)         (0.046)           (0.196)         (0.033)
                  T3 (Current FFR)                                  -0.348**         0.169***          0.861***       -0.160***
                                                                    (0.171)         (0.050)           (0.193)         (0.027)
                  T4 (FG: LR high)                                  -0.030           0.014             0.533**        -0.108***
                                                                    (0.176)         (0.047)           (0.214)         (0.035)
                  T5 (FG: LR low)                                    0.040           0.039             0.064          -0.017
                                                                    (0.170)         (0.048)           (0.176)         (0.024)
                  T6 (FG: LR central)                               -0.168           0.060             0.360**        -0.084***
                                                                    (0.158)         (0.048)           (0.169)         (0.023)
                  T7 (FG: 1yr central)                               0.223           0.037             1.328***       -0.286***
                                                                    (0.170)         (0.044)           (0.198)         (0.030)
                  T8 (FG: 1yr high)                                 -0.465***        0.113*           -1.251***        0.301***
                                                                    (0.179)         (0.058)           (0.188)         (0.026)
                  T9 (FG: 1yr low)                                   0.089          -0.116**           0.923***       -0.204***
                                                                    (0.176)         (0.045)           (0.200)         (0.028)
                  T10 (FG: 2yr central)                             -0.361**         0.041            -0.259           0.087***
                                                                    (0.158)         (0.047)           (0.186)         (0.029)
                  T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)                        -0.133          -0.101**          -0.660***        0.188***
                                                                    (0.174)         (0.051)           (0.199)         (0.032)
                  T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)                         -0.075          -0.010             0.934***       -0.202***
                                                                    (0.161)         (0.043)           (0.181)         (0.025)
                  T13 (FG: 3yr central)                             -0.355**        -0.011            -0.426**         0.098***
                                                                    (0.166)         (0.044)           (0.197)         (0.032)
                  T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)                        -0.249           0.203***          0.549***       -0.121***
                                                                    (0.167)         (0.044)           (0.189)         (0.027)
                  T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                         -0.078          -0.079            -1.398***        0.314***
                                                                    (0.172)         (0.049)           (0.187)         (0.030)
                  T16 (FG: LR central-high)                         -0.218           0.111**           0.407**        -0.081***
                                                                    (0.176)         (0.046)           (0.176)         (0.025)
                  T17 (FG: LR central-low)                          -0.094          -0.001             0.929***       -0.191***
                                                                    (0.173)         (0.048)           (0.175)         (0.022)
                  T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)                   -0.047           0.063            -0.225           0.042*
                                                                    (0.166)         (0.044)           (0.170)         (0.025)
                  T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)                      -0.265          -0.025             0.812***       -0.166***
                                                                    (0.163)         (0.045)           (0.190)         (0.025)
                  T20 (Inflation last year)                         -0.394**         0.224***          0.282          -0.081**
                                                                    (0.173)         (0.051)           (0.210)         (0.032)
                  T21 (Inflation last 3 years)                      -0.076          -0.004             1.559***       -0.345***
                                                                    (0.166)         (0.047)           (0.184)         (0.024)
                  T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead              -0.299*          0.106**          -0.155           0.046
                        inflation path forecast)                    (0.159)         (0.042)           (0.190)         (0.028)
                  T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead              -0.191          -0.047             1.137***       -0.226***
                        inflation average forecast)                 (0.158)         (0.046)           (0.173)         (0.025)
                  T24 (current mortgage rate)                       -0.455***        0.248***          0.378**        -0.100***
                                                                    (0.168)         (0.046)           (0.177)         (0.024)
                  Observations                                                7,580                             6,492
                  R-squared                                                   0.206                             0.612
Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for one-year-ahead inflation expectations (columns 1 and 2) and
for one-year-ahead unemployment rate expectations (columns 3 and 4). Posterior unemployment rate expectations (point predictions)
are for one-year ahead. Prior unemployment rate expectations (point predictions) are for "the end of 2019". Posterior inflation
expectations are point predictions. Prior inflation expectations are measured as implied means from the reported probability distributions.
All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                        58
                                                     Appendix Table 13. Posterior beliefs (nominal mortgage rates) in the 2nd follow-up wave by treatment.
                                                  Current                        one-year [2019]                   two-year [2020]                   Three-year [2021]                 Longer run
Treatment                              Intercept (b)      Slope ()         Intercept (b)     Slope ()        Intercept (b)     Slope ()        Intercept (b)     Slope ()     Intercept (b)    Slope ()
                                             (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)             (8)           (9)            (10)
Control                                   2.638***         0.328***           2.536***         0.357***         2.533***          0.395***         2.283***        0.468***      2.032***        0.563***
                                         (0.102)          (0.019)            (0.120)          (0.021)          (0.136)          (0.021)           (0.169)         (0.025)       (0.179)         (0.023)
Relative to control
T2 (Population growth)                   1.228***           -0.290***         1.356***       -0.313***          1.420***        -0.287***         1.254***        -0.255***      1.818***        -0.335***
                                        (0.147)             (0.027)          (0.150)         (0.024)           (0.198)          (0.030)          (0.219)          (0.032)       (0.244)          (0.031)
T3 (Current FFR)                        -0.014              -0.004            0.228          -0.062**           0.771***        -0.149***        -0.721***         0.148***      1.009***        -0.157***
                                        (0.179)             (0.034)          (0.179)         (0.029)           (0.205)          (0.029)          (0.275)          (0.043)       (0.269)          (0.034)
T4 (FG: LR high)                         0.317**            -0.074***         0.252          -0.062**           0.265           -0.043*           0.521**         -0.090***      1.220***        -0.213***
                                        (0.146)             (0.026)          (0.166)         (0.029)           (0.176)          (0.025)          (0.215)          (0.030)       (0.246)          (0.031)
T5 (FG: LR low)                          0.349*             -0.074**          0.646***       -0.148***          0.932***        -0.187***        -0.227            0.051         1.469***        -0.261***
                                        (0.185)             (0.035)          (0.159)         (0.025)           (0.181)          (0.025)          (0.269)          (0.041)       (0.278)          (0.038)
T6 (FG: LR central)                      0.659***           -0.134***         0.933***       -0.187***          1.001***        -0.172***         1.338***        -0.225***      1.842***        -0.312***
                                        (0.167)             (0.031)          (0.181)         (0.031)           (0.189)          (0.028)          (0.220)          (0.032)       (0.249)          (0.031)
T7 (FG: 1yr central)                    -0.844***            0.203***        -0.658***        0.152***         -0.499**          0.096***         0.092            0.004         1.607***        -0.282***
                                        (0.161)             (0.030)          (0.188)         (0.033)           (0.202)          (0.030)          (0.252)          (0.038)       (0.268)          (0.037)
T8 (FG: 1yr high)                        0.806***           -0.185***        -1.494***        0.298***         -0.589**          0.104**         -0.309            0.054         0.638**         -0.103***
                                        (0.152)             (0.028)          (0.172)         (0.030)           (0.250)          (0.042)          (0.267)          (0.041)       (0.262)          (0.035)
T9 (FG: 1yr low)                        -1.228***            0.289***        -0.458***        0.105***         -0.934***         0.210***        -0.465*           0.118***     -0.184            0.033
                                        (0.137)             (0.023)          (0.172)         (0.028)           (0.195)          (0.028)          (0.240)          (0.035)       (0.243)          (0.030)
T10 (FG: 2yr central)                    0.761***           -0.157***         0.522***       -0.113***          1.280***        -0.239***         1.547***        -0.305***      2.015***        -0.375***
                                        (0.155)             (0.029)          (0.177)         (0.028)           (0.180)          (0.026)          (0.216)          (0.030)       (0.237)          (0.028)
T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)              -0.607***            0.126***         0.285*         -0.052**           0.036           -0.008            0.611***        -0.111***      0.442           -0.070**
                                        (0.159)             (0.029)          (0.163)         (0.027)           (0.204)          (0.030)          (0.229)          (0.033)       (0.273)          (0.035)
T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)               -0.368**             0.069**          0.581***       -0.164***         -0.896***         0.146***         1.322***        -0.241***      1.941***        -0.346***
                                        (0.157)             (0.029)          (0.172)         (0.029)           (0.221)          (0.033)          (0.212)          (0.029)       (0.263)          (0.033)
T13 (FG: 3yr central)                    0.388***           -0.106***         1.166***       -0.261***          0.324           -0.079**         -0.798***         0.110***      0.779***        -0.167***
                                        (0.150)             (0.028)          (0.167)         (0.028)           (0.217)          (0.035)          (0.248)          (0.037)       (0.272)          (0.036)
T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)              -0.074               0.020            0.035          -0.024             0.493**         -0.100***         0.906***        -0.173***      1.262***        -0.204***
                                        (0.134)             (0.024)          (0.170)         (0.029)           (0.206)          (0.032)          (0.227)          (0.033)       (0.254)          (0.033)
T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)               -0.432***            0.093***         0.081          -0.040            -0.356*           0.052           -0.682***         0.117***     -0.289            0.064**
                                        (0.144)             (0.027)          (0.195)         (0.036)           (0.206)          (0.033)          (0.222)          (0.032)       (0.231)          (0.028)
T16 (FG: LR central-high)               -0.171               0.028           -0.340*          0.051            -0.499***         0.092***        -0.663***         0.137***      0.073           -0.022
                                        (0.158)             (0.030)          (0.186)         (0.034)           (0.189)          (0.027)          (0.228)          (0.034)       (0.267)          (0.036)
T17 (FG: LR central-low)                -0.271*              0.068**          0.749***       -0.138***          1.506***        -0.267***         2.468***        -0.422***      0.356           -0.055
                                        (0.156)             (0.027)          (0.165)         (0.026)           (0.229)          (0.035)          (0.252)          (0.037)       (0.287)          (0.037)
T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)          1.308***           -0.303***         1.442***       -0.327***          1.418***        -0.292***         1.928***        -0.347***      2.013***        -0.360***
                                        (0.148)             (0.028)          (0.173)         (0.031)           (0.205)          (0.032)          (0.242)          (0.036)       (0.248)          (0.032)
T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)             0.368**            -0.069**          0.757***       -0.158***         -0.005           -0.005            0.108           -0.031        -0.009           -0.002
                                        (0.151)             (0.028)          (0.177)         (0.031)           (0.198)          (0.028)          (0.253)          (0.036)       (0.249)          (0.031)
T20 (Inflation last year)                0.518***           -0.129***         1.238***       -0.272***          1.460***        -0.282***         1.407***        -0.293***      1.898***        -0.374***
                                        (0.146)             (0.027)          (0.171)         (0.029)           (0.188)          (0.027)          (0.244)          (0.036)       (0.239)          (0.029)
T21 (Inflation last 3 years)             0.730***           -0.170***         0.645***       -0.153***          0.625***        -0.128***         1.028***        -0.189***      0.705***        -0.142***
                                        (0.180)             (0.035)          (0.223)         (0.042)           (0.223)          (0.034)          (0.249)          (0.036)       (0.272)          (0.035)
T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead    -0.398**             0.095***        -0.739***        0.145***          0.801***        -0.146***         0.320           -0.047         1.105***        -0.179***
      inflation path forecast)          (0.172)             (0.035)          (0.196)         (0.036)           (0.207)          (0.032)          (0.260)          (0.040)       (0.269)          (0.036)
T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead    -0.435***            0.077***         0.133          -0.041            -0.318            0.031           -0.642**          0.104***      0.463*          -0.114***
      inflation average forecast)       (0.153)             (0.027)          (0.206)         (0.036)           (0.257)          (0.041)          (0.255)          (0.038)       (0.255)          (0.033)
T24 (current mortgage rate)             -0.966***            0.226***        -0.225           0.053**           0.289           -0.052*          -1.252***         0.235***      0.955***        -0.189***
                                        (0.151)             (0.027)          (0.160)         (0.026)           (0.196)          (0.030)          (0.219)          (0.031)       (0.254)          (0.032)
Observations                                        7,135                            7,178                              7,248                             7,285                          7,340
R-squared                                           0.589                            0.517                              0.543                             0.626                          0.589
  Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for nominal mortgage rates for various horizons. All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use
  sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     59
                                                     Appendix Table 14. Posterior beliefs (real mortgage rates) in the 2nd follow-up wave by treatment.
                                                  Current                       one-year [2019]                    two-year [2020]                   Three-year [2021]                 Longer run
Treatment                              Intercept (b)      Slope ()       Intercept (b)      Slope ()        Intercept (b)       Slope ()        Intercept (b)    Slope ()     Intercept (b)    Slope ()
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)             (8)           (9)            (10)
Control                                   1.956***         0.210***         2.031***          0.216***          2.334***          0.235***         2.588***        0.238***      2.599***        0.365***
                                         (0.156)          (0.027)          (0.163)           (0.027)           (0.176)           (0.027)          (0.181)         (0.024)       (0.203)         (0.027)
Relative to control
T2 (Population growth)                   0.061           -0.163***          -0.060           -0.116***          0.243           -0.135***         0.243           -0.118***      0.623**         -0.206***
                                        (0.245)          (0.043)            (0.252)          (0.040)           (0.274)          (0.041)          (0.277)          (0.039)       (0.312)          (0.042)
T3 (Current FFR)                        -0.790***         0.320***          -0.820***         0.298***         -0.377            0.141***        -0.192            0.117**       0.412           -0.069
                                        (0.248)          (0.047)            (0.253)          (0.039)           (0.294)          (0.048)          (0.295)          (0.046)       (0.305)          (0.044)
T4 (FG: LR high)                         0.502**         -0.107***           0.113           -0.018             0.274           -0.058            0.030           -0.038         0.656**         -0.219***
                                        (0.241)          (0.040)            (0.251)          (0.038)           (0.268)          (0.039)          (0.276)          (0.034)       (0.309)          (0.040)
T5 (FG: LR low)                          0.052           -0.024             -0.037           -0.013             0.075           -0.043           -0.048           -0.001         0.117           -0.100**
                                        (0.247)          (0.043)            (0.253)          (0.039)           (0.265)          (0.036)          (0.284)          (0.039)       (0.324)          (0.045)
T6 (FG: LR central)                      0.102           -0.008              0.050            0.010            -0.006           -0.022            0.056           -0.045         0.451           -0.208***
                                        (0.235)          (0.038)            (0.241)          (0.038)           (0.258)          (0.039)          (0.265)          (0.038)       (0.297)          (0.038)
T7 (FG: 1yr central)                    -0.348            0.028             -0.528**          0.059            -0.612**          0.046           -0.468*           0.013         0.350           -0.192***
                                        (0.237)          (0.040)            (0.247)          (0.038)           (0.263)          (0.039)          (0.278)          (0.039)       (0.307)          (0.041)
T8 (FG: 1yr high)                       -1.061***         0.427***          -1.460***         0.496***         -1.397***         0.365***        -1.384***         0.322***     -0.375            0.010
                                        (0.246)          (0.047)            (0.253)          (0.048)           (0.279)          (0.049)          (0.293)          (0.049)       (0.321)          (0.046)
T9 (FG: 1yr low)                        -0.446*           0.160***           0.096           -0.033             0.377           -0.075**          0.303           -0.094***      0.488           -0.179***
                                        (0.238)          (0.041)            (0.257)          (0.040)           (0.276)          (0.038)          (0.288)          (0.034)       (0.332)          (0.039)
T10 (FG: 2yr central)                    0.189            0.071              0.182            0.028             0.034            0.056           -0.011            0.007         0.493*          -0.121***
                                        (0.245)          (0.047)            (0.257)          (0.046)           (0.276)          (0.047)          (0.287)          (0.043)       (0.297)          (0.040)
T11 (FG: 2yr central-high)              -0.922***         0.407***          -0.545**          0.261***         -0.609**          0.240***        -0.460            0.185***      0.216           -0.028
                                        (0.261)          (0.040)            (0.276)          (0.046)           (0.286)          (0.041)          (0.292)          (0.041)       (0.354)          (0.051)
T12 (FG: 2yr central-low)               -0.142            0.014             -0.435*           0.051            -0.358            0.049           -0.031           -0.028         0.276           -0.178***
                                        (0.229)          (0.038)            (0.247)          (0.038)           (0.260)          (0.039)          (0.265)          (0.034)       (0.292)          (0.039)
T13 (FG: 3yr central)                    0.462**         -0.065*             0.562**         -0.110***          0.332           -0.097**          0.042           -0.053         0.355           -0.138***
                                        (0.235)          (0.037)            (0.252)          (0.039)           (0.272)          (0.042)          (0.284)          (0.042)       (0.305)          (0.045)
T14 (FG: 3yr central-high)              -0.415*           0.098**           -0.157            0.016            -0.343            0.034           -0.487*           0.045         0.037           -0.079*
                                        (0.229)          (0.041)            (0.245)          (0.041)           (0.256)          (0.038)          (0.267)          (0.038)       (0.318)          (0.046)
T15 (FG: 3yr central-low)                0.153            0.166***          -0.114            0.172***         -0.255            0.148***        -0.330            0.143***      0.317           -0.038
                                        (0.244)          (0.041)            (0.254)          (0.039)           (0.264)          (0.037)          (0.273)          (0.038)       (0.296)          (0.040)
T16 (FG: LR central-high)                0.137            0.009              0.224           -0.028            -0.182            0.079*          -0.228            0.081**      -0.503*           0.143***
                                        (0.244)          (0.045)            (0.253)          (0.041)           (0.269)          (0.044)          (0.267)          (0.039)       (0.293)          (0.043)
T17 (FG: LR central-low)                -0.567**          0.211***          -0.097            0.060            -0.462*           0.162***        -0.651**          0.184***      0.193           -0.078*
                                        (0.235)          (0.039)            (0.260)          (0.040)           (0.272)          (0.039)          (0.278)          (0.037)       (0.323)          (0.044)
T18 (FG: LR central + past FFR)          0.045           -0.030             -0.362            0.111***         -0.085           -0.078**         -0.040           -0.061*        0.768**         -0.276***
                                        (0.225)          (0.037)            (0.237)          (0.040)           (0.255)          (0.039)          (0.268)          (0.037)       (0.307)          (0.041)
T19 (Current FFR + past FFR)             0.027            0.032              0.101           -0.030             0.073            0.025            0.212           -0.094***      0.538*          -0.150***
                                        (0.240)          (0.041)            (0.250)          (0.040)           (0.271)          (0.043)          (0.267)          (0.036)       (0.317)          (0.044)
T20 (Inflation last year)               -0.359            0.135***           0.110           -0.008             0.004            0.051           -0.662**          0.179***      0.100           -0.045
                                        (0.249)          (0.050)            (0.249)          (0.044)           (0.263)          (0.043)          (0.300)          (0.050)       (0.332)          (0.047)
T21 (Inflation last 3 years)            -0.259            0.034             -0.527*           0.109**          -0.288            0.018           -0.305           -0.008         0.095           -0.099*
                                        (0.271)          (0.053)            (0.277)          (0.050)           (0.284)          (0.043)          (0.294)          (0.040)       (0.350)          (0.052)
T22 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead    -0.296            0.162***          -0.264            0.117**          -0.391            0.167***        -0.397            0.145***      0.827***        -0.240***
      inflation path forecast)          (0.250)          (0.050)            (0.261)          (0.050)           (0.287)          (0.048)          (0.303)          (0.048)       (0.314)          (0.047)
T23 (Inflation last year + 3yr ahead     0.435*          -0.050              0.431*          -0.060             0.304           -0.067*           0.366           -0.095**       0.335           -0.104**
      inflation av. forecast)           (0.229)          (0.036)            (0.249)          (0.041)           (0.265)          (0.040)          (0.273)          (0.038)       (0.307)          (0.043)
T24 (current mortgage rate)             -0.940***         0.207***          -1.288***         0.289***         -1.179***         0.177***        -1.196***         0.183***     -0.833***         0.037
                                        (0.235)          (0.042)            (0.241)          (0.041)           (0.267)          (0.044)          (0.276)          (0.043)       (0.303)          (0.039)
Observations                                     7,400                               7,431                              7,410                             7,398                          7,413
R-squared                                        0.334                               0.315                              0.300                             0.287                          0.259
   Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficients in specification (1) for real mortgage rates (nominal mortgage rate minus one-year-ahead inflation forecast) for various horizons.
   All estimates are based on Huber robust regressions. Regressions use sampling weights. No household/respondent controls are included. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
   ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                           E(unemployment rate); current; perceived                          E(mortgage rate); end of 2020
                             4     4.5       5        5.5       6                       5      5.2   5.4    5.6    5.8     6




                                                                             -10




                -10
                                                                  -5




     -5
                                                                       0




          0
                                                                             5




                5
     E; one-year ahead
                                                                  E; one-year ahead
                                                                                  10




                15   10
                                                                             15


                    E(personal income growth); one-year ahead                                E(mortgage rate); end of 2020
                      -2        0       2       4        6                             4.5      5     5.5      6     6.5       7
                                                                             0




     -5         -10
                                                                  10




          0
                                                                          20




                5
                                                                                  30
                                                                  E; five-year ahead




      E; one-year ahead
                15    10
                                                                             40




        E(personal nondur consumption growth); 1y ahead E(unemployment rate); one-year ahead
             -10      -5       0       5        10      4.5   5    5.5     6     6.5     7
                -10
                                                                             -10
                                                                                                                                   Appendix Figure 1. Correlation between inflation expectations and other expectations.




     -5
                                                                  -5




           0
                                                                       0




                 5
                                                                             5




      E; one-year ahead
                                                                  E; one-year ahead




                      10
                                                                                  10




                15
                                                                             15




61
                                                                 Appendix Figure 2. Revision of inflation expectations by select treatments.


                                    Panel A                                                           Panel B                                                         Panel C




                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                              6
              6
                               Control                                                          Control                                                          Control
                               Treatment (placebo)                                              Treatment (T20: past inflation)                                  Treatment (T6: FG)




                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                   4
                   4




                                                                                                                                         posterior E
                                                                       posterior E
       posterior E




                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                            2
            2




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                              0
              0




                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                              -2
              -2




                       -20   -10         0              10          20                 -20   -10          0                10           20               -20   -10         0          10   20
                                     prior E                                                          prior E                                                          prior E
                                    Panel D                                                           Panel E
                                                                              6
              6




                               Control                                                          Control
                               Treatment (T19: curr./past FFR)                                  Treatment (T24: current mortgage rate
                                                                                   4
                   4




                                                                       posterior E
       posterior E




                                                                            2
            2




                                                                              0
              0




                                                                              -2
              -2




                       -20   -10         0              10          20                 -20   -10          0                10           20
                                     prior E                                                          prior E


Notes: Each panel shows binscatter plot for post- vs. pre-treatment inflation expectations. Each square and triangle aggregate approximately 30 observations. Lines show fitted
linear regressions.

                                                                                                                                                                                                62
                                                                                       Appendix Figure 3. Revision of unemployment rate expectations by select treatments.


                                                               Panel A                                                                                     Panel B                                                                                  Panel C
                                         30




                                                                                                                                    30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                    posterior E(UE rate); end of 2019




                                                                                                                                                                                              posterior E(UE rate); end of 2019
         posterior E(UE rate); end of 2019
                                                          Control                                                                                    Control                                                                                   Control
                                                          Treatment (placebo)                                                                        Treatment (T20: past inflation)                                                           Treatment (T6: FG)
                              20




                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                        10         20
                   10




                                                                                                              10
        0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                              0            10           20         30                                                    0            10           20         30                                                   0            10           20         30
                                                  prior E(UE rate); one-year ahead                                                           prior E(UE rate); one-year ahead                                                          prior E(UE rate); one-year ahead
                                                               Panel D                                                                                     Panel E
                                         30




                                                                                                                                    30
         posterior E(UE rate); end of 2019




                                                                                                    posterior E(UE rate); end of 2019
                                                          Control                                                                                    Control
                                                          Treatment (T19: current and past FFR)                                                      Treatment (T24: current mortgage rate
                              20




                                                                                                                         20
                   10




                                                                                                              10
        0




                                                                                                   0




                                              0            10           20         30                                                    0            10           20         30
                                                  prior E(UE rate); one-year ahead                                                           prior E(UE rate); one-year ahead


Notes: Each panel shows binscatter plot for post- vs. pre-treatment unemployment rate expectations. Each square and triangle aggregate approximately 30 observations. Lines
show fitted linear regressions. The sample is restricted to 0-30 percent unemployment rate.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             63
                                                                       Appendix Figure 4. Revision of nominal mortgage rate expectations (end of 2020) by select treatments.


                                                          Panel A                                                                                   Panel B                                                                                 Panel C
                                       30




                                                                                                                                25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
         posterior E(mortgage rate 2020)




                                                                                                  posterior E(mortgage rate 2020)




                                                                                                                                                                                           posterior E(mortgage rate 2020)
                                                     Control                                                                                  Control                                                                                  Control
                                                     Treatment (placebo)                                                                      Treatment (T20: past inflation)                                                          Treatment (T6: FG)




                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                            20




                                                                                                                    15




                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                   10




                                                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                                                                                5
        0




                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                            0          10          20                        30                                      0          10         20                         30                                      0          10          20         30
                                                prior E(mortgage rate 2020)                                                              prior E(mortgage rate 2020)                                                              prior E(mortgage rate 2020)
                                                          Panel D                                                                                   Panel E
                                                                                                                                15
                                      25




                                                                                                  posterior E(mortgage rate 2019)
        posterior E(mortgage rate 2020)




                                                     Control                                                                                  Control
                                                     Treatment (T19: current and past FFR)                                                    Treatment (T24: current mortgage rate
                                20




                                                                                                                     10
                    10   15




                                                                                                            5
             5           0




                                                                                                                   0




                                            0          10          20                        30                                      0           5         10                         15
                                                prior E(mortgage rate 2020)                                                              prior E(mortgage rate 2019)

Notes: Each panel shows binscatter plot for post- vs. pre-treatment nominal mortgage expectations at the end of 2020. Each square and triangle aggregate approximately 30
observations. Lines show fitted linear regressions.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     64
                                                                              Appendix Figure 5. Revision of real mortgage rate expectations (end of 2020) by select treatments.


                                                             Panel A                                                                                      Panel B                                                                                    Panel C
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                     8
                                                        Control                                                                                     Control                                                                                     Control




                                                                                                                                                                                                 posterior E(real mortgage rate)
                                                                                                     posterior E(real mortgage rate)
        posterior E(real mortgage rate)


                                                        Treatment (placebo)                                                                         Treatment (T20: past inflation)                                                             Treatment (T6: FG)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                            6
                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                             2
         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                     0
                                             -10       0        10      20                      30                                       -10       0        10      20                      30                                       -10       0        10      20       30
                                                   prior E(real mortgage rate)                                                                 prior E(real mortgage rate)                                                                 prior E(real mortgage rate)
                                                             Panel D                                                                                      Panel E
                                                                                                                                     8
                                        8




                                                        Control                                                                                     Control
                                                                                                     posterior E(real mortgage rate)
        posterior E(real mortgage rate)




                                                        Treatment (T19: current and past FFR)                                                       Treatment (T24: current mortgage rate
                                                                                                                            6
                               6




                                                                                                                     4
                        4




                                                                                                             2
                2




                                                                                                     0
        0




                                             -10       0        10      20                      30                                       -10       0        10      20                      30
                                                   prior E(real mortgage rate)                                                                 prior E(real mortgage rate)

Notes: Each panel shows binscatter plot for post- vs. pre-treatment real mortgage expectations (nominal mortgage rates at the end of 2020 minus one-year-ahead inflation
forecast). Each square and triangle aggregate approximately 30 observations. Lines show fitted linear regressions.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65
Survey Questionnaire: Wave 1
                                     UIC Booth Economic Survey - March 2019

                       Please have all household members, 18 years or older, answer this survey.

;SHOW THIS TEXT WITH Q1
This survey is about your household's finances and opinions about the economy. As with any of our surveys, the
information you provide is confidential and is only shared in an aggregate (not individual) level.

Please tell us about yourself...

;3 DROP-DOWN BOXES
1. What is your date of birth?
Month: January, February...December
Day: 1, 2, 3...31
Year: 1916, 1917...1997

2. What is your gender?
() Male
() Female

3. What is your first name?
____________________________________

4. Over the last three months on average, how much did your household spend (per month) on goods and services in total
and for each of the individual components listed below?

Please enter a number between 0 and 10,000 for each category. The sum of the expenditures for the individual categories
should add up to the total amount.

Total monthly spending TOTAL [AUTOSUM] [RANGE: 0-99,999] [HAVE THIS AUTOMATICALLY SUM]
$__________

Debt payments (mortgages, auto loans, student loans, etc.)                                             $__________
Housing (including rent, maintenance and home owner/renter insurance, housekeeping and cleaning service, but not
including mortgage payments)                                                                            $__________
Utilities (including water, sewer, electricity, gas, heating oil, phone, cable, internet)               $__________
Food (including groceries, dining out, take-out food, and beverages)                                    $__________
Clothing, footwear, and personal care                                                                   $__________
Gasoline                                                                                                $__________
Other regular transportation costs (including public transportation fares and car maintenance)           $__________
Medical care (including health insurance, out-of-pocket medical bills and prescription drugs)           $__________
Travel, Recreation, and entertainment                                                                   $__________
Education and child care                                                                                $__________
Furniture, jewelry, small appliances and other small durable goods                                      $__________
Other (including gifts, child support or alimony, charitable giving, and other miscellaneous)            $__________

5. Thinking ahead to 12 months from now, how do you expect your household spending on all goods and services at that
time to compare to your spending over the previous 12 months?
() Higher than now
() About the same
() Lower than now
() Do not know
                                                                                                                   66
;IF Q5='Higher than now' OR Q5='Lower than now', GO TO Q5a.
;IF Q5='Do not know', GO TO Q5b.
;IF Q5='About the same', GO TO Q5c.
;QUESTION WORDING FOR Q5a DEPENDENT ON CHOICE FOR 'Higher than now' OR 'Lower than now' IN Q5.
5a. How much [higher/lower] (percentage-wise) do you expect your household spending on all goods and services to be
12 months from now relative to the previous 12 months?
()__________ percent [RANGE: 0-100]
() Do not know

;IF Q5a='Do not know', GO TO Q5b.
;QUESTION WORDING FOR Q5b DEPENDENT ON CHOICE FOR 'Higher than now' OR 'Lower than now' IN Q5.
5b. Please estimate how much [higher/lower] (percentage-wise) you expect your monthly household spending on all
goods and services to be 12 months from now using the categories listed below?
() Less than 5%
() 5 - 10%
() 11 - 15%
() 16 - 20%
() 21 - 25%
() 26 - 30%
() More than 30%
() Don't Know

ASK Q5c IF Q5 = `About the same', OTHERWISE SKIP TO Q6.
5c. You have indicated that you expect that your household spending 12 months from now will be about the same as over
the previous 12 months. This could mean that the change equals zero percent or that the percent change is small. Please
estimate using the categories listed below what situation best describes your situation?
() Over 12 months 10 percent lower
() Over 12 months 9 percent lower
() Over 12 months 8 percent lower
() Over 12 months 7 percent lower
() Over 12 months 6 percent lower
() Over 12 months 5 percent lower
() Over 12 months 4 percent lower
() Over 12 months 3 percent lower
() Over 12 months 2 percent lower
() Over 12 months 1 percent lower
() Over 12 months exactly the same as now
() Over 12 months 1 percent higher
() Over 12 months 2 percent higher
() Over 12 months 3 percent higher
() Over 12 months 4 percent higher
() Over 12 months 5 percent higher
() Over 12 months 6 percent higher
() Over 12 months 7 percent higher
() Over 12 months 8 percent higher
() Over 12 months 9 percent higher
() Over 12 months 10 percent higher
() Do not know

6. Suppose that you had to make an unexpected payment equal to one month of your after-tax income, would you have
sufficient financial resources (access to credit, savings, loans from relatives or friends, etc.) to pay for the entire amount?
() Yes
() No

                                                                                                                              67
() Don't know/prefer not to answer

7. Which of the following best characterizes your household:
() Own our house/apartment without mortgage
() Own our house/apartment and have a fixed-rate mortgage
() Own our house/apartment and have a variable-rate mortgage
() Rent our house/apartment
() Other

8. Does your household have total financial investments (excluding housing) worth more than one month of combined
household income?
() Yes
() No >SKIP TO Q9

8a. What percent of your financial wealth (excluding housing) do you invest in the following categories? Put "0" if you do
not invest in a given category.
[RANGE FOR EACH ITEM BELOW: 0-100]
Checking and Savings Account, Certificate of deposits             __________percent
Cash                                                              __________percent
US Bonds                                                          __________percent
US Stocks                                                         __________percent
Foreign Stocks and Bonds                                          __________percent
Gold and precious metals                                          __________percent
Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies                                __________percent
Other                                                             __________percent
% Total                                                           ___100___

9. In your current job, do you...
Please select all that apply.
[] Supervise 1 to 10 other people
[] Supervise 11 to 50 other people
[] Supervise more than 50 other people
[] Make decisions about hiring/firing workers
[] Make decisions about what prices to set
[] Make decisions about capital expenditures
[] Make decisions about wages/salaries
[] Make decisions about marketing or sales
[] None of the above >EXCLUSIVE

10. Do you currently plan to buy a new home, car, or other major big-ticket item (fridge, TV, furniture, etc.) in the next 12
months?
() Yes
() No >SKIP TO Q11
10a. Which of the following do you plan to purchase in the next 12 months? Please select all that apply.
[] A house/apartment
[] A car or other vehicle
[] A large home appliance or electronics
[] None of the above >EXCLUSIVE >SKIP TO Q11

;ONLY SHOW RESPONSES SELECTED IN Q10a
10b. How much do you plan to spend on the following?
A house/apartment __________
A car or other vehicle __________
A large home appliance or electronics __________

                                                                                                                          68
We would like to ask you some questions about the overall economy and in particular about the rate of
inflation/deflation (Note: inflation is the percentage rise in overall prices in the economy, most commonly
measured by the Consumer Price Index and deflation corresponds to when prices are falling).

11. Over the last 12 months, what do you think the overall rate of inflation/deflation has been in the economy?
Answer: The rate of inflation/deflation was __________ percent over the last 12 months.

If you think there was inflation, please enter a positive number. If you think there was deflation, please enter a negative
number. If you think there was neither inflation nor deflation, please enter zero.
[RANGE: -100-100 ALLOW FOR UP TO 2 DECIMAL POINTS]

12. In THIS question, you will be asked about the probability (PERCENT CHANCE) of something happening. The
percent chance must be a number between 0 and 100 and the sum of your answers must add up to 100.

What do you think is the percent chance that, over the next 12 months...
[RANGE OF EACH OPTION BELOW: 0-100 ALLOW FOR UP TO 2 DECIMAL POINTS]
   · the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be 12% or more        ______
   · the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 8% and 12% ______
   · the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 4% and 8%  ______
   · the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 2% and 4%  ______
   · the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 0% and 2%  ______
   · the rate of inflation will be between 0% and 2%                          ______
   · the rate of inflation will be between 2% and 4%                          ______
   · the rate of inflation will be between 4% and 8%                          ______
   · the rate of inflation will be between 8% and 12%                         ______
   · the rate of inflation will be 12% or more                                ______
   · % Total                                                                  ______ [TOTAL ANSWERS
       FROM ABOVE]

13. What is your best guess about what the current unemployment rate in the U.S. is and what it will be in 12 months?
Current UE rate:                __________% [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
UE rate in 12 months:           __________% [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]

14. What is your best guess about the current interest rate on a savings account in a bank?
__________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
15. What do you think is the current interest rate on a fixed-rate 30-year mortgage for someone like you and what do you
think it will be in the future?
Current rate:                           __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
At the end of 2019?                     __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
At the end of 2020?                     __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
At the end of 2021?                     __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
In the next 5-10 years?                 __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
[80% GET 1% NUMBER, 20% GET 3% NUMBER]
16. Suppose that the interest rate offered by banks on savings were hypothetically to increase by 1%. By what percentage
would you change your total spending? Your answer should be a positive number if you would increase your spending, a
negative number if you would decrease your spending, and zero if no change.
__________%
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------
;RANDOMLY ALLOCATE RESPONDENTS TO ONE OF THE GROUPS BELOW:
1. Control with no information - GO STRAIGHT TO Q17 [AT LEAST 2,000 RESPONDENTS]


                                                                                                                                                69
;IF ONE OF THE GROUPS BELOW SHOW "Before you give us your responses to the rest of the questions, we would
like you to know the following."
2. Placebo group
"Population of the U.S. grew by 2.2 percent between 2015 and 2017."
3. Current rate, FFR
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%."
4. Current rate FFR + high path
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 3.1% on average in 2019, 3.6% in 2020 and 2021, and 3.5% in the
longer run."
5. Current rate FFR + low path
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.4% on average in 2019, 2020 and 2021 and 2.5% in the longer run."
6. Current rate FFR + central tendency
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019, 3.1% in 2020, 3.0% in 2021 and 2.8% in the
longer run."
7. FFR today plus 2019 projection
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019."
8. FFR today plus high 2019
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 3.1% on average in 2019."
9. FFR today plus low 2019
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.4% on average in 2019."
10. FFR today plus central 2019 plus central 2020 projection
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019 and 3.1% in 2020."
11. FFR today plus central 2019 plus high 2020 projection
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019 and 3.6% in 2020."
12. FFR today plus central 2019 plus low 2020 projection
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019 and 2.4% in 2020."
13. FFR today plus central 2019 + central 2020 + central 2021
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019, 3.1% in 2020, and 3.0% in 2021."
14. FFR today plus central 2019 + central 2020 + high 2021
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019, 3.1% in 2020, and 3.6% in 2021."
15. FFR today plus central 2019 + central 2020 + low 2021
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019, 3.1% in 2020, and 2.4% in 2021."
16. FFR today plus central 2019 + central 2020 + central 2021 + high long-term
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019, 3.1% in 2020, 3.0% in 2021, and 3.5% in the
longer run."
17. FFR today plus central 2019 + central 2020 + central 2021 + low long-term
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. One forecast from
the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will be 2.8% on average in 2019, 3.1% in 2020, 3.0% in 2021, and 2.5% in the
longer run."
18. Current rate FFR + past rates + central tendency


                                                                                                                        70
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. This rate was 1.0%
on average in 2017, 0.4% in 2016, and 0.1% in 2015. One forecast from the Federal Reserve is that this interest rate will
be 2.8% on average in 2019, 3.1% in 2020, 3.0% in 2021 and 2.8% in the longer run."
19. Current rate + past rates, FFR
"The interest rate set by the Federal Reserve, known as the Federal Funds Rate, is currently at 2.5%. This rate was 1.0%
on average in 2017, 0.4% in 2016, and 0.1% in 2015."
20. Inflation treatment: current inflation
"Over the last twelve months, the overall inflation rate in the economy as measured by the percentage change in a
consumer price index has been 1.8%."
21. Inflation treatment: current inflation + previous two years
"Over the last three years, the overall inflation rate in the economy as measured by the percentage change in a consumer
price index has been 1.6% per year."
22. Inflation treatment: current inflation + path of expected inflation
"Over the last twelve months, the overall inflation rate in the economy as measured by the percentage change in a
consumer price index has been 1.8%. One forecast at the Federal Reserve is that this inflation rate will be 1.9% on
average in 2019, 2.1% in 2020 and 2021, and 2.0% in the longer-run."
23. Inflation treatment: close to 2%
"Over the last twelve months, the overall inflation rate in the economy as measured by the percentage change in a
consumer price index has been 1.8%. One forecast at the Federal Reserve is that this inflation rate will be 2.0% on
average over the next few years and in the longer-run."
24. Current fixed-rate 30-year mortgage
"The current average rate for fixed-rate 30-year mortgage is 4.6% per year."
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------
17. Over the next 12 months, what do you think the overall rate of inflation/deflation (as measured by the Consumer Price
Index) will be in the economy?
__________% [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
18. What annual rate of inflation/deflation (as measured by the Consumer Price Index) do you expect over the next 3-5
years?
__________% per year [RANGE: -100 to 100, ONE DECIMAL]
19. What do you think the unemployment rate in the U.S. will be
At the end of 2019? __________% [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
Over the next 3-5 years? __________% [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
20. How much higher or lower do you think your household's total after-tax (i.e., `take home') income will be over the
next twelve months compared to the last twelve months? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.
() My after-tax income will rise by __________% [RANGE: 0-300, ONE DECIMAL]
() My after-tax income will stay the same
() My after-tax income will fall by __________% [RANGE: 0-300, ONE DECIMAL]

21. Nondurable goods and services include for instance food, tobacco, alcohol, gasoline, clothing, haircuts, transportation,
and other small services and nondurable goods that do not last in time. By how much do you think that, over the next 12
months, your spending on non-durable goods and services will change relative to the previous 12 months?
() My spending will rise by __________% [RANGE: 0-300, ONE DECIMAL]
() My spending will stay the same
() My spending will fall by __________% [RANGE: 0-300, ONE DECIMAL]

22. Generally speaking, do you think now is a good time or a bad time to buy...
Very good                                [] A house/apartment
Good                                     [] A car/other vehicle
Neither good nor bad                     [] Large appliances or
Bad                                      electronics
Very bad



                                                                                                                                                71
23. What do you think is the current interest rate on a fixed-rate 30-year mortgage for someone with excellent credit and
what do you think it will be in the future?
Current rate?                     __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
At the end of 2019?               __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
At the end of 2020?               __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
At the end of 2021?               __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
In the next 5-10 years?             __________% per year [RANGE: 0-100, ONE DECIMAL]
24. What is your best guess about the rate at which average wages in the economy will grow on average over the next 12
months?
__________% [RANGE: -100-100, ONE DECIMAL]

25. What is your best guess about the rate at which housing prices in the U.S. will change over the next 12 months?
__________% [RANGE: -100-100, ONE DECIMAL]

26. Do you have a paid job?
() Yes
() No >GO TO Q27a
;IF Q27 IS ZERO, ASK Q27a - OTHERWISE SKIP TO Q28.
27. How many total hours per week do you work in a typical week?
__________Hrs/week [RANGE: 0-168]

27a. Are you actively looking for a job?
() Yes >GO TO Q27aa
() No >GO TO Q27ag

27aa. How long have you been searching for a job?
Months:__________ [RANGE: 0-60]

27ab. How many job applications are you submitting per week on average?
Number of applications per week:__________

27ac. Have you received any job offers that you have turned down?
() Yes >GO TO Q27aca
() No >GO TO Q27ad
27aca. Why did you turn down this offer? Please select all that apply. If you have received more than one offer, think of
the last offer you received.
[] Wage was too low
[] Hours were not what I wanted
[] Job was too far
[] Position was not sufficiently high
[] Other

;IF "Wage was too low" WAS NOT SELECTED, GO DIRECTLY TO Q27ad. OTHERWISE ASK Q27acb.
27acb. What fraction of your previous wage/salary were they offering you?
They were offering me __________% of my previous wage. [RANGE: 0%-300%]

27ad. How many hours do you spend searching for a job each week?
__________Hours [RANGE: 0-168]
27ae. What fraction of your previous wage would you need to accept a comparable job?
__________% of my previous wage/salary [RANGE: 0%-300%]

27af. How much longer do you expect to be looking for work?
__________Months [RANGE: 0-60] >SKIP TO Q28


                                                                                                                            72
27ag. Here are a number of possible reasons why people who are not working choose not to look for work. Please select
all that apply to you.
[] Homemaker
[] Raising children
[] Student
[] Retiree
[] Disabled, health issues
[] Couldn't find a job
[] On break
[] No financial need
[] Other

You are almost done with the survey.

28. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2% per year. After one year,
how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account?
() More than today
() Same as today
() Less than today
() I don't know

29. If you have $100 in a savings account and the interest rate is 10% per year and you never withdraw or deposit money,
how much will you have in the account after:
Please enter a whole dollar amount at each.
One year: __________ [RANGE: 0-999]
Two years: __________ [RANGE: 0-999]

30. If the chance of getting a disease is 5 percent, how many people out of 1,000 would be expected to get the disease?
() ___________ people [RANGE: 0-1000]
() Don't know

31. Suppose you have a choice between receiving with certainty $100 today or with certainty $X in a week. What would
be the minimum value of $X that you would need before accepting to receive money in a week? Please choose an option
below that best describes your preference.
() $100 today or $101 in 1 week
() $100 today or $103 in 1 week
() $100 today or $108 in 1 week
() $100 today or $117 in 1 week
() $100 today or $125 in 1 week
() $100 today or $133 in 1 week
() $100 today or $150 in 1 week
() $100 today or $167 in 1 week
() $100 today or $183 in 1 week
() $100 today or $200 in 1 week
() $100 today or $233 in 1 week

32. Suppose you have a choice to receive with certainty $100 or to play a lottery with a prize of $200. Possible lotteries
differ in the probability of winning $200. Which of the lotteries makes you indifferent between taking $100 with certainty
and playing a lottery? Please choose an option below that best describes your preference.
() $100 guaranteed or a 25% chance to win $200 and 75% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 28% chance to win $200 and 72% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 31% chance to win $200 and 69% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 34% chance to win $200 and 66% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 37% chance to win $200 and 63% chance to win $0

                                                                                                                          73
() $100 guaranteed or a 40% chance to win $200 and 60% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 43% chance to win $200 and 57% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 46% chance to win $200 and 54% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 49% chance to win $200 and 51% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 52% chance to win $200 and 48% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 55% chance to win $200 and 45% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 58% chance to win $200 and 42% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 61% chance to win $200 and 39% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 64% chance to win $200 and 36% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 67% chance to win $200 and 33% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 70% chance to win $200 and 30% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 73% chance to win $200 and 27% chance to win $0
() $100 guaranteed or a 76% chance to win $200 and 24% chance to win $0

33. When making your consumption and savings decisions, how far in the future do you typically plan?
() I just plan for the moment
() 1-3 months
() More than 3 months but less than 1 year
() 1 to 2 years
() 2 to 5 years
() 5 to 10 years
() More than 10 years

34. This is the last question!
We would like you to consider the following situation. You and another person are playing a game in which each person
requests an amount of money. The amount must be (a whole dollar amount) between 11 and 20 dollars. Each person will
receive the amount he/she requests. A person will receive an additional amount of 20 dollars if he/she asks for exactly one
dollar less than the other person.
What amount of money would you request? [DROPDOWN MENU: $11, $12, $13,...,$20]




                                                                                                                        74
