                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DOES RACE MATTER FOR POLICE USE OF FORCE? EVIDENCE FROM 911
                                 CALLS

                                        Mark Hoekstra
                                        CarlyWill Sloan

                                      Working Paper 26774
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26774


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We would like to thank the police departments in two anonymous cities for providing the data.
We would also like to thank multiple officials in those cities for helpfully answering our
numerous questions. We also thank Isabelle Sin, Jan Feld, James West, Jennifer Doleac, Samuel
Myers, Jr., Benjamin Hansen, seminar participants at the University of Florida, Georgia Tech,
University of Mississippi, Mississippi State University, and conference participants at the 2019
Stata Texas Empirical Microeconomics Conference, the Victoria University of Wellington
Applied Econometrics Workshop, the 2019 SEA Annual Conference, and the 2019 ASSA Annual
Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Any errors are our own The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mark Hoekstra and CarlyWill Sloan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Race Matter for Police Use of Force? Evidence from 911 Calls
Mark Hoekstra and CarlyWill Sloan
NBER Working Paper No. 26774
February 2020
JEL No. J15,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

While there is much concern about the role of race in police use of force, identifying causal
effects is difficult. This is in part because of selection, and in part because researchers often
observe only interactions that end in use of force, necessitating nontrivial benchmarking
assumptions. This paper addresses these problems by using data on officers dispatched to over 2
million 911 calls in two cities, neither of which allows for discretion in the dispatch process.
Using a location-by-time fixed effects approach that isolates the random variation in officer race,
we show white officers use force 60 percent more than black officers, and use gun force twice as
often. To examine how civilian race affects use of force, we compare how white officers increase
use of force as they are dispatched to more minority neighborhoods, compared to minority
officers. Perhaps most strikingly, we show that while white and black officers use gun force at
similar rates in white and racially mixed neighborhoods, white officers are five times as likely to
use gun force in predominantly black neighborhoods. Similarly, white officers increase use of
any force much more than minority officers when dispatched to more minority neighborhoods.
Consequently, difference-in-differences estimates from individual officer fixed effect models
indicate black (Hispanic) civilians are 30 - 60 (75 - 120) percent more likely to experience any
use of force, and five times as likely to experience gun use of force, compared to if white officers
scaled up force similarly to minority officers. These findings highlight race as an important
determinant of police use of force, including and especially lethal force.


Mark Hoekstra
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
245 Liberal Arts Social Sciences Building
College Station, TX 77840
and NBER
markhoekstra@tamu.edu

CarlyWill Sloan
Texas A&M University
cwsloan_1992@tamu.edu
1    Introduction

There are widespread concerns regarding police officer treatment of minorities. These con-

cerns are rooted in a long history of police mistreatment of black Americans, and are reflected

by the fact more blacks report having "no confidence" in local police (24 percent) than have

"a lot of confidence" (14 percent). This distrust of police is perhaps strongest with respect to

police use of force, as only 33 percent of blacks believe officers use the right amount of force

for the situation, and only 35 percent believe police treat racial and ethnic groups equally

(Pew Research Center, 2016). Concerns over the role of race in police use of force have been

voiced most forcefully in the protests over police shootings of unarmed black civilians and

by the Black Lives Matter movement. Importantly, this distrust has important efficiency

implications in that reduced civilian cooperation likely leads to less effective policing and

higher social costs of crime.

    However, documenting whether race matters for police use of force is difficult. This is

in part because researchers often do not observe interactions in which force was not used.

As a result, researchers must make assumptions regarding the appropriate "benchmark",

such as violent crime rates or arrests. In addition, it is difficult for researchers to observe

whether the underlying risk of situations involving white and minority civilians, or white and

minority officers, is similar in terms of whether force was merited. It is also unclear whether

controlling for observed contextual factors is sufficient to overcome bias due to selection.

    In this paper, we use a fundamentally different approach we believe most closely mirrors

the ideal thought experiment. Specifically, we observe settings in which white and minority

officers are as-good-as-randomly sent to otherwise similar situations, and where the same

black and white officers are observed responding to situations in white and minority neigh-


                                               1
borhoods. We do this using administrative data on over two million 911 calls, which enables

us to observe police use of force for a defined set of interactions, independent of whether the

interaction involved use of force. Importantly, the data come from two cities in which the dis-

patch protocols allow for no discretion on the part of the officer or the operator with respect

to which officer is dispatched. Rather, in the first city, the dispatcher observes on her com-

puter screen whether the officer on duty for that beat is available and if so, dispatches that

officer. If the dispatcher's monitor indicates the beat officer is unavailable--which happens

if, for example, the beat officer is currently engaged in a traffic stop--then she dispatches

the available officer observed to be closest to the call's location. The protocol for the second

city requires that the operator dispatch the available officer who is closest geographically to

the location. Both protocols imply that conditional on police beat-by-time fixed effects, the

variation in the race of the officer dispatched is as good as random. Our interviews with

dispatchers indicate they follow the protocol. We also show empirically that officer race in

both cities is uncorrelated with exogenous call characteristics and with predicted use of force

based on those covariates once we condition on the beat-by-time fixed effect.

   We use this conditionally-random variation in police officer race to answer two questions.

The first is whether white officers use force at higher rates than minority officers when

responding to otherwise similar calls. The second is whether officers are more likely to

use force on opposite-race civilians. We answer this second question by asking whether

white officers increase their use of force more then minority officers as they are dispatched

to more-minority neighborhoods. We do so by controlling for both individual officer and

beat-by-time fixed effects in a difference-in-differences style framework similar to the Price

and Wolfers (2010) study on racial bias by NBA referees. The advantage of this approach



                                               2
is we avoid imposing selection-on-observables assumptions in comparing interactions across

civilian race. Rather, we assume that in the absence of an opposite-race effect, white and

minority officers should increase use of force by a similar amount as they are dispatched from

white to minority neighborhoods. The limitation is that as in all police use of force studies,

we do not observe the proper amount of force. As a result, our measure of whether civilian

race matters is necessarily a relative one: how would black civilians have fared if the white

officers had scaled up their use of force the same as black officers?

   Our data include the universe of 911 calls made in two cities linked to police officer race

and use of force. As a condition of acquiring the data, we cannot disclose the names of the

cities. The first city has a population and police force composed primarily of whites and

blacks. It has a population of more than 240,000 and a homicide rate that ranks in the

top 20 among the nation`s largest 100 cities. In this city, we have administrative records on

over 1.2 million 911 calls over a three to five year period starting after 2010.1 These calls

resulted in 1,300 police uses of force, 94 of which involved the discharge of an officer's gun.

The data include the time and date of the call, the priority score assigned to the call by

the 911 operator, a short description of the call, the first officer(s) dispatched to the scene

by the operator, and whether or not force was used (and by which officer) at the scene.

Importantly, we observe the first officer(s) dispatched to the scene, even if other officers also

arrive after the dispatched officer arrives. In addition, we observe the address from which

the call originated, which we geocode into a Census Block Group to assign civilian race. In

the second city, we have data on just under one million 911 calls. This city is composed

primarily of white and Hispanic civilians and police officers. This city has a population of

more than 150,000, and the call records include similar information. There are just under
1 We   do not report the exact years to protect the anonymity of the city.



                                                                3
3,000 incidents of police use of force linked to these calls. We do not observe the type of

force used in this city.

   Results indicate that white officers use force 60 percent more often than black officers

on average, and use gun force more than twice as often. In both cases estimates are highly

significant, and demonstrate the difference in propensity to use force between black and

white officers. This suggests that the type of white person attracted to the police force is

systematically different than the typical black person when it comes to likelihood of using

force. In contrast, we find no evidence of an overall difference in the second city, where white

and Hispanic officers use force at the same rate, on average.

   Importantly, police use of force in both cities varies systematically by civilian race. Per-

haps most strikingly, we show that while white and black officers use gun force at approx-

imately the same rate in white and racially mixed neighborhoods, white officers use gun

force five times as often in neighborhoods that are 80+ percent black. That is, while black

officers use gun force at most modestly more when they are dispatched to calls in more black

neighborhoods, white officers use gun force much more often when they are dispatched to

predominantly black neighborhoods. This pattern holds even when controlling for individual

officer fixed effects. As a result, ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates indicate dispatching

a white officer to a call in a black neighborhood increases the use of gun force by four to

five times; logit estimates are even larger. In addition, we find a similar pattern for all use

of force. Results indicate that dispatching an opposite-race officer increases use of force by

30 to 60 percent, though only OLS estimates are significant at conventional levels. These

estimates are driven by the fact that white officers increase their use of force significantly

as they are dispatched to calls in more black neighborhoods. In contrast, black officers use



                                               4
force at most modestly more as they are dispatched to calls in more black neighborhoods.

As with the gun force findings, estimates for all use of force are similar when controlling for

individual officer fixed effects.

   Results from the second city indicate even though white and Hispanic officers use force

at the same overall rate, the use of force is disproportionately concentrated in different-race

neighborhoods. Specifically, we show that white officers increase their use of force more

when dispatched to more Hispanic neighborhoods, compared to Hispanic officers. Estimates

indicate that dispatching an officer of a different race roughly doubles the likelihood that

force will be used.

   We show these results are robust to the inclusion of controls for call characteristics, which

is consistent with the as-good-as-random assignment of calls conditional on location-by-time

fixed effects. We also show that the officer race effects (e.g., white vs. black) are robust to

controlling for whether this is the officer`s home beat, as proxied by the beat to which he

is most frequently dispatched. Similarly, difference-in-differences estimates are shown to be

robust to the inclusion of home beat and home beat interacted with officer race, in addition

to individual officer fixed effects. This suggests effects are not driven by a familiarity effect.

We also examine the extent to which our opposite-race results can be explained by the

inclusion of all observed call characteristics interacted with officer race, and find such effects

could explain only a small fraction of our findings. Finally, we show estimates in the first

city are robust to whether we define use of force at the call level (i.e., assign use of force to

the dispatched officer even if another officer was the one to use force) or at the level of the

officer who used the force.

   The main contribution of this paper is to identify the effect of race on use of force by



                                                5
exploiting conditionally random variation in officer race and within-officer variation in civilian

race to overcome the benchmarking and selection problems. In doing so, this paper joins a

larger literature examining the impact of race in the criminal justice system. It is related

to work on racial bias in police vehicle searches (e.g., Anwar and Fang, 2006; Persico and

Todd, 2006; Antonovics and Knight, 2009). To address the issue of officer selection into

interactions with civilians, this literature tests for racial bias by modeling police behavior

and implementing tests based on vehicle search "hit rates" relative to a benchmark encounter

rate. A related literature addresses the difficulty of assessing the benchmark encounter rate

by exploiting changes in ambient light to test for racial profiling in traffic stops (Grogger and

Ridgeway, 2006; Horrace and Rohlin, 2016). This paper complements these literatures by

taking a substantively different approach to solving problems created by endogenous police-

civilian interactions. In doing so, this paper is more closely related to work by Weisburst

(2017), who uses 911 calls to estimate the value-added of individual police officers, and West

(2018), who tests for racial bias in traffic citations using conditionally-random variation in

the race of officers called to traffic accidents. The advantage of this paper relative to West

(2018) is we examine the impact of race in arguably a more important context with more

important outcomes--911 calls and police use of force. The advantage of West (2018) is he

has objective information on whether certain citations were merited, which is not possible

for use of force. In addition, this paper also complements research on racial bias in the

criminal justice system more generally, including racial bias by prosecutors (Sloan, 2019;

Tuttle, 2019), juries (Anwar, Bayer, and Hjalmarsson, 2012; Flanagan, 2018) and judges

(Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang, 2018; Bielen, Marneffe, and Mocan, 2018).2
2 More  generally, it also complements a broader literature on own-group bias in education, labor, housing, and product markets
 (e.g., Feld, Slamanca, and Hamermesh, 2015; Ayres and Siegelman, 1995; Dahl and Moretti, 2008; Goldin and Rouse, 2000;
 Lavy, 2008; Neumark, Bank, and van Nort, 1996; Moss-Racusin, Corinne, Dovidio, Brescoll, Graham, and Handelsman, 2012;
 Price and Wolfers, 2010; Parsons, Sulaeman, Yates, and Hamermesh, 2011.)



                                                              6
   In assessing the effect of officer and civilian race on use of force, this paper is most similar

to work by Fryer (forthcoming) and Johnson et al. (2019). Fryer (forthcoming) uses an

impressive range of data sets including detailed data on all interactions from Stop and Frisk

in New York City. In addition, he uses data on officer-involved shootings in several other

cities and counties, which he benchmarks using arrests. Using these data, he implements a

selection-on-observables design to control for contextual factors. He concludes that blacks

and Hispanics are more likely to experience non-lethal force all else equal, but not more likely

to experience an officer-involved shooting. Weisburst (2019) extends this work using data on

use of force and arrests from Dallas, and similarly reports that conditional on arrest there is

no racial difference in use of force. Johnson et al. (2019) use data on fatal officer-involved

shootings across counties and conclude there is little evidence of bias, though others have

criticized the underlying assumptions in the analysis (Knox and Mummolo, 2019; Knox,

Lowe, and Mummolo, 2019). The main advantage of this paper relative to this prior work

is we are able to estimate the effect of race in a context where black and white officers are

as-good-as-randomly dispatched to similar situations, and where each officer is as-good-as-

randomly dispatched to calls in more and less black neighborhoods. In this way, we avoid

making potentially problematic assumptions about the appropriate benchmark. In addition,

by assessing the impact of civilian race by comparing how white and black officers scale up

use of force as they are dispatched from white to black neighborhoods, we avoid concerns

about whether we control for enough contextual factors that may differ across civilian race.

Similarly, we avoid potentially over-controlling for factors described by the officer after force

was used (e.g., in an arrest report), which would lead to understating effects The limitations

of our approach are that our difference-in-differences estimate of whether race matters is



                                                7
necessarily a relative one, and we address this question in only two cities.

    Our results have important implications for policing in the United States. Perhaps most

importantly, they provide rigorous evidence in support of the common civilian perception

of that race is an important determinant of police use of force. The results of this paper

suggest that at least in the contexts studied here this belief seems warranted, especially with

respect to the use of lethal force. In addition, this study demonstrates that race matters

even in a time and context during which police departments generally, and white officers in

particular, know they are under close scrutiny by the media and the public.



2      Background and Data

2.1     Background and Dispatch Procedures


As noted above, the protocol for dispatching officers to the scene of 911 calls is critical for

our research design. For this reason, we contacted police departments in more than a dozen

cities inquiring about their system for dispatching officers to calls, as well as the availability

of data. In particular, we needed to be able to observe and link the race of the police officer to

911 calls and use of force. We were able to obtain data in two cities that met both criteria.3

As part of the agreement to obtain the necessary data, which includes officer identifiers, we

were required not to disclose the names of the cities. However, we can state that the first

city we study has large populations of both blacks and whites, a total population of over

240,000 and has a homicide rate that ranks in the top 20 among the nation's 100 largest

cities. We note this set of cities does not overlap with those studied by Fryer (2019) and
3 We also obtained data from a third city that we were told used a protocol in which officers and operators had no discretion.
 However, upon receiving the data we discovered that did not appear to be the case, and thus do not use that city in this
 analysis.




                                                              8
Weisburst (2019), none of which have a homicide rate that ranks in the top 20 among the

nations`s largest cities.

    In this city, a civilian's 911 call is given to the first dispatcher available. The dispatcher

then records important aspects of the call and assigns the call to a primary unit. Specifically,

the computer system used by dispatchers records the time, exact location, and police beat of

the call. The dispatcher will then ask the caller about details surrounding the call, categorize

the seriousness and urgency of the call and rate it from highest priority (1) to low priority

(higher values). The dispatcher also records a short description of the call. For example,

a dispatcher may record a call as a domestic disturbance and then assign it priority of 2.

Calls are then dispatched based on the priority of the call. This means more urgent calls,

like assaults or crimes in progress, will be dispatched first, while less serious calls, like stolen

cars, will be given lower priority and dispatched later.

    After recording the above aspects of the call, the dispatcher assigns a primary unit to

the call. The majority of calls (98 percent) in the first city are assigned only one primary

unit. In 1.2 percent of calls, two primary units are dispatched, while in the remaining calls

there are three to five primary units. To dispatch a primary unit, the police dispatcher will

refer to her computer screen, which displays the location of all available police officers. An

officer will not be available if they are responding to another call for service or a self-initiated

event. For example, if an officer makes a traffic stop, they will use their in-car computer to

communicate that they are not available, in which case they will not appear on the police

dispatcher's screen for that period of time. If the beat officer for the beat of the call is

available, then the call will be dispatched to that unit.4 If the beat officer is not available,
4 Foreach shift a beat is assigned a beat officer. If a beat officer if not on a call for service, they are expected to patrol their
 beat. Our city has over 50 beats.




                                                                 9
the closest officer (geographically) will be dispatched. Importantly, in this setting, officers

do not select the calls to which they respond.5 After the primary unit is dispatched, other

officers may observe the call on their police car computer and respond to the call. We do

not observe these officers in our data, and assign only the primary dispatched officer(s) to

each call. In this way, we perform an intent-to-treat analysis. Given the dispatch procedure,

we need only condition on police beat-by-time fixed effects to isolate as good as random

variation in police officer race. In Section 4, we show empirical evidence consistent with this

identifying assumption.

    Once a primary unit is dispatched to a call they may encounter a situation that leads to

use of force. If an officer uses any type of force, police department administrative procedure

dictates they must immediately file a report describing the details of the incident and the

use of force type. This report number will be recorded in the officer in-car computer and

linked to the call for service where the use of force occurred. Even if the use of force report

is made later--for example, after the officer has been dispatched to another call--we are

still able to link this use of force to the call for service using the police report number. A

use of force report must be recorded even in events where non-deadly force (punches/kicks,

etc.) is used. In the event an officer discharges his gun, he must allow the ranking officer on

the scene to inspect the weapon and issue replacement ammunition. If an officer has shot

someone, a detective or internal affairs investigator will take possession of the weapon. All

use of force reports are reviewed quarterly by a community use of force committee, which

makes recommendations about the use of force policy to the Chief of Police.

    We also study use of force in a second city, where the population is more than 95 percent
5 Thesedata do not include officer-initiated incidents where officers observe an incident, call it in, and have the dispatcher assign
 them to that incident.




                                                                10
Hispanic or white, and less than 10 percent black. This city has a population of more than

150,000, which ranks in the largest 300 cities in the country. The protocol for dispatching

officers to calls is similar to the city described above in that calls are dispatched according to

a protocol that does not allow for discretion on the part of the operator or officer. However,

in this city, the operator first dispatches the geographically closest available officer to the

call. In addition, in this city it is more common to have more than one officer initially

dispatched. Specifically, 44% of calls have one unit assigned, 31% have two units assigned,

and 25% have three or more units assigned initially. As with the first city, after any use of

force, department procedure dictates that the officer record the incident report electronically,

and that their supervisor review the report.


2.2        Data


The police administrative dataset for the first city includes all calls for service from a three

to five year period after 2010 where at least one officer was dispatched. For each call in our

dataset, we observe the primary unit, beat, priority, time between call and dispatch, latitude,

longitude, time of the call, time of dispatch, and date of the call. There are over 50 beats

in our city.6 We also observe the race, gender, and years of experience of each police officer.

Because Hispanics make up less than five percent of police officers in our city, we exclude

those officers from the sample. Additionally, we observe if the call resulted in use of force

and the type of use of force. Type of force is recorded by the police officer, including whether

the force was a gun. According to the police department records division, nearly all of the

incidents of gun force are the discharging of the gun. We classify use of force in two different

ways, and show results for each. The first is to classify all officers in the assigned primary
6 In   order to protect the anonymity of the cities, we are not revealing the exact time period or number of beats.



                                                                11
unit(s) as having used force if any officer assigned to the call used force. For example, if two

officers are dispatched to the same event, but only one uses force, in this approach we assign

both officers as having used force. We use this event-level assignment procedure in order

to account for the joint decision-making process of responding officers. For example, one

officer could fail to deescalate a situation, causing another responding officer to use force.

The second way we classify use of force is to assign it at the officer level, in which an officer

is only assigned use of force if that officer used force.

   In the first city, we assign civilian race as the proportion of the population that is black

from the Census Block Group from which the call originated. We do so using the 2010

Census for each of the several hundred different Census Block Groups from which calls in

our city originated. We classify civilians as black if they are only black, and white if they are

only white. This results in the classification of over 90 percent of this city's citizens as only

black or only white. Hispanics make up less than 5 percent of the population in this city. In

the second city, we assign civilian race as the proportion of the population that is minority

(e.g., black or Hispanic), noting that less than five percent of the population in that city is

black.

   As with many cities in the U.S., there is significant sorting by race across neighborhoods.

For example, in the first city about 35 percent of our census block groups are more than 75

percent black and about 25 percent of our census block groups are more than 75 percent

white. This is also evident in the distribution of 911 calls. This distribution is shown in

Figure 1, where proportion black for the Census Block Group of the originating call is shown

on the x-axis and varies from 0 to 1. It is clear that while there are calls originating from

all types of neighborhoods, we have a significant number of calls originating from nearly-



                                                12
all-white or (especially) nearly-all-black neighborhoods. Panels b and c of Figure 1 shows

that black and white officers are dispatched to both types of neighborhoods, as well as

neighborhoods of mixed race.

   Summary statistics for the first city are shown in Table 1. The sample includes 1.2 million

calls for service. There were over 1,300 incidents of police use of force representing 0.109

percent of all calls, of which 94 (0.0076 percent) involved a gun. Thirty-eight percent of

responding officers were black, and 16 percent were female. Average officer experience was

10 years. On average 58.6 percent of callers were black. It takes 6.5 minutes for a primary

unit to be dispatched to a call.

   In columns 2 and 3 we show summary statistics separately for black and white responding

officers, respectively. We note that this comparison does not reflect our research design

since it does not account for potential of officer selection by race into different police beats.

However, given these data only include use of force resulting from 911 calls, and since

officers of both races respond to calls in all neighborhoods at roughly the same rates (as

shown in Figure 1) and have no discretion in how they are dispatched, we find it instructive

nonetheless. Columns 2 and 3 show that black officers are somewhat more likely to be female

(18.9 versus 14.2 percent), have more experience (10.5 versus 9.9 years), and respond to calls

in slightly more black neighborhoods (0.603 versus 0.575). Black and white officers respond

to calls of similar priority and are dispatched similarly quickly (6.51 versus 6.46 minutes)

and to locations with similar x and y coordinates. However, use of force is quite different

across officer race. While black officers use force 7.8 out of every 10,000 calls, white officers

use force 12.8 times per 10,000 calls. White officers use gun force approximately 1 out of

every 10,000 calls, which is more than twice as often as black officers.



                                               13
    Summary statistics for the second city are shown in Appendix Table A4. Eighty-five

percent of civilians are minority, and 81% are Hispanic. The police force reflects these

demographics, as 86 and 83 percent are minority and Hispanic, respectively. We observe

just under 3,000 incidents of force linked to 911 calls. Unfortunately, we were not able to

acquire information on the type of force used. White and minority officers use force at a

similar rate of around 3 in 1,000.



3     Research Design and Methodology

Our identification strategy in both cities relies on the as-good-as-random variation in officer

assignment to 911 calls. However, for ease of exposition, below we discuss our estimation

approach as it relates to the first city in our analysis, though the approach is similar for the

second (Hispanic/white) city.

    To estimate the racial differences between white and minority officers in overall use of

force, we estimate the following equation:



    U seof F orcec = 0 + 1 I (W hiteOf f icer)c + Beat  Y ear  W eek  Shif tc + Xc +       c   (1)



Use of force is a binary variable equal to one when a call c ends in a use of force and zero

for calls that do not involve a use of force. W hite Of f icer takes on a value of one when

the police officer is white and zero otherwise. 1 captures the difference in the probability

of force across officer race. Xc includes control variables at the call-level. Specifically, Xc

includes controls for officer gender, priority of call, latitude, longitude, and time between

call and dispatch, as well as fixed effects for day of the week, call description, and call taker.



                                               14
All specifications include Beat*Y ear*W eek *Shif t fixed effects. Robust standard errors are

clustered at the officer level to allow observations to be correlated across cases for a particular

officer.

   To estimate the effect of opposite-race officers on use of force, we use a difference-in-

differences style approach. Formally, we estimate the following for the first city in our

analysis:



  U seof F orceic = 0 + 1 (P roportionBlackCivilians)c + Of f iceri +

2 I (W hiteOf f icer  P roportionBlackCivilians)ic + Beat  Y ear  W eek  Shif tc + Xc +        ic


                                                                                               (2)


where Of f iceri is an individual officer fixed effect and captures time-invariant officer char-

acteristics including officer race. P roportion Black Civiliansc is the proportion of black

civilians in the Census Block Group of the call, and controls for differences in probability of

use of force across neighborhoods of different racial compositions. The variable of interest

is the interaction between P roportion Black Civiliansc and W hite Of f iceri . We interpret

the coefficient, 2 , as the effect of dispatching an opposite-race officer on use of force. As

discussed earlier, this measure is necessarily a relative one. It provides an estimate of how

much additional force is used by white officers on black versus white civilians, compared to

if white officers increased their use of force the same as black officers. We also note that

because we do not observe--and view as unknowable--whether force emphshould have been

used on a given call, without imposing additional assumptions we cannot know whether a

nonzero effect means white officers used too much force on black civilians, or too little on

white civilians, or whether black officers used too much force on white civilians, or too little


                                                15
on black civilians. The coefficient 2 captures the sum of those effects.

    We note that in equations 1) and 2), we identify effects using only the race of the dis-

patched officer(s), even though others may choose to respond to the call as well. In this

way, we implement an intent-to-treat analysis. Relatedly, for the analysis of the first city

we observe whether force was used by the dispatched officer, or by another officer who also

responded to the same call.7 Our main analysis assigns use of force to a dispatched officer if

force was used by any officer on that call. However, in Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 we show

estimates are almost identical when use of force is defined as force used by that dispatching

officer.

    In addition to estimating each equation with ordinary least squares, we also estimate using

a logit model and report odds ratios. However, we note that doing so has two disadvantages.

First, in order to attain convergence of the logit model, we are only able to control for police

beat and time fixed effects, rather than beat-by-time fixed effects. While this is not ideal, we

note that OLS estimates using only beat fixed effects are similar to those that use beat-by-

time fixed effects. More problematically, given a fixed number of observations in each group,

the logit estimator is not consistent as the number of groups increases (Chamberlain, 1980;

Heckman, 1987). As a result, while we show logit estimates for the sake of completeness, we

prefer OLS estimates, particularly in models that include individual officer fixed effects.

    Intuitively, this difference-in-differences approach compares differences in the probability

of use of force between black civilians and white civilians for black officers and white officers.

Importantly, this model allows for encounters with black civilians to merit more or less force

than interactions with white civilians. In this way, our approach differs significantly from

approaches that rely on controlling for observable contextual factors to account for selection
7 For   the second city, we only observe whether the dispatched officer used force.



                                                                 16
in the type of interactions with white versus black civilians. Rather, we identify opposite-race

effects by comparing how a given white officer's use of force differs when he is dispatched to

a more black versus less black neighborhood, compared to what happens when a given black

officer is dispatched to more and less black neighborhoods. In short, we include beat-by-time

fixed effects to ensure white and black officers are dispatched to similar calls, and individual

officer fixed effects to ensure differences in use of force across civilian race are not driven by

nonrandom sorting of officers across neighborhoods.

    There are several mechanisms through which opposite-race police officers can affect use

of force, as measured by our coefficient of interest 2 . The first is racial bias by police

officers. For example, if officers receive utility from using force on opposite-race civilians,

the threshold for using force will be lower. This bias will then be reflected in 2 . In addition,

it is also possible that officers are less skilled at interacting with members of different races.

If, for example, black officers are better at de-escalating situations involving black civilians

compared to white officers, this will generate a nonzero estimate of 2 . Similarly, if white

officers misperceive behavior by black civilians as being threatening, while black officers

correctly perceive that same behavior, that misperception could drive any effects we estimate.

Finally, we note our estimate of the effect of opposite-race police officers will also capture

differential civilian response to opposite-race police officers. Importantly, for this response

to drive a nonzero estimate of 2 , it must be the case that civilians behave differently for

opposite-race officers than for same-race officers. In contrast, any overall racial difference in

civilian behavior is accounted for in the beat-by-time fixed effect.8
8 Our view is that it is difficult to assess the importance of civilian response without detailed data on the actions, body language,
 and speech of the officer and civilian. While this is difficult, to our knowledge the best evidence to date comes from Voigt
 et al. (2017), who analyze officer speech from officers' body cam footage in Oakland during traffic stops. They report that
 officers speak more disrespectfully to blacks than whites, controlling for observed contextual factors. The authors note it is
 possible for some of this effect to be caused by civilian behavior, though they argue it is unlikely all due to civilian behavior
 given the difference is present in the first five percent of words spoken by the officers, and is judged to be present even when
 evaluated in the context of what was said by the civilian.



                                                                17
   Both the cross-sectional approach and the difference-in-differences approach rely on the

assumption that conditional on the beat-by-time fixed effect, the variation in police officer

race is as good as random. Given our understanding of dispatch protocol in both cities, we

believe there are ex ante reasons to believe this assumption is valid. In addition, we also

empirically assess the validity of our research design. First, when we estimate effects, we will

examine the extent to which adding controls affects our estimates of interest. Specifically,

we add call characteristics including call priority, latitude, longitude, time between call and

dispatch, as well as fixed effects for day of the week, call description, call taker. We also add

controls for officer gender and years of experience. If our identifying assumption is valid, we

expect adding these controls should not affect our coefficient of interest.

   The second way in which we assess the validity of our research design is to examine directly

the correlation between call characteristics and officer race, conditional on a police beat by

time fixed effect. Under the identifying assumption, officer race should be uncorrelated with

the race of the caller, the call priority, time between call and dispatch, the geographic location

of the call (i.e., X and Y coordinates), whether the call came from an officer's home beat, and

other Census Black Group characteristics (i.e. per capita income, proportion unemployed,

and proportion with less than a high school degree). We formally test this in Table 2, which

regresses each of these characteristics on a beat-year-week-shift fixed effect and an indicator

for whether the officer was white. One of the nine estimates is statistically significant at the

10 percent level; none are significant at the 5 percent level. In addition, point estimates are

economically small. For example, compared to black officers, white officers respond to calls

that are dispatched 0.11 minutes faster and 0.01 points lower priority, and to neighborhoods

that are 0.13 percentage points less black. The small magnitude of these correlations is



                                               18
consistent with the identifying assumption of our study.

   In addition, the third way in which we assess our research design is to use all call char-

acteristics to predict officer use of force. Specifically, we first regress police use of force on

beat-year-week-shift fixed effects. We then regress these residuals--which capture the devi-

ation from the average use of force for that beat and time--on every covariate we observe

for each call. These include proportion black civilians in the block group, call priority, lati-

tude, longitude, time between call and dispatch, home beat, per capita income, proportion

of civilians with less than high school degree and proportion unemployed, as well as fixed

effects for call description and call taker. We use the resulting regression equation to predict

the likelihood force would be used for each officer on each call. Intuitively, this produces a

linear combination of exogenous call characteristics, where the weights are chosen as to best

predict the likelihood of force being used. We then ask whether white and black officers are

dispatched to calls of similar underlying danger when assigned to a neighborhood of a given

racial composition. If the identifying assumption of our approach is valid, predicted use of

force should be the same for white officers as black officers.

   We show results of this test graphically for the first (black/white) city in Figure 2. Panel

a shows results for all use of force, while panel b shows results for only gun use of force. In

both cases, results demonstrate that conditional on the police beat-year-month-week-shift

of the call, white and black officers are dispatched to calls that are of similar underlying

risk. This is consistent with the identifying assumption, and with our understanding of how

officers are dispatched.

   Finally, for the difference-in-differences approach, we also add controls for interactions

between officer race and all call characteristics. We do so in order to shed light on the



                                               19
mechanism underlying the opposite-race effects. In particular, we test whether the effect

can be explained by officers having an increased propensity to use force for the type of calls

that occur in opposite-race neighborhoods. For example, if white officers were more likely

to use force when dispatched to domestic disturbance incidents, and if domestic disturbance

incidents were more likely to occur in black neighborhoods, that could generate a nonzero

difference-in-differences estimate. It is important to note, however, that because this be-

havior has a disparate impact on opposite-race civilians, the effect is the same as explicit

bias.



4       Results

We begin by showing results for the first city graphically. Results for all use of force are

shown in Figure 3. Each graph shows local averages of use of force by race of officer,

as represented by the blue circles (white officers) and red squares (black officers). Each

circle/square includes the same number of calls. We also fit lines to the underlying data, by

officer race.

    Panel a of Figure 3 shows actual use of force, while panel b shows residualized use of

force, after first regressing use of force on beat-by-year-by-week-by-shift fixed effects. We

show residualized use of force since it closely corresponds to the variation we use to estimate

across-race effects. More precisely, while graphing actual use of force against neighborhood

racial composition as in Figure 3a overcomes many potential selection problems, Figure 3b

additionally addresses the potential problem of non-random assignment of officers across




                                              20
beats of a given racial composition.9

    Results in Figure 3 reveal two main takeaways. The first is that regardless of the racial

composition of the neighborhood, white officers are more likely to use force than black

officers. This demonstrates that the differences shown in Table 1 were not due to differences

in racial composition of neighborhoods or non-random sorting of officers, but instead reflects

racial differences in the underlying propensity to use force. Thus suggests that with respect

to the likelihood of using force, white officers seem to be drawn from a different distribution

than black officers.

    The second main takeaway from Figure 3 is that while the propensity of black officers

to use force increases only modestly as they are dispatched to neighborhoods with higher

proportions of black civilians, white officers use significantly more force as they are dispatched

to more black neighborhoods. This suggests that having an opposite-race officer dispatched

to a scene seems to have a large effect on the likelihood of force. For example, if officer race

(white versus black) mattered for use of force, but having an officer of opposite-race did not,

we would expect parallel slopes for white and black officers in both panels of Figure 3. The

difference in slopes suggests that dispatching an opposite-race officer to a call results in a

higher likelihood of police use of force.

    Figure 4 shows results for use of force with a gun. It shows that while black and white

officers have roughly similar propensities to use gun force when assigned to majority-white

neighborhoods, they differ significantly when dispatched to neighborhoods with 80+ percent

black residents. In those neighborhoods, white officers are roughly five times more likely to
9 Forexample, if conditional on being assigned to beats of similar racial composition, white officers were systematically assigned
 to the more dangerous beats within that set, Figure 3a could be misleading. As it turns out, this type of selection seems
 unimportant for the black/white city as panels a and b of Figure 3 show qualitatively the same result. However, we do find
 some evidence of this type of sorting for the second Hispanic/white city, where controlling for beat-by-time effects makes the
 opposite-race effects more clear.




                                                               21
use gun force compared to black officers. Again, this suggests that white officers are more

likely to use force overall. In addition, it suggests that they are especially likely to use more

force in mostly-black neighborhoods, suggesting large opposite-race effects.

   We note that the opposite-race effects apparent in Figures 3 and 4 include the impact

of any potentially non-random sorting of white and black officers across neighborhoods of

different race. While the impact of such nonrandom sorting may be of interest in its own

right--for example, the allocation of the most aggressive white officers to predominantly

black neighborhoods could itself drive disparities--in the results below we also estimate

opposite-race effects controlling for individual officer fixed effects.


4.1   The Effect of Officer Race on Use of Force


Estimates of the average effect of officer race are shown in Table 3, where each column

represents a different regression. Panel A shows coefficients from OLS estimation, while

Panel B shows odds ratios from a logit regression. Column 1 in Panel A controls only

for beat-by-year-by-week-by-shift fixed effects, while Panel B (logit) controls for beat fixed

effects. Column 2 includes controls for call characteristics, including call priority, latitude,

longitude, time between call and dispatch, per capita income, unemployment, proportion

with less than a high school degree, home beat and fixed effects for day of the week, call

description, and call taker for OLS specifications. Column 2 for logit specifications includes

controls for priority, officer gender, per capita income, unemployment, and proportion with

less than a high school degree.

   Results in column 1 of Panel A indicate that white officers are 0.0507 percentage points

less likely to use force than black officers. Given the average use of force of 0.106 percent, this



                                                22
suggests that white officers are 48 percent more likely to use force relative to the mean, and

65 percent more likely relative to mean for black officers of 0.078 percent, as shown in Table

1. The estimate in column 2 changes only slightly to 0.0429 percentage points, implying a

55 percent increase relative to black officers. Both estimates are statistically significant at

the one percent level. Odds ratios from a logit specification are similar; estimates in the first

two columns indicate white officers are 1.66 and 1.65 times as likely to use force as black

officers. Both estimates are significant at the one percent level.

   Estimates in columns 3 and 4 show results for beats with above-average and below-average

rates of use of force. In both cases white officers are estimated to be more likely to use force

than black officers. Estimates in Panel B indicate that white officers are 1.53 and 1.95 times

as likely to use force in high- and low-use-of-force police beats; both estimates are significant

at the one percent level.

   Columns 5 through 8 show the same specifications for use of force in which a gun was used

by the officer. Estimates in columns 5 and 6 of Panel A are 0.0000518 and 0.0000463, both

of which are significant at the five percent level. The estimates indicate 65 to 73 percent

increases in gun force by white officers relative to the mean, and 109 to 122 percent increases

relative to the mean for black officers. Logit estimates in Panel B are similar, indicating

white officers are 2.4 to 2.6 times as likely to use gun force as black officers. Estimates in

columns 7 and 8 show effects for above- and below-average-gun-force beats, and indicate

similar relative increases for white officers in both.

   In short, results from Table 3 indicate that white officers use force 55 to 65 percent

more often than black officers when attending otherwise similar calls, and use gun force

approximately twice as often as black officers. In addition, results in Figure 2 suggest that the



                                               23
difference in the likelihood of using lethal force is largely due to differences in predominantly

black neighborhoods from which a large fraction of 911 calls originate.


4.2       The Effect of Opposite-Race Officers on Use of Force


We now turn to estimating the effect of opposite-race police officers on use of force. Results

are shown in Table 4, which is similar to Table 3 in that column 1 includes only beat-by-

year-by-week-by-shift fixed effects, officer race fixed effects, and a control for the proportion

of black civilians in the block group. Column 2 adds individual officer fixed effects in order

to account for any nonrandom assignment of police officers across different neighborhoods.

Column 3 adds call controls, and column 4 adds controls for the home beat of the officer

(as proxied by the beat in which the officer responds to the most calls) and an interaction

between officer race and home beat.

   Results indicate that opposite-race officers are significantly more likely to use force. Esti-

mates in columns 1 - 4 of Panel A are 0.000566, 0.000613, and 0.000632, and 0.000618, all of

which are significant at the five percent level. They indicate that opposite-race officers are

0.057 to 0.063 percentage points more likely to use force. Given a mean use of force rate of

0.106 percentage points, these estimates suggest increases of 53 to 60 percent. Corresponding

odds ratios from logit regressions that include individual officer fixed effects in columns 2

and 3 of Panel B are 1.46 and 1.38, respectively, though neither is significant at conventional

levels.

   In column 5, we include interactions between officer race and each observed call charac-

teristics. We do so in order to assess the extent to which the estimated effect in columns 1 -

4 is picking up the response of officers to a call characteristic that is correlated with civilian



                                               24
race of the opposite race. The estimate in Panel A is 0.000405, which suggests that this dif-

ferential response can explain roughly one-third of the overall effect. We note, however, that

even if part of the overall effect is due to officers responding more harshly to calls that tend

to come from opposite-race neighborhoods, that still represents the type of policy-relevant

disparate impact interested groups are worried about.

   In columns 6 and 7, we show effects for neighborhoods with above- and below-average

rates of use of force. Results indicate that opposite-race effects seem driven by effects in

high use of force beats. The OLS and logit estimates in column 5 suggest increases of 94

and 82 percent, respectively. The OLS estimate in panel A is significant at the five percent

level, while the logit estimate is not significant at conventional levels.

   In summary, results in Table 4 indicate that there is suggestive evidence of opposite-race

effects on overall use of force. OLS estimates from officer fixed effect models range from 55

- 60 percent and are significant at the 5 percent level, while logit estimates are of similar

magnitude (40 - 50 percent) but are not significant at conventional levels.


4.3      The Effect of Opposite-Race Officers on Gun Use of Force


Next, we estimate the effect of opposite-race police officers on gun use of force. Results

are shown in Table 5, which takes the same form as Table 4, except that we do not show

estimates for below-average use of force beats, given how rare gun use of force is in those

beats.

   The estimate in column 1 indicates opposite-race officers are 0.0171 percentage points

more likely to use gun force, and is significant at the one percent level. Given the baseline

rate of 0.0071 percentage points, this suggests that opposite-race officers are 240 percent more



                                               25
likely to use gun force. The corresponding odds ratio indicates that opposite-race officers

are 4.1 times as likely to use force, which is significant at the 10 percent level. Notably,

estimates are larger when individual officer fixed effects are included, as in columns 2 - 7.

OLS estimates in columns 2 - 5 range from 0.000299 to 0.000379; all are significant at the

one percent level. These estimates imply dispatching an opposite-race officer results in a 420

to 530 percent increase in the likelihood of gun force relative to the mean. Logit estimates

are even larger when officer fixed effects are included, with odds ratios of 16.5 (column 3)

and 28.1 (column 2). These are significant at the ten and five percent levels, respectively,

though we interpret these estimates cautiously in light of the incidental parameters problem

with the logit estimator in cases like this (Chamberlain, 1980; Heckman, 1987).

   The estimated effect of opposite-race officers is robust to controlling for call characteristics

(column 3), a proxy for home beat and home beat interacted with officer race (column 4),

and interactions between call characteristics and officer race (column 5). This suggests that

the effect of opposite-race officers on gun use of force is not driven by bad luck in dispatches,

lack of familiarity with the police beat, or differential response to certain types of calls that

are more prevalent in opposite-race neighborhoods.

   In summary, results in Table 5 indicate there is strong evidence that dispatching an

opposite-race police officer to the scene results in much higher probabilities that gun force

will be used. Estimates from officer fixed effect specifications indicate opposite-race officers

are at least five times as likely to use gun force. In addition, as shown in Figure 3, effects seem

largely driven by the much higher rates of gun force used by white officers in mostly-black

neighborhoods, compared to black officers.




                                                26
4.4     Results from the Second City: Whites and Hispanics


In addition to studying the effects of police officer race in a city in which citizens and officers

are mostly white or black, we also study it in the context of a second city composed primarily

of whites and Hispanics. Figure 5 shows the distribution of calls across neighborhoods

of differing race. As shown there, the vast majorities of 911 calls in this city originate

from neighborhoods in which at least half of the population is Hispanic. However, within

those neighborhoods, minority (i.e., mostly Hispanic) and white officers are dispatched to

neighborhoods that range in percent Hispanic from 50 percent to 100 percent.

   The correlation between call characteristics and officer race are shown in Appendix Table

A5, which follows the form of Table 2. None of the twelve coefficients are significant at the

10 percent level, which is consistent with our understanding of how 911 calls are dispatched.

Perhaps more meaningfully, we also graph predicted use of force against the proportion of

minorities in the Census Block Group. Specifically, we regress use of force on every call

characteristic that we observe, except for the race of the officer dispatched. Results in

Figure 6 indicate that white and minority officers were dispatched to calls that had a similar

underlying level of danger. This provides evidence that the variation in officer race across

calls is as good as random, consistent with the identifying assumption. We note also that

the scale of the x-axis in Figure 6 goes from 60 percent minority to 100 percent minority.

This reflects the fact there are relatively few mostly-white neighborhoods in this particular

city.

   Figure 7 shows actual use of force by officer race. Panel a shows the raw data, while panel

b shows residualized use of force after removing beat-by-year-by-month and beat-by-shift

fixed effects. Two main findings are evident in Figure 7. The first is that white and Hispanic


                                                27
officers do not seem to differ in their overall propensity to use force. This contrasts with

Figure 3, which showed that white officers were much more likely to use force than black

officers.

    The second finding is that as officers are dispatched to more minority/Hispanic neighbor-

hoods, white officers seem to increase their use of force more than Hispanic officers. This

is particularly evident in panel b of Figure 7, which shows residualized use of force.10 This

suggests that dispatching officers to a different-race neighborhood results in increased use of

force.

    Corresponding estimates are shown in Tables 6 and 7. Estimates in Table 6 confirm the

visual evidence in Figure 7 that there is almost no difference between the rate at which force

is used by white and Hispanic officers. Logit estimates indicate that white officers are 1.06 to

1.1 times more likely to use force than Hispanic officers; none of the logit or OLS estimates

are significant at conventional levels

    In contrast, Table 7 provides evidence that while overall rates of use of force may be similar

across officer race, that force is disproportionately used in neighborhoods of a different race.

Estimates in column 1, which include only beat-year-month and beat-shift fixed effects,

indicate that opposite-race officers are 0.08 percentage points (89 percent, OLS) and 160

percent (logit) more likely to use force. Estimates from the remaining columns in which

officer fixed effects are included are somewhat smaller; OLS estimates in columns 2 - 4

suggest 75 percent increases relative to the mean, whereas odds ratios in Panel B suggest

120 percent increases. All estimates in columns 2 - 4 are significant at the 10 percent

level. Additionally controlling for interactions of officer race and call characteristics reduces
10 The increased difference between the slopes in panels a and b is evidence that in this city, conditioning on neighborhood
  racial composition by binning neighborhoods is not sufficient to overcome non-random sorting of officers across beats.




                                                            28
estimates somewhat (column 5), and effects are clearly driven by high use of force beats

(column 6) rather than low use of force beats (column 7).

    In summary, our analysis of the second city that is populated primarily by Hispanics

and whites yields two findings. First, white and Hispanic officers use force at similar over-

all rates. Second, that overall similarity in the use of force disguises the fact that force is

disproportionately used in different-race neighborhoods. In short, we show that the rate at

which white officers use force increases by more as those officers are dispatched to more His-

panic neighborhoods, compared to Hispanic officers. As a result, we estimate that minority

citizens are roughly twice as likely to experience use of force when interacting with a white

officer, compared to if white officers were scale up use of force similarly to Hispanic officers.



5    Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we examine the impact of officer and civilian race on use of force by exploiting

as-good-as-random variation in the race of officers dispatched to more than two million 911

calls in two different cities. In doing so, we answer two questions: Do white officers use force

more often than minority officers in otherwise-similar situations? And are encounters with

an officer of a different race more likely to result in use of force?

    Results provide strong evidence that race matters. We show that white officers use force

55 to 65 percent more than black officers when responding to similar calls. Moreover, we

show that while white officers increase their use of force significantly as they are dispatched

to more black neighborhoods, black officers do so at most modestly. This is true both in the

aggregate, and when comparing within individual police officers using officer fixed effects.

As a result, we estimate that interacting with an opposite-race officer results in a 30 to


                                                29
60 percent increase in the use of force. We find somewhat larger effects in a second city

consisting primarily of whites and Hispanics. There, interacting with an officer of a different

race roughly doubles the likelihood force will be used.

   The importance of race in white versus black neighborhoods is even more pronounced

when it comes to the likelihood the officer will fire his gun. While black and white officers

use gun force at approximately the same rate when responding to calls in white neighbor-

hoods, white officers are five times as likely to fire their gun when dispatched to a call in

predominantly neighborhoods. As a result, we estimate that white officers are twice as likely

to use gun force overall, and dispatching an opposite race officer increases the probability

he will fire his gun by a factor of five. This finding contrasts significantly with previous

work by Fryer (forthcoming) and Weisburst (2019), who find black civilians are no more

likely to experience gun force. There are several explanations for the difference. The first is

that effects may be present when police respond to 911 calls, but not when police interact

with civilians in other contexts. Alternatively, results could differ due to differences in the

cities and neighborhoods studied. As shown in Figure 4, our findings on gun force are driven

by police behavior in the most black neighborhoods of the city, where a disproportionate

amount of crime occurs and 911 calls originate. In addition, the city itself has a homicide

rate that ranks in the top 20 nationwide among large cities, a set that does not include any

of the cities studied by this previous work. This suggests that just as effects are not evident

in many of the neighborhoods shown in Figure 4, effects may also not be present in the

black neighborhoods found in less dangerous cities. Finally, the contrast in findings could be

due to differences in research design. Fryer (forthcoming) uses arrests as a benchmark and

a selection-on-observables design to account for differences across interactions, while we ex-



                                              30
ploit exogenous interactions and compare changes in force across neighborhood race for the

same black and white officers. The former approach could understate effects in our context

if white officers were to arrest at higher rates in the predominantly black neighborhoods in

Figure 4, or if white officers described those encounters as more dangerous than black officers

would have described identical situations. It is also possible that a selection-on-observables

approach understates the impact of race compared to the difference-in-differences approach

used here, perhaps because the context of the encounter is described in the arrest report

after force is used.

   Overall, our findings indicate that race is an important determinant of use of force. While

it is difficult to know if these findings extend to other cities, these results do corroborate the

distrust of police among minorities in the U.S. In particular, this study shows that white

officers are more likely to use force than black officers when dispatched to otherwise-similar

situations. In addition, results demonstrate that white officers are especially more likely

to use force--including and especially gun force--in minority neighborhoods, compared to

minority officers. This suggests use of force depends in large part on whether the officer is

the same race as the civilians. In short, these findings suggest there is indeed a race problem

with respect to police use of force, and thus much work remains to develop the civilian trust

and cooperation necessary to maximize policing effectiveness.




                                               31
References

Antonovics, Kate and Knight, Brian G. A new look at racial profiling: Evidence from the

 Boston Police Department. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1):163­177, 2009.


Anwar, Shamena and Fang, Hanming. An alternative test of racial prejudice in motor vehicle

 searches: Theory and evidence. American Economic Review, 96(1):127­151, 2006.


Anwar, Shamena, Bayer, Patrick, and Hjalmarsson, Randi. The impact of jury race in

 criminal trials. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2):1017­1055, 2012.


Arnold, David, Dobbie, Will, and Yang, Crystal S. Racial bias in bail decisions. The

 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(4):1885­1932, 2018.


Ayres, Ian and Siegelman, Peter. Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new

 car. The American Economic Review, pages 304­321, 1995.


Bielen, Samantha, Marneffe, Wim, and Mocan, Naci H. Racial bias and in-group bias

 in judicial decisions: Evidence from virtual reality courtrooms. Working Paper 25355,

 National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2018.


Center, Pew Research.       The racial confidence gap in police performance, 2016.

 https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2016/09/ST_

 2016.09.29_Police-Final.pdf, Last accessed on 2019-12-2.


Chamberlain, Gary. Analysis of covariance with qualitative data. The Review of Economic

 Studies, 47(1):225­238, 1980.


Dahl, Gordon B and Moretti, Enrico. The demand for sons. The Review of Economic Studies,

 75(4):1085­1120, 2008.

                                            32
Feld, Jan, Salamanca, Nicol´
                           as, and Hamermesh, Daniel S. Endophilia or exophobia: Beyond

  discrimination. The Economic Journal, 126(594):1503­1527, 2016.


Flanagan, Francis X. Race, gender, and juries: Evidence from North Carolina. Journal of

  Law and Economics, 61(2):189­214, 2018.


Fryer, Roland G. An empirical analysis of racial differences in police use of force. Journal

  of Political Economy, 127(3):1210­1261, 2019.


Goldin, Claudia and Rouse, Cecilia. Orchestrating impartiality: The impact of "blind"

  auditions on female musicians. American Economic Review, 90(4):715­741, 2000.


Grogger, Jeffrey and Ridgeway, Greg. Testing for racial profiling in traffic stops from behind

  a veil of darkness. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101(475):878­887, 2006.


Heckman, James J. The incidental parameters problem and the problem of initial conditions

  in estimating a discrete time-discrete data stochastic process and some Monte Carlo evi-

  dence. University of Chicago Center for Mathematical studies in Business and Economics,

  1987.


Horrace, William C and Rohlin, Shawn M. How dark is dark? Bright lights, big city, racial

  profiling. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2):226­232, 2016.


Johnson, David J, Tress, Trevor, Burkel, Nicole, Taylor, Carley, and Cesario, Joseph. Officer

  characteristics and racial disparities in fatal officer-involved shootings. Proceedings of the

  National Academy of Sciences, 116(32):15877­15882, 2019.


Knox, Dean and Mummolo, Jonathan. Making inferences about racial disparities in police

  violence. Available at SSRN 3431132, 2019.


                                              33
Knox, Dean, Lowe, Will, and Mummolo, Jonathan. The bias is built in: How administrative

 records mask racially biased policing. Available at SSRN, 2019.


Lavy, Victor. Do gender stereotypes reduce girls' or boys' human capital outcomes? Evidence

 from a natural experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 92(10-11):2083­2105, 2008.


Moss-Racusin, Corinne A, Dovidio, John F, Brescoll, Victoria L, Graham, Mark J, and

 Handelsman, Jo. Science facultys subtle gender biases favor male students. Proceedings of

 the National Academy of Sciences, 109(41):16474­16479, 2012.


Neumark, David, Bank, Roy J, and Van Nort, Kyle D. Sex discrimination in restaurant

 hiring: An audit study. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3):915­941, 1996.


Parsons, Christopher A, Sulaeman, Johan, Yates, Michael C, and Hamermesh, Daniel S.

 Strike three: Discrimination, incentives, and evaluation. American Economic Review, 101

 (4):1410­35, 2011.


Persico, Nicola and Todd, Petra. Generalising the hit rates test for racial bias in law en-

 forcement, with an application to vehicle searches in Wichita. The Economic Journal, 116

 (515):F351­F367, 2006.


Price, Joseph and Wolfers, Justin. Racial discrimination among NBA referees. The Quarterly

 Journal of Economics, 125(4):1859­1887, 2010.


Sloan, CarlyWill. Racial bias by prosecutors: Evidence from random assignment. 2019.


Tuttle, Cody. Racial disparities in federal sentencing: Evidence from drug mandatory mini-

 mums. 2019.




                                            34
Voigt, Rob, Camp, Nicholas P, Prabhakaran, Vinodkumar, Hamilton, William L, Hetey, Re-

 becca C, Griffiths, Camilla M, Jurgens, David, Jurafsky, Dan, and Eberhardt, Jennifer L.

 Language from police body camera footage shows racial disparities in officer respect. Pro-

 ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(25):6521­6526, 2017.


Weisburst, Emily K. Whose help is on the way? The importance of individual police officers

 in law enforcement outcomes. 2017.


Weisburst, Emily K. Police use of force as an extension of arrests: Examining disparities

 across civilian and officer race. AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109:152­56, 2019.


West, Jeremy. Racial bias in police investigations. 2018.




                                             35
6    Tables and Figures

               Figure 1: Distribution of 911 calls across Census Block Groups
                                        (a) Entire Sample




                (b) Black Officers                              (c) White Officers




Notes: These figures report the distribution of proportion black residents for calls for service.
Each histogram uses 0.01 size bins. Panels (b) and (c) report the histogram for calls where
only black or white officers are dispatched, respectively.




                                               36
                   Figure 2: Predicted Outcomes for Black and White Officers

                                           (a) Predicted Use of Force




                                        (b) Predicted Gun Use of Force




Notes: In Panels (a) and (b), we predict probability of use of force or gun use of force using all observable
call characteristics for each call for service. Specifically, we predict (after removing beat-year-week-shift fixed
effects) using proportion black civilians, unemployment, per capita income, proportion high school drop outs,
call priority, latitude, longitude, and time between call and dispatch, as well as fixed effects for day of the
week, call description, home beat, and call taker using a linear probability model. Observations are grouped
so that each point includes an equal number of calls. The fitted line is a linear fit across all predicted use of
force rates.                                              37
                    Figure 3: Actual Use of Force for Black and White Officers

                                               (a) Use of Force




                                       (b) Residualized Use of Force




Notes: In Panel (a) we plot use of force. In Panel (b) we plot residualized (beat-year-week-shift fixed effects
are removed) use of force. The fitted line is a linear fit across all use of force rates. Observations are grouped
so that each point includes an equal number of calls.


                                                       38
                Figure 4: Actual Gun Use of Force for Black and White Officers

                                          (a) Gun Use of Force




                                  (b) Residualized Gun Use of Force




Notes: In Panel (a) we plot gun use of force. In Panel (b) we plot residualized (beat-year-week-shift
fixed effects are removed) gun use of force. The fitted line is a linear fit across all gun use of force rates.
Observations are grouped so that each point includes an equal number of calls.


                                                      39
       Figure 5: Second City Distribution of 911 calls across Census Block Groups




                                       (a) Entire Sample




          (b) Minority Officers Only                       (c) White Officers Only

Notes: These figures report the distribution of proportion minority civilians for calls for
service. Each histogram uses 0.01 size bins. Panels (b) and (c) report the histogram for calls
where only minority or white officers are dispatched, respectively. 97% of minority officers
are Hispanic. 96% of minority civilians are Hispanic.




                                              40
      Figure 6: Second City Predicted Use of Force for Minority and White Officers




Notes: Here we predict probability of use of force using all observable call characteristics
for each call for service. Specifically, we predict (after removing beat-year-month and beat-
shift) using proportion minority civilians, call priority, latitude, longitude, per capital income,
unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school degree, and dispatch time, as
well as fixed effects for day of the week, call description, officer's home beat and call source.
Observations are grouped so that each point includes an equal number of calls. The fitted
line is a linear fit across all predicted use of force rates. 97% of minority officers are Hispanic.
96% of minority civilians are Hispanic.




                                                41
       Figure 7: Second City Actual Use of Force for Minority and White Officers

                                       (a) Use of Force




                                (b) Residualized Use of Force




Notes: Here we plot the average use of force for 10 bins in panel (a) or residualized (beat-
year-month, and beat-shift are removed) use of force in panel (b). The fitted line is a linear
fit across all use of force rates. Observations are grouped so that each point includes an
equal number of calls. 97% of minority officers are Hispanic. 96% of minority civilians are
Hispanic.
                                              42
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                 (1)                      (2)                    (3)
                                            Entire Sample            Black Officers         White Officers
 Outcomes
 Use of Force                                   0.00109                0.000780                 0.00128

 Gun Use of Force                              0.0000762               0.0000426               0.0000969

 Call Characteristics
 Proportion Black Civilians                      0.586                   0.603                   0.575
                                                (0.333)                 (0.333)                 (0.333)

 Per Capita Income                              23280.1                 22796.2                 23577.3
                                               (14849.2)               (14559.2)               (15016.8)

 Proportion Unemployed                           0.139                   0.143                   0.137
                                                (0.111)                 (0.112)                 (0.110)

 Proportion Less than HS Degree                  0.185                   0.187                   0.184
                                                (0.118)                 (0.117)                 (0.118)

 Black Officer                                   0.380                     1                       0

 Female Officer                                  0.160                   0.189                   0.142

 Years of Experience                             10.11                   10.52                   9.858
                                                (7.980)                 (7.969)                 (7.976)

 Priority of Call                                2.838                   2.838                   2.838
                                                (0.757)                 (0.754)                 (0.758)

 Call from Home Beat                             0.180                   0.183                   0.177

 Time Between Call and Dispatch                  6.479                   6.509                   6.460
                                                (63.24)                 (23.06)                 (78.28)

 X Coordinate                                    87.31                   87.31                   87.30
                                                (0.808)                 (0.788)                 (0.820)

 Y Coordinate                                    111.6                   111.7                   111.6
                                                (1.685)                 (1.672)                 (1.691)
 Observations                                   1233139                 469170                  763969
 Standard deviations in parentheses



Notes: This table reports mean, standard deviation, and number of observations for each variable. Use of
force is measured at the call level and takes on a value of one if the call ended in a use of force. The same
is true for gun use of force. Priority, latitude, and longitude have been altered (multiplied by a random
number) to protect the identity of our city.




                                                     43
                                        Table 2: Correlation Between Call Characteristics and Officer Race
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)           (5)              (6)                 (7)          (8)           (9)
                         Proportion Black    Per Capita    Proportion      Proportion Less       Call     Time Between Call       Call from         X             Y
                             Civilians        Income       Unemployed      than HS Degree      Priority     and Dispatch         Home Beat     Coordinate    Coordinate
      White Officer          -0.00128          52.40         -0.000247         -0.000208       -0.0105          -0.108             -0.00582       758.7         339.2
                            (0.000662)        (43.57)       (0.000246)        (0.000254)      (0.00857)        (0.144)            (0.00374)     (1103.3)       (1157.6)
      Observations            1233139         1233139         1233139           1233139        1233139        1233139              1233139      1233139        1233139




44
      Outcome Mean             0.586          23281.7          0.139             0.185          2.839           6.490                0.180     87304866.5    202240062.9
      Standard errors in parentheses
       p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01


     Notes: This table reports the coefficient on W hite Of f icer from separate regressions of call characteristics on a binary variable representing officer
     race. Each column includes beat-year-week-shift fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the officer level. Priority, latitude, and longitude have
     been altered (multiplied by a random number) to protect the identity of our city.
                                      Table 3: The Effect of Police Officer Race on Use of Force and Gun Use of Force
                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)
                                              Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force   Gun Use of Force   Gun Use of Force   Gun Use of Force   Gun Use of Force
                Panel A: OLS
                White Officer                 0.000507       0.000429       0.000437       0.000434         0.0000518          0.0000463          0.0000666           0.0000157
                                              (0.0000819)    (0.0000792)     (0.000111)    (0.0000881)      (0.0000219)        (0.0000229)        (0.0000327)        (0.0000182)
                Observations                    1233139        1233139         722901         510238          1233139            1233139             722901             510238
                Outcome Mean                     0.00106        0.00106        0.00127       0.000765        0.0000710          0.0000710          0.0000947          0.0000375

                Beat-year-week-shift FE            Y              Y              Y              Y                Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
                Officer and Call Controls          -              Y              Y              Y                -                  Y                  Y                  Y
                High Use of Force Beats            -              -              Y              -                -                  -                  Y                  -
                Low Use of Force Beats             -              -              -              Y                -                  -                  -                  Y

                Panel B: Logit (Odds Ratio)
                White Officer                  1.659          1.647          1.534          1.954            2.647               2.364              2.501                1.868
                                                (0.139)        (0.135)        (0.145)        (0.263)          (0.882)             (0.799)            (0.905)            (1.095)
                Observations                   1215884        1091746         615692         417725           734785              397598             253021              48084




45
                Outcome Mean                    0.00107        0.00119        0.00148       0.000929         0.000118            0.000219           0.000269           0.000395

                Beat FE                            Y              Y              Y              Y                Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
                Additional Controls                -              Y              Y              Y                -                  Y                  Y                  Y
                High Use of Force Beats            -              -              Y              -                -                  -                  Y                  -
                Low Use of Force Beats             -              -              -              Y                -                  -                  -                  Y

                Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in parentheses
                 p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01
     Notes: This table reports the coefficient on W hite Of f icer from the regression of U se of F orce or Gun U se of F orce on an indicator for officer
     race. For OLS specifications, column 2 adds controls for officer gender and years of experience, priority of call, latitude, longitude, time between call
     and dispatch, per capital income, unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for day of the week, call
     description, and call taker. For Logit specifications, column 2 adds controls for priority of call, per capita income, unemployment, and proportion
     with less than a high school degree. Robust standard errors are clustered at the officer level.
                                                       Table 4: The Effect of Opposite Race Police Officers on Use of Force
                                                                  (1)                (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                              Use of Force       Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force    Use of Force    Use of Force     Use of Force
                    Panel A: OLS
                    Opposite Race Officer
                    (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)          0.000566          0.000613       0.000632       0.000618          0.000405        0.00100         0.0000753
                                                                (0.000194)       (0.000277)     (0.000275)     (0.000275)       (0.000303)      (0.000417)       (0.000313)
                    Observations                                 1233139          1233139        1233139        1233139          1233139          722901           510238
                    Outcome Mean                                 0.00106           0.00106        0.00106        0.00106          0.00106         0.00127         0.000765

                    Beat-year-week-shift FE                          Y                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Officer & Civilian Race Controls                 Y                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Officer FE                                       -                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Officer and Call Controls                        -                -              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Home Beat Controls                               -                -              -              Y               -                -                -
                    Interactions                                     -                -              -              -               Y                -                -
                    High Use of Force Beats                          -                -              -              -               -                Y                -
                    Low Use of Force Beats                           -                -              -              -               -                -                Y




        46
                    Panel B: Logit (Odds Ratio)
                    Opposite Race Officer
                    (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)             1.300             1.462          1.381            -                -             1.818           1.164
                                                                 (0.273)           (0.419)        (0.389)           -                -            (0.684)         (0.573)
                    Observations                                 1215884           812760         812760            -                -            429337          195604
                    Outcome Mean                                 0.00107           0.00160        0.00160           -                -            0.00212         0.00197

                    Beat FE                                          Y                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Officer & Civilian Race Controls                 Y                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Officer FE                                       -                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Additional Controls                              -                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y
                    Home Beat Controls                               -                -              -              Y               -                -                -
                    Interactions                                     -                -              -              -               Y                -                -
                    High Use of Force Beats                          -                -              -              -               -                Y                -
                    Low Use of Force Beats                           -                -              -              -               -                -                Y
                    Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in parentheses
                     p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01

 Notes: This table reports the coefficient on the interaction of W hite Of f icer and P roportion Black Civilian from the regression of U se of F orce on indicators for officer race, proportion
citizen black, and the interaction term. For OLS specifications, column 3 adds controls for priority of call, latitude, longitude, time between call and dispatch, per capital income, unemployment,
and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for day of the week, call description, and call taker. For Logit specifications, column 3 controls for priority, per
capita income, unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school degree. Column 4 includes controls for home beat and the interaction of home beat and officer race. Column 5 adds
interactions for every call characteristic added in column 2 interacted with officer race. Robust standard errors are clustered at the officer level.
                                                            Table 5: The Effect of Opposite Race Police Officers on Gun Use of Force
                                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                       Gun            Gun            Gun            Gun              Gun              Gun              Gun
                                                                   Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force     Use of Force     Use of Force     Use of Force
                    Panel A: OLS
                    Opposite Race Officer
                    (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)               0.000171      0.000379       0.000299        0.000369         0.000368         0.000414         0.000141
                                                                    (0.0000601)    (0.000133)     (0.000133)      (0.000133)       (0.000105)       (0.000148)     (0.0000714)
                    Observations                                      1233139       1233139        1233139         1233139          1233139           722901          510238
                    Outcome Mean                                     0.0000710     0.0000710      0.0000710       0.0000710        0.0000710        0.0000947       0.0000375

                    Beat-year-week-shift FE                             Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Officer & Civilian Race Controls                    Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Officer FE                                          -              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Officer and Call Controls                           -              -              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Home Beat Controls                                  -              -              -               Y                -                -                -
                    Interactions                                        -              -              -               -                Y                -                -
                    High Use of Force Beats                             -              -              -               -                -                Y                -
                    Low Use of Force Beats                              -              -              -               -                -                -                Y




        47
                    Panel B: Logit (Odds Ratio)
                    Opposite Race Officer
                    (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)                 4.123         28.09           16.53              -                -             33.56            27.42
                                                                      (3.175)       (46.33)        (26.27)             -                -            (61.67)          (74.81)
                    Observations                                      734785         43698          43698              -                -             25598            5460
                    Outcome Mean                                     0.000118       0.00199        0.00199             -                -            0.00266          0.00348

                    Beat FE                                             Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Officer & Civilian Race Controls                    Y              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Officer FE                                          -              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Additional Controls                                 -              Y              Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
                    Home Beat Controls                                  -              -              -               Y                -                -                -
                    Interactions                                        -              -              -               -                Y                -                -
                    High Use of Force Beats                             -              -              -               -                -                Y                -
                    Low Use of Force Beats                              -              -              -               -                -                -                Y
                    Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in parentheses
                       p < .1,      p < .05,      p < .01
 Notes: This table reports the coefficient on the interaction of W hite Of f icer and P roportion Black Civilian from the regression of Gun U se of F orce on indicators for officer race, proportion
citizen black, and the interaction term. For OLS specifications, column 3 adds controls for priority of call, latitude, longitude, time between call and dispatch, per capital income, unemployment,
and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for day of the week, call description, and call taker. For Logit specifications, column 3 controls for priority, per capita
income, unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school degree. Column 4 includes controls for an officer's home beat and the interaction of home beat and officer race. Column 5
adds interactions for every call characteristic added in column 3 interacted with officer race. Robust standard errors are clustered at the officer level.
      Table 6: Second City The Effect of Police Officer Race on Use of Force
                                              (1)                 (2)            (3)            (4)
                                          Use of Force        Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force
 Panel A: OLS
 White Officer                              0.0000956          0.0000870      0.000175      -0.00000556
                                           (0.0000824)        (0.0000779)    (0.000145)     (0.0000451)
 Observations                                 938562             938562        469653          468909
 Outcome Mean                                0.000940           0.000940       0.00180       0.0000958
 Beat-year-month, Beat-shift FE                 Y                  Y              Y              Y
 Officer and Call Controls                       -                 Y              Y              Y
 High Use of Force Beats                         -                  -             Y               -
 Low Use of Force Beats                          -                  -             -              Y

 Panel B: Logit (Odds Ratio)
 White Officer                                 1.102              1.064          1.090         0.819
                                             (0.0783)           (0.0740)       (0.0742)       (0.416)
 Observations                                 937796             937796         469653        316901
 Outcome Mean                                0.00299            0.00299        0.00592       0.0000947
 Beat FE                                         Y                  Y              Y             Y
 Additional Controls                             Y                  Y              Y             Y
 High Use of Force Beats                         -                  -              Y             -
 Low Use of Force Beats                          -                  -              -             Y
 Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in parentheses
  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01

Notes: This table reports the coefficient on W hite Of f icer from the regression of
U se of F orce on an indicator for officer race. Each column includes beat-year-
month and beat-shift fixed effects. Column 2 includes controls for officer gender, hire
date, priority of call, home beat, latitude, longitude, unemployment rate, per capita
income, and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for
day of the week, multi-agency calls, call hour, call source and call description for OLS
specifications. For Logit specifications, column 2 includes controls for officer gender,
hire date, priority of call, home beat, latitude, longitude, unemployment rate, per
capita income, and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed
effects for day of the week. Columns 3 and 4 only include calls from high use of force
beats and low use of force beats, respectively. Robust standard errors are clustered
at the officer level.




                                                        48
                                             Table 7: Second City The Effect of Different Race Police Officers on Use of Force
                                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)
                                                                 Use of Force   Use of Force     Use of Force     Use of Force     Use of Force     Use of Force    Use of Force
                  Panel A: OLS
                  Opposite Race Officer
                  (White Officer*Pr Minority Civilians)           0.000840       0.000694         0.000691         0.000689          0.000349         0.00145        -0.0000819
                                                                  (0.000393)     (0.000398)       (0.000544)       (0.000394)       (0.000397)       (0.000870)      (0.000215)
                  Observations                                      938562         938562           938562           938562           938562           469653           468909
                  Outcome Mean                                     0.000940       0.000940         0.000940         0.000940         0.000940         0.00180         0.0000958

                  Beat-year-month, Beat-shift FE                       Y              Y                Y                Y                Y                Y               Y
                  Officer & Civilian Race Controls                     Y              Y                Y                Y                Y                Y               Y
                  Officer FE                                           -              Y                Y                Y                Y                Y               Y
                  Officer and Call Controls                            -              -                Y                Y                Y                Y               Y
                  Home Beat Controls                                   -              -                -                Y                -                -               -
                  Interactions                                         -              -                -                -                Y                -               -
                  High Use of Force Beats                              -              -                -                -                -                Y               -
                  Low Use of Force Beats                               -              -                -                -                -                0               Y




        49
                  Panel B: Logit (Odds Ratio)
                  Opposite Race Officer
                  (White Officer*Pr Minority Civilians)             2.628           2.241            2.222              -                -             1.910            0.128
                                                                    ( 1.089)       (0.969)          (0.988)             -                -            (0.865)          (0.365)
                  Observations                                       937796        863920           863920              -                -            431459            22947
                  Outcome Mean                                        0.003        0.00325          0.00325             -                -            0.00644          0.00131
                  Beat FE                                               Y             Y                Y                Y                Y               Y                Y
                  Officer & Civilian Race Controls                      Y             Y                Y                Y                Y               Y                Y
                  Officer FE                                            -             Y                Y                Y                Y               Y                Y
                  Additional Controls                                   -              -               Y                Y                Y               Y                Y
                  Home Beat Controls                                    -              -                -               Y                -               -                -
                  Interactions                                          -              -                -               -                Y               -                -
                  High Use of Force Beats                               -              -                -               -                -               Y                -
                  Low Use of Force Beats                                -              -                -               -                -               0                Y
                  Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in parentheses
                   p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01
Notes: This table reports the coefficient on the interaction of W hite Of f icer and P roportion M inority Civilians from the regression of U se of F orce on indicators for officer race, proportion
citizen black, and the interaction term. For OLS specifications, column 3 includes controls for priority of call, latitude, longitude, unemployment rate, per capita income, and proportion with
less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for day of the week, multi-agency calls, call hour, call source and call description. For Logit specifications, column 3 includes controls for
priority of call, home beat, latitude, longitude, unemployment rate, per capita income, and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for day of the week. Column 4
adds controls for an officer's home beat and home beat interacted with officer race. Column 5 adds interactions for every call characteristic added in column 2 interacted with officer race. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the officer level.
    tablesection figuresection




A      Appendix (For online publication)

                  Figure A.8: Predicted Outcomes for Black and White Officers

    (a) Predicted UOF in High UOF Beats             (b) Predicted UOF in Low UOF Beats




                             (c) Predicted Gun UOF in High UOF Beats




Notes: In Panels (a) and (b), we predict probability of use of force or gun use of force using
all observable call characteristics for each call for service. Specifically, we predict (after
removing beat-year-week-shift and individual officer fixed effects) using proportion black
civilians, call priority, latitude, longitude, unemployment, proportion with less than a high
school degree, home beat,per capita income, and time between call and dispatch, as well as
fixed effects for day of the week, call description, and call taker using a linear probability
model. Observations are grouped so that each point includes an equal number of calls. The
fitted line is a linear fit across all predicted use of force rates. High Use of Force Beats are
police beats with above average use of force. Low Use of Force Beats are police beats with
below average use of force.




                                               50
           Figure A.9: Actual Outcomes for Black and White Officers (Subgroup)

         (a) Use of Force in High UOF Beats            (b) Residualized Use of Force in High UOF Beats




         (c) Use of Force in Low UOF Beats             (d) Residualized Use of Force in Low UOF Beats




       (e) Gun Use of Force in High UOF Beats        (f) Residualized Gun Use of Force in High UOF Beats




Notes: In panels (a), (c), and (e) we plot use of force or gun use of force. Panels (b), (d), and
(e) show residualized (removing beat-year-week-shift fixed effects) use of force or gun use of
force. The fitted line is a linear fit across all use of force rates. Observations are grouped so
that each point includes an equal number of calls.




                                                51
                          Table 8: Individual Officer Level Results­ The Effect of Opposite Race Police Officers on Use of Force
                                                              (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)
                                                          Use of Force      Use of Force       Use of Force      Use of Force       Use of Force      Use of Force       Use of Force
             Panel A: OLS
             Opposite Race Officer
             (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)            0.000543           0.000579           0.000605            0.000365         0.000592          0.000973           0.0000336
                                                           (0.000193)        (0.000276)         (0.000274)         (0.000274)        (0.000300)        (0.000413)         (0.000312)
             Observations                                   1233139           1233139            1233139            1233139           1233139            722901             510238
             Outcome Mean                                   0.00104            0.00104            0.00104            0.00104           0.00104           0.00125           0.000755

             Beat FE                                            Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Officer & Civilian Race Controls                   Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Officer FE                                         -                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Call Controls                                      -                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Home Beat Controls                                 -                  -                 -                  Y                 -                  -                 -
             Interactions                                       -                  -                 -                  -                 Y                  -                 -
             High Use of Force Beats                            -                  -                 -                  -                 -                  Y                 -
             Low Use of Force Beats                             -                  -                 -                  -                 -                  -                 Y




52
             Panel B: Logit (Odds Ratio)
             Opposite Race Officer
             (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)                1.310             1.500              1.402                -                  -              1.875              1.194
                                                             (0.276)           (0.435)            (0.398)               -                  -             (0.708)            (0.590)
             Observations                                    1223413           814384             814384                -                  -             427656             198366
             Outcome Mean                                    0.00106           0.00160            0.00160               -                  -             0.00213            0.00195

             Beat FE                                            Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Officer & Civilian Race Controls                   Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Officer FE                                         -                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Call Controls                                      -                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
             Home Beat Controls                                 -                  -                 -                  Y                 -                  -                 -
             Interactions                                       -                  -                 -                  -                 Y                  -                 -
             High Use of Force Beats                            -                  -                 -                  -                 -                  Y                 -
             Low Use of Force Beats                             -                  -                 -                  -                 -                  -                 Y
             Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in parentheses
              p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01

Notes: We define use of force at the individual officer level (as opposed to call level). This table reports the coefficient on the interaction of W hite Of f icer and P roportion Black Civilian
from the regression of U se of F orce on indicators for officer race, proportion citizen black, and the interaction term. For OLS specifications, column 3 adds controls for priority of call, latitude,
longitude, time between call and dispatch, per capital income, unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for day of the week, call description,
and call taker. For Logit specifications, column 3 controls for priority, per capita income, unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school degree. Column 4 includes controls for
home beat and the interaction of home beat and officer race. Column 5 adds interactions for every call characteristic added in column 2 interacted with officer race. Robust standard errors are
clustered at the officer level.
                  Table 9: Individual Officer Level Results ­ The Effect of Opposite Race Police Officers on Gun Use of Force
                                                           (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)               (7)
                                                           Gun               Gun                Gun                Gun                Gun                Gun               Gun
                                                       Use of Force      Use of Force       Use of Force       Use of Force       Use of Force       Use of Force      Use of Force
         Panel A: OLS
         Opposite Race Officer
         (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)             0.000161           0.000368           0.000361           0.000360          0.000286           0.000399            0.000129
                                                       (0.0000586)         (0.000132)         (0.000133)         (0.000133)        (0.000103)         (0.000148)        (0.0000702)
         Observations                                    1233139            1233139            1233139            1233139           1233139             722901             510238
         Outcome Mean                                   0.0000681          0.0000681          0.0000681          0.0000681         0.0000681          0.0000905          0.0000365

         Beat-year-week-shift FE                             Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Officer & Civilian Race Controls                    Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Officer FE                                          -                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Call Controls                                       -                  -                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Home Beat Controls                                  -                  -                  -                  Y                  -                 -                  -
         Interactions                                        -                  -                  -                  -                  Y                 -                  -
         High Use of Force Beats                             -                  -                  -                  -                  -                 Y                  -
         Low Use of Force Beats                              -                  -                  -                  -                  -                 -                  Y




53
         Panel B: Logit (Odds Ratio)
         Opposite Race Officer
         (White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)                3.903               23.57             13.51                 -                  -               24.81              27.31
                                                          (3.048)            (38.04)           (21.33)                -                  -              (44.92)            (74.48)
         Observations                                     739115              43296             43296                 -                  -               25228              5486
         Outcome Mean                                    0.000118            0.00201           0.00201                -                  -              0.00270            0.00346

         Beat FE                                             Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Officer & Civilian Race Controls                    Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Officer FE                                          -                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Call Controls                                       -                  Y                  Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                  Y
         Home Beat Controls                                  -                  -                  -                  Y                  -                 -                  -
         Interactions                                        -                  -                  -                  -                  Y                 -                  -
         High Use of Force Beats                             -                  -                  -                  -                  -                 Y                  -
         Low Use of Force Beats                              -                  -                  -                  -                  -                 -                  Y
         Exponentiated coefficients; Standard errors in parentheses
            p < .1,      p < .05,      p < .01
     Notes: We define use of force at the individual officer level (as opposed to call level). This table reports the coefficient on the interaction of W hite Of f icer and P roportion Black
     Civilian from the regression of Gun U se of F orce on indicators for officer race, proportion citizen black, and the interaction term. For OLS specifications, column 3 adds controls for
     priority of call, latitude, longitude, time between call and dispatch, per capital income, unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school degree, as well as fixed effects for
     day of the week, call description, and call taker. For Logit specifications, column 3 controls for priority, per capita income, unemployment, and proportion with less than a high school
     degree. Column 4 includes controls for an officer's home beat and the interaction of home beat and officer race. Column 5 adds interactions for every call characteristic added in column
     3 interacted with officer race. Robust standard errors are clustered at the officer level.
                                  Table 10: Alternative Specifications
                                                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                           Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force
 Panel A: Use of Force
 Opposite Race Officer(White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)    0.000613
                                                           (0.000277)

 Opposite Race Officer (Black Officer*Pr White Civilian)                  0.000700
                                                                          (0.000297)

 Same Race Officer (Black Officer*Pr Black Civilian)                                     -0.000613
                                                                                          (0.000277)

 Same Race Officer (White Officer*Pr White Civilian)                                                    -0.000700
                                                                                                         (0.000297)
 Observations                                                1233139        1233139        1233139        1233139
 Outcome Mean                                                0.00106        0.00106        0.00106         0.00106
                                                               Gun            Gun            Gun             Gun
                                                           Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force   Use of Force
 Panel B: Gun Use of Force
 Opposite Race Officer(White Officer*Pr Black Civilian)    0.000379
                                                           (0.000133)

 Opposite Race Officer (Black Officer*Pr White Civilian)                  0.000383
                                                                           (0.000141)

 Same Race Officer (Black Officer*Pr Black Civilian)                                     -0.000379
                                                                                          (0.000133)

 Same Race Officer (White Officer*Pr White Civilian)                                                    -0.000383
                                                                                                         (0.000141)
 Observations                                                1233139        1233139        1233139        1233139
 Outcome Mean                                               0.0000710      0.0000710      0.0000710      0.0000710
 Standard errors in parentheses
  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01


Notes: This table reports the coefficient for each possible interaction term. Every specifi-
cation includes the relevant officer and civilian race controls (For example, in the second
row the regression includes a control for proportion white civilians). Each column represents
a separate regression. All specifications include beat-year-week-shift and individual officer
fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the officer level.




                                                   54
                                          Table 11: Second City Summary Statistics
                                                               (1)                       (2)                        (3)
                                                          Entire Sample            Minority Officers           White Officers
             Outcomes
             Use of Force                                    0.00299                    0.00297                   0.00311

             Call Characteristics
             Proportion Minority Civilian                      0.849                     0.852                      0.831
                                                              (0.125)                   (0.124)                    (0.130)



             Per Capita Income                               42097.8                    41932.9                   43079.2
                                                            (23962.3)                  (23985.9)                 (23797.7)

             Proportion Unemployed                            0.0834                    0.0835                     0.0824
                                                             (0.0623)                  (0.0625)                   (0.0610)

             Proportion Less than HS Degree                    0.251                     0.254                      0.235
                                                              (0.172)                   (0.173)                    (0.163)

             Minority Officer                                  0.856                       1                          0

             Hispanic Officer                                  0.829                     0.969                        0

             Black Officer                                    0.0268                    0.0313                        0

             Longitude                                         -211.3                    -211.3                     -211.3
                                                              (0.185)                   (0.186)                    (0.182)

             Latitude                                         31.07                     31.07                      31.08
                                                             (0.0583)                  (0.0575)                   (0.0609)

             Hour Dispatched                                   12.93                     12.98                      12.62
                                                              (7.386)                   (7.311)                    (7.810)

             Priority                                          5.338                     5.340                      5.329
                                                              (1.896)                   (1.893)                    (1.914)

             Multi-Agency Call                                 0.852                     0.852                      0.854
             Observations                                     938562                    803494                     135068
             Standard deviations in parentheses
Notes: This table reports mean, standard deviation, and number of observations for each variable. Use of force is measured at the call level
and takes on a value of one if the call ended in a use of force. Priority, latitude and longitude have been altered (multiplied by a random
number) to protect the identity of our city. Multi-Agency takes on a value of one if other agencies (e.g. Fire Department) were dispatched
to a call. Over 80% of Minorities are Hispanic.




                                                                       55
                               Table 12: Second City Correlation Between Call Characteristics and Officer Race
                          (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)         (8)        (9)          (10)           (11)         (12)
                      Proportion      Proportion   Proportion     Per Capita    Proportion   Proportion Less     Home           X          Y          Time            Call        Multi
                       Minority        Hispanic       Black         Income      Unemployed   than HS Degree       Beat       Coord.     Coord.     Dispatched      Priority      Agency
     White Officer       0.733           1.493       -0.766        -151324.9       -0.355         0.976           36.85      -0.353     -0.219       -272.8         -26.19       -10.82
                       (28515.9)       (33205.0)    (9448.9)    (8.64108e+09)    (31280.1)      (87793.4)      (318525.4)   (9156.3)   (3257.2)   (15754781.2)   (3763753.1)   (666544.6)
     Observations       938562          938562       938562         938562        938562         938562          938562      938562     938562       938562        938562        938562
     Outcome Mean        0.848           0.812       0.0365         42165.7       0.0836          0.251          0.0268      -211.3      31.07        13.09          5.575        1.112




56
     Standard errors in parentheses
      p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01

                               Notes: This table reports the coefficient on W hite Of f icer from separate regressions
                               of call characteristics on a binary variable representing officer race. Each column
                               includes beat-year-month and beat-shift fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
                               at the officer level. Priority, latitude, and longitude have been altered (multiplied by
                               a random number) to protect the identity of our city.
