                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ROLE OF HETEROGENEOUS RISK PREFERENCES, DISCOUNT RATES,
           AND EARNINGS EXPECTATIONS IN COLLEGE MAJOR CHOICE

                                        Arpita Patnaik
                                       Joanna Venator
                                      Matthew Wiswall
                                         Basit Zafar

                                     Working Paper 26785
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26785


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




We thank the NYU Center for Experimental Social Sciences (CESS) for providing assistance in
conducting the information survey and experiment, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
for funding the study. The paper has benefited from the comments of the editor, Adeline
Delavande, and two anonymous referees. We also thank participants in the Behavioral Research
in Economics Workshop (BREW) India. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Arpita Patnaik, Joanna Venator, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Heterogeneous Risk Preferences, Discount Rates, and Earnings Expectations
in College Major Choice
Arpita Patnaik, Joanna Venator, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 26785
February 2020
JEL No. I23,J16,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we estimate a rich model of college major choice using a panel of experimentally-
derived data. Our estimation strategy combines two types of data: data on self-reported beliefs
about future earnings from potential human capital decisions and survey-based measures of risk
and time preferences. We show how to use these data to identify a general life-cycle model,
allowing for rich patterns of heterogeneous beliefs and preferences. Our data allow us to separate
perceptions about the degree of risk or perceptions about the current versus future payoffs for a
choice from the individual's preference for risk and patience. Comparing our estimates of the
general model to estimates of models which ignore heterogeneity in risk and time preferences, we
find that these restricted models are likely to overstate the importance of earnings to major
choice. Additionally, we show that while men are less risk averse and patient than women, gender
differences in expectations about own-earnings, risk aversion, and patience cannot explain gender
gaps in major choice.

Arpita Patnaik                                  Matthew Wiswall
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison                 University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive                          1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706                               Madison, WI 53706
patnaik3@wisc.edu                               and NBER
                                                matt.wiswall@gmail.com
Joanna Venator
University of Wisconsin­Madison                 Basit Zafar
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
1180 Observatory Drive                          Arizona State University
Madison, WI 53706-1393                          P.O. Box 879801
venator@wisc.edu                                Tempe, AZ 85287
                                                and NBER
                                                basitak@gmail.com
1    Introduction

Several decades of research has emphasized the importance of earnings risk and life-cycle earnings
growth to understanding occupation and human capital investment choices. One strand of this past
work suggests that lifetime earnings risk varies significantly across education levels, college majors,
and occupations, and that these differences are an important driver of choices (Altonji, 1993; Flyer,
1997; Saks and Shore, 2005; Nielsen and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2006; Bonin et al., 2007; De Paola
and Gioia, 2012; Belzil and Leonardi, 2013; Fouarge et al., 2014; Barth et al., 2017; Dillon, 2018).
Another strand of this literature emphasizes the differences in earnings growth across occupations
and the delays and concomitant patience required to make human capital investments (Bonin et al.,
2007; Oreopoulos, 2007; Cadena and Keys, 2015; Levitt et al., 2016). The standard assumption
running through this past work is that individuals, conditional on certain observables, have the
same beliefs about the characteristics of the choices they face. A central challenge in this research
is then separately identifying beliefs from preferences: do the observed choices reflect a different
belief about the risk or growth in earnings across these occupation and education choices, or a
different tolerance for risk or level of patience?
    We address this identification challenge by using a unique dataset with three key features: a)
individual beliefs about the level of earnings, earnings growth, and earnings uncertainty for a set
of possible college major choices, b) individual measures of risk tolerance and patience, and c) an
experimental component allowing us to robustly identify the importance of earnings considerations
separate from other aspects of choice. We use these various components of the data to estimate
a general life-cycle model of college major choice, allowing for individual-level heterogeneity in
preferences and beliefs. Using our estimated model, we can then evaluate the relative importance
of each model feature.
    We explore the importance of risk aversion, impatience, and earnings expectations in the choice
of college major, using a survey and experimental design. We collect rich data from undergraduate
college students at New York University (NYU), where in successive rounds respondents were
asked their self beliefs about their own expected future earnings and other major-specific aspects
were they to major in different majors, their beliefs about the population distribution of these
outcomes, and the subjective belief that they will graduate with each major. In addition, we
use a set of hypothetical survey questions to elicit students' preferences over risk and self-control
based on measures developed by Eckel and Grossman (2002) and Coller and Williams (1999),



                                                     1
respectively. After the initial round in which the baseline beliefs and preferences are elicited,
we provide students with accurate information on population characteristics of the major and
observe how this new information causes respondents to update their self beliefs and their subjective
probabilities of graduating with each particular major. This experimental design creates panel data
for major choices, which is otherwise largely a one-time decision. We can then use the changes in
subjective expectations about major choice and earnings characteristics of majors combined with
the preference parameters elicited in the survey, to identify a structural model of major choice.
       Consistent with most prior literature, we find that women, on average, are more risk averse
and patient than men. The average annual discount factor in our sample for women is 0.88, versus
0.86 for men, with the difference statistically significant (p-value of equality = 0.008). Likewise,
the average coefficient of relative risk aversion for women is 1.82 versus 1.38 for men (p-value of
equality = 0.0001). There is also substantial heterogeneity within gender. For example, the 10th-
90th percentile range of the discount factor distribution is 0.73-0.97 for women and 0.70-0.96 for
men.
       Our methodological innovation is to then use these individual-specific measures on time and risk
preferences in a life-cycle model of college major choice, while imposing limited structure on the
choice problem. In much of the literature on dynamic discrete choice, individual-specific measures
of time discounting and risk preferences are not available and are difficult to separately identify from
other modeling features using observed choices. For example, Magnac and Thesmar (2002) show
that the discount factor is not identified from choice data without further restrictions on functional
form. Importantly, we find that models which assume standard, homogeneous levels of discounting
and risk aversion are likely to overestimate how sensitive students' college major choices are to
expected earnings. It is, in particular, the heterogeneity in risk preferences that seems to matter.
However, gender differences in risk preferences and patience cannot explain the pattern of women
being less likely to select into high-paying, but risky majors such as business/economics.1 Instead,
tastes over major characteristics other than own-earnings explain most of the gender differences in
major choice.
       Historically, research on college major choice typically allows for limited degrees of individual
   1
       There are well-documented differences in risk aversion and patience across gender (see Niederle (2014) for a
review). Men are, on average, both less risk averse and less patient, prompting the hypothesis that some of the
gender differences we see in labor market outcomes may stem from differences in these preferences. For example,
women's lower preference for risk may result in them selecting out of high-risk, high-return majors and occupations,
such as finance, which may contribute to gender differences in lifetime earnings.


                                                          2
heterogeneity in beliefs about future earnings, assumes that expectations are either rational or
myopic, and then uses observed choices and earnings to identify parameters (Freeman, 1971; Siow,
1984; Zarkin, 1985; Bamberger, 1988; Berger, 1988; Flyer, 1997; Eide and Waehrer, 1998; Mont-
marquette et al., 2002; Arcidiacono, 2004; Beffy et al., 2012; Brodaty et al., 2014). This approach
is limited: observed choices can be consistent with many different combinations of expectations
and preferences (Manski, 1993).
   The experimental design of this study, combined with data on probabilistic choices and sub-
jective beliefs about major choice and earnings, allows us to separately identify the unobserved
tastes for each major from individual heterogeneity in beliefs about the earnings distribution asso-
ciated with a major under weaker modeling restrictions than is possible with cross-sectional data.
Additionally, we elicit beliefs about future earnings at multiple points in time over the life-cycle,
which allows us estimate a life-cycle utility model without making strong assumptions about earn-
ings growth over the life-cycle. These innovations are in line with past work using this same survey
(e.g., Wiswall and Zafar, 2015) as well as a more recent literature which uses subjective expectations
data rather than choice data to understand decision-making under uncertainty in the context of
schooling choices (e.g., Attanasio and Kaufmann, 2014; Zafar, 2011; Zafar, 2013; Giustinelli, 2016;
Arcidiacono et al., 2012; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2012; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner,
2013; Kaufmann, 2014; Ruder and Van Noy, 2017; Attanasio and Kaufmann, 2017).
   Although the more recent literature allows researchers more flexibility to estimate models with-
out making strong assumptions about student's expectations at the time of the decision, the data
available to researchers typically do not allow them to incorporate individual-specific risk and dis-
counting components into utility. Past research instead assumes a parametric functional form for
utility that implies a specific coefficient of risk aversion, such as the natural log of expected earnings
(e.g., Arcidiacono et al., 2012; Arcdiacono et al., 2014; Kaufmann, 2014; Attanasio and Kaufmann,
2017) or linear in expected earnings (e.g. Zafar, 2013). Papers that allow for risk aversion typically
estimate a single parameter for the whole population (e.g., Beffy et al., 2012; Brodaty et al., 2014;
Nielsen and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2006) rather than allowing it to vary flexibly across individuals.
Estimates of the risk coefficient vary widely across samples, ranging from 0.6 to 5. Moreover, most
studies fix the annual discount factor to be  = 0.95. In fact, none of the past literature that
uses subjective expectations data estimates a discount factor. In a previous paper using parts of
the same dataset considered here (Wiswall and Zafar, 2015), direct measures of risk and patience
preferences were not used, and instead, following the previous literature, a homogeneous risk aver-


                                                    3
sion parameter (by gender) was assumed. Our findings indicate that ignoring the heterogeneity in
time and risk preferences leads to biased inference (more specifically, an overestimation) regarding
the importance of earnings in college major choice. However, qualitative conclusions regarding the
drivers of the underlying gender gap remain unchanged.
    This paper is organized as follows. We first describe the data collection methodology in Section
2. In Section 3, we discuss our measures of patience and risk aversion and motivate the role that
these characteristics may play in college major choices. In Section 4, we outline our model of
college major choice and then discuss identification of the model in Section 5. Section 6 presents
model estimates, and the next two sections report counterfactual estimates from a structural life-
cycle utility model of major choice and explore how gender differences in structural parameters are
related to gender differences in major choice. Finally, Section 9 concludes.


2     Data

In this section, we describe the data collection process, including the administration of the survey,
the information treatment provided to students, the questions used to recover subjective expecta-
tions about earnings and major choice, and the two games used to elicit preferences over risk and
discounting.


2.1   Administration

Our data is from an original survey instrument administered to New York University (NYU) under-
graduate students over a 3-week period, during May-June 2010. NYU is a large, selective, private
university located in New York City. Students were recruited from the email list used by the Center
for Experimental Social Sciences (CESS) at NYU. The study was limited to full-time NYU students
who were in their freshman, sophomore, or junior years, were at least 18 years of age, and were US
citizens. Upon agreeing to participate in the survey, students were sent an online link to the survey
(constructed using the SurveyMonkey software). The students could use any Internet-connected
computer to complete the survey. The students were given 2-3 days to start the survey before
the link became inactive and were told to complete the survey in one sitting. The survey took
approximately 90 minutes to complete and consisted of several parts. Students were not allowed to
revise answers to any prior questions after new information treatments were received. Many of the
questions had built-in logical checks (e.g., percent chances of an exhaustive set of events such as


                                                 4
majors had to sum to 100). Students were compensated $30 for successfully completing the survey.


2.2       Survey Instrument

Our instrument consisted of three distinct stages:

   1. In the `Initial Stage', respondents were asked about their beliefs about major-specific charac-
         teristics for both themselves and the population.

   2. In the `Intermediate Stage', respondents were randomly selected to receive 1 of 4 possible
         information treatments shown in Appendix Table A-1.2 The information was reported on
         the screen and the respondents were asked to read this information before they continued.
         Respondents were then re-asked about population beliefs (on areas they were not provided
         information about) and self beliefs.

   3. In the `Final Stage', respondents were given all of the information contained in each of the
         4 possible information treatments (of Table A-1). After having seen this information, re-
         spondents were then re-asked about their self beliefs. At the end of this stage, we elicited
         respondents' time and risk preferences through two hypothetical games (described below).

The information treatment consisted of statistics about the earnings and labor supply of the US
population. Some of the information was general (e.g., mean earnings for all US workers in the
All Individuals Treatment), while other information was specific to individuals who had graduated
in a specific major (e.g., mean earnings for all male college-graduates with a degree in business or
economics, in the Male Major Specific Treatment). For the purposes of estimating the choice model
in this paper, we use the initial stage self beliefs as the pre-treatment and the final stage beliefs as
the post-treatment observations.
       Our goal was to collect information on consequential life activities that would plausibly be key
determinants of the utility gained from a college major. Because of time constraints, we aggregated
the various college majors to 5 groups:

   1. Business and Economics
   2
       The information was calculated by the authors using the Current Population Survey (for earnings and employment
for the general and college educated population) and the National Survey of College Graduates (for earnings and
employment by college major). Details on the calculation of the statistics used in the information treatment are in
Appendix Section A.1; this information was also provided to the survey respondents.


                                                           5
   2. Engineering and Computer Science

   3. Humanities and Other Social Sciences

   4. Natural Sciences and Math

   5. Never Graduate/Drop Out.

       Conditional on graduating in each of these major groups and for different future points in time
(immediately after graduation, at age 30, and at age 45), students were asked for the distribution of
self earnings. In addition, we collected data on the probability a student believes she will graduate
with a major in each of these fields. This probability ­ the subjective expectation of graduating in
a given major ­ is the primary outcome of interest that we investigate in this paper. Throughout
the paper, when we refer to major choice, we are referencing currently enrolled college students'
beliefs about what they plan to major in, not their realized major upon graduation.


2.3       Subjective Beliefs about Major

Our survey instrument provides us with a panel of self beliefs about earnings at 22, 30, and 45
years. Students were asked to report the earnings they expect to receive for working full-time,
conditional on graduating in each of the four major groups or not graduating at ages 22, 30 and
45. They were also asked to report the likelihood of earning more than $35,000 and the likelihood
of earning more than $85,000 at age 30 and 45. By asking about the likelihood of earning more
than certain earnings levels, we are able to elicit beliefs about earnings uncertainty.3 Appendix
Table A-1 provides details about the information treatment and shows the variation in objective
likelihoods associated with these values.
       From these measures, we can recover subjective expectations about both the first and second
order moments over the life cycle conditional on some functional form assumptions. As we elicit
students' beliefs conditional on major choice, we do not need to rely on the restrictive assumption
that major choices are the product of rational and fully informed choices. While Appendix section
A.2 provides some sample survey questions, interested readers are referred to Wiswall and Zafar
(2015) for a detailed discussion of the survey instrument.
   3
       The choice of the specific values of $85,000 and $35000 was somewhat arbitrary. We could have used any values
to identify the earnings uncertainty for which there was variation in the likelihood of achieving that earnings level
across majors and there was not a mass of individuals who believed that they were certain to earn more or less than
that amount (i.e., likelihoods equal to 0 or 1).


                                                          6
2.4    Risk and Time Preferences

The survey also included two hypothetical games that elicit risk and time discount preferences.
   In the first, we employ a method developed by Eckel and Grossman (2002), henceforth referred
to as the `EG Game'. The question wording is presented in Section A.3. Students are presented
with 6 different games of chance where the payoff depends on the toss of a coin, with the riskiness
increasing with each game. The student is asked to choose one game that they would like to
participate in. This choice corresponds to a range of values for the risk aversion parameter, bounded
by the values that would make the student indifferent between that game and the other games that
have the next highest and next lowest variance in payments.
   In the second game, we employ a method developed by Coller and Williams (1999), henceforth
referred to as the `CW Game'. In this game, respondents were given the choice between receiving
3000 dollars in one month (Option A) or receiving a higher payment in 7 months (Option B).
Students choose between Option A and B in ten such games, each with a different payment schedule
with increasing amounts delayed to the later date (see Section A.4). The point at which a person
switches from preferring the smaller amount in a month's time to the larger amount in seven months
corresponds to a specific range of discount factors.
   Using both of these games, we recover the risk and time preference parameters for each of
the respondents corresponding to a utility specification that has functional form consistent with
constant relative risk aversion and geometric discounting. See Appendix A.5 for the steps for
recovering these individual-specific parameters.
   Note that we did not provide students with payments corresponding to these schedules, and
this was made clear to them before they were asked to make their decisions (that is, there was no
deception). A natural question to ask is whether hypothetical rewards versus real rewards leads to
some bias. With regards to risk preferences, Holt and Laury (2002) find that choices are similar
for hypothetical and real gambles when stakes are not too high, as is the case in our scenarios.
With regards to discount rates, one may suspect that individuals exhibit higher discount factors
(more patience) when rewards are hypothetical, but Frederick et al. (2002), in their review article,
conclude that there is no clear evidence that hypothetical rewards are discounted differently than
real rewards.




                                                   7
2.5       Sample Definition

We restrict our sample based on the following criteria.
       Of the 501 students who participated in the survey, we drop 6 students who report that they
are in the 4th year of school or higher as they are more likely to have already committed to the
major they will graduate in.
       We then restrict the sample to students who report statistically sensible expectations about
their future earnings. We drop 78 students who report a higher likelihood of earning more than
$85,000 than of earning more than $35,000 in either the pre- or post- treatment sample for any
of the 5 major categories. We do not observe the dropped students responding incorrectly for all
probability responses (i.e., misreading the question to be asking about earnings being less than
35,000) nor for only a single response (i.e., a singular error). On average, those who made at
least one probability error made 5.8 mistakes out of the 20 instances in which they were asked
about the likelihood of making more than $85,000 and $35,000. The mistakes were somewhat more
common for higher-paying majors (economics/business and engineering). Nonetheless, the dropped
students do not differ from the remaining sample on observable characteristics (i.e., race, gender,
SAT score, class year, parental income), expected likelihood of graduating in each major category,
or expected earnings in each major category at age 30; we therefore drop these students for all
remaining analyses.4
       For individuals who report the exact same probability for both these questions, we recode the
probability of earning more than $85,000 as 0.01 lower than the original value. There are 126 total
respondents who report the exact same likelihood of making $35,000 and $85,000 at age 30 for
at least one major either pre- or post- treatment. These responses are more common in the pre-
treatment expectations, with 67 students reporting equal likelihood for at least one major only prior
to receiving the information treatment, 27 reporting equal likelihood for at least one major only
post receiving the treatment, and 32 reporting equal likelihood in both the pre- and post- treatment
responses. When we compare the sample of students who ever report equal likelihoods to those who
do not, we see significant differences in the observable characteristics of this group: those who report
   4
       We conduct a t-test of equality of means across the estimation sample and the dropped respondents for all
demographics characteristics, likelihood of choosing each major at age 30, and expected earnings at age 30. No
differences are significant at p < 0.05 for a two-sided t-test of equality of means. One difference is marginally
significant (p = 0.09): dropped students are less likely to expect to major in the natural sciences (13.3 %) than the
full sample (19.2).




                                                         8
equal likelihoods have significantly lower SAT verbal scores on average, are less likely to be White
and more likely to be Asian, significantly less likely to expect to major in humanities/social sciences,
and report significantly higher expected earnings at age 30 in economics/business, engineering, and
natural sciences.5
       We also impose a ceiling and floor on beliefs about full time annual earnings such that any
value above $500,000 is coded as $500,000 and any value below $10,000 is coded as $10,000. We
apply this coding for earnings expectations for every major, treatment status, and age. The major
specific earnings that were most often truncated were for economics and not graduating.The largest
proportion of students top-coded were the five percent of the students with expected earnings above
$500,000 at age 45 after graduating from economics (pre-treatment) whereas the largest proportion
of bottom-coded responses were approximately six percent of the sample with expected earnings
below 10,000 after not graduating at age 22. The reader may refer to Appendix Table A-5 for details
on the proportion of the sample for whom we truncate earnings beliefs. We also recode all reported
probabilities of 0 to 0.001 to allow for calculating log-odds ratios. Lastly, for all calculations, we
scale earnings in terms of $100,000 to make computation of the present-discounted value of lifetime
earnings computationally tractable.
       The resulting final sample consists of 417 respondents, for whom we have 10 observations: 5
majors × 2 (pre-treatment and post-treatment). Of the 417 students in our sample, 63 percent of
the respondents are female. The sample is 38.6 percent White and 44.6 percent Asian. Most of
the students are underclassmen (41.7 percent freshmen and 36.5 percent sophomores) with a high
average family income of $148,430. Our sample consists of high-ability individuals with an average
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) Score of 700 for Math and 683 for Verbal tests. Women have
slightly higher SAT verbal scores and lower SAT math scores then men, though only the difference
in SAT math scores is statistically significant. Table 1 describes the summary statistics for the
sample.
   5
       We conduct a t-test of equality of means between those who ever report equal likelihoods and those who do not.
The characteristics mentioned are the only ones that the samples differ at a p < 0.10 level; we cannot reject the null
that the samples are similar on all other characteristics (i.e., gender, SAT math score, class year, parental income,
expected likelihood of non-humanities majors, and expected earnings in humanities and for non-graduates).




                                                           9
3     Measures of Future Expectations, Risk Aversion, and Patience



In this section, we discuss descriptive results about students' expectations about their future college
major choice, expectations about the earnings associated with these choices, and their risk and
discounting preferences.


3.1   Expectations about Earnings and Major Choice

Table 2 describes self-beliefs about expected earnings by major separately by gender, both pre-
and post- the information treatment. Panel A shows that both genders expect average earnings to
be the highest in economics, followed by engineering; this the case both pre- and post- treatment.
Expectations about earnings at age 45 (reported in Panel D) are unsurprisingly higher. Pre-
treatment, the average earnings beliefs are quite similar by gender for the graduating majors.
    After receiving information about the average earnings in these majors at age 30, men and
women's earnings expectations adjust. For almost all college majors, men and women revise earn-
ings beliefs downwards, meaning that both men and women are on average adjusting towards the
population average provided in the treatment. Humanities/social sciences is the exception, with
men revising age 30 beliefs upwards (though the difference is not statistically significant). As we
show later, women over-estimate population earnings in humanities/social sciences more than men
(12.6 percent, on average, versus a 0.7 percent overestimation by men), and also tend to have larger
absolute errors in their population beliefs (that is, they are ex-ante less informed). This explains
why women are more responsive to the treatment.
    The other panels of Table 2 report students' expectations about the likelihood that they will be
making more than $85,000 and $35,000. Both men and women respond similarly to these questions.
Around 80-90% of both genders think they will make more than $35,000 at both age 30 and age 45
if they graduate from college, regardless of major. There is more variation by major in the expected
likelihood of making more than $85,0000, with students thinking it is more likely with an economics
or engineering major and extremely unlikely if they do not graduate from college. Students were
also more responsive to the information treatment in how they respond to the likelihood of making
$85,000, with the average likelihood dropping significantly across all majors.
    Though students' beliefs about their future earnings potential in different majors responded to
the information treatment, their beliefs about their future major choice were less responsive. Table


                                                  10
3 provides descriptive statistics of beliefs about own probability of graduating with the different
majors. Pre-treatment, women are significantly more likely than men to report that they will
graduate with humanities (average probability of 49.9 versus 31.4 for men) and significantly less
likely to report majoring in economics (23.8 percent versus 36.7 percent for men) or engineering (5.6
percent versus 8.7 percent for men). These gender differences remain even after the information
treatment, though they are slightly smaller. Post-treatment, both men and women report a lower
likelihood of choosing a humanities/social science major, with women reporting a higher likelihood
of majoring in economics or engineering and men reporting a higher likelihood of majoring in
engineering or the natural sciences.


3.2       Heterogeneity in Risk Aversion and Patience

We next look at how students' risk aversion and patience are correlated with gender, expected major,
and other demographic characteristics, using the parameters calculated based on the responses to
the EG game and the CW game. Tables 4 and 5 provide summary statistics for the risk and time
discount parameters in our sample, by gender and by the major reported at the time of the survey,
respectively. Note that a higher time discount factor implies a more patient individual, and a higher
coefficient of relative risk aversion implies a higher degree of risk aversion.
       Panel A of Table 4 shows that the annual discount factor is lower, on average, than the 
typically used in dynamic choice models, but is consistent with other estimates of discount factors
in hypothetical choice exercises. For example, the mean value of 0.874 in the NYU sample is close
to estimates in Andersen et al. (2008), which finds a discount factor of 0.90 in a population of
German adults. We find that men are slightly more impatient, with an average discount factor for
men of 0.86 versus 0.88 for women (test of equality p-value = 0.008). This is consistent with some
past work using similar elicitation methodologies (e.g., Coller and Williams, 1999; Dittrich and
Leipold, 2014) as well as past work eliciting discount factors for college students (Brunello et al.,
2004). However, the literature is not conclusive on the relationship between gender and patience.
Other research finds no significant relationship between gender and patience (Becker and Mulligan,
1997; Andersen et al., 2008) and more recent cross-country analysis by Falk and Hermle (2018)
finds that men are more patient on average. However, they find a great deal of heterogeneity in
this parameter across countries.6
   6
       Men are more patient in 68 percent of the countries they sample and this association is only significantly different
from zero in 32 percent of countries. For comparison, women are more risk averse than men in 95% of the countries



                                                             11
    Additionally, our results suggest there is substantial heterogeneity within gender, as indicated
by the sizable standard deviation. For example, for females, the 10-90 percentile of the estimated
discount factor distribution is 0.73-0.97. The corresponding range for males is 0.70-0.96. While
only 50 percent of males have a discount factor that is 0.88 or higher, 65 percent of females have a
discount factor in that range.
    Turning to risk preferences, Panel B of Table 4 shows that the average coefficient of risk aversion
is 1.7. The distribution of estimates is similar to Dave et al. (2010) with most of the respondents
choosing Gamble 3, a gamble that is associated with a CRRA coefficient ranging from 0.71 to
1.16. The average coefficient of risk aversion is significantly higher for women in our sample (1.82)
compared to men (1.38) and this is true for the median values as well. This is consistent with past
literature (e.g., Niederle, 2014, Eckel and Grossman, 2008, Croson and Gneezy, 2009, Falk and
Hermle, 2018) although some of these studies adopt a different experimental design, which makes
it difficult to compare the magnitude of our estimates to theirs. The studies that are closest to our
study design are Eckel and Grossman (2002) and Dave et al. (2010). Eckel and Grossman (2002)
find that more than one third of the men and only 13 percent of the women in their sample choose
the most risky gamble. In our sample, 11 percent of the men and 9 percent of the women chose the
most risky game. Our sample, particularly the sample of men, is therefore more risk averse than
the sample in Eckel and Grossman (2002). Additionally, we see that the variation within gender is
also sizable, as indicated by the large standard deviations of 1.2 points.
    Figure 1 plots the distributions of risk and time preference measures by gender. To test whether
the underlying distributions differ, we use a Kolmogorov- Smirnov test and can reject the null
hypothesis that the distribution of parameters are the same across genders for both the coefficient
of risk aversion (p = 0.001) at the 1 percent level and the discount factor (p = 0.059) at the 10
percent level .
    Panel A1 of Table 5 shows that discount factors also vary by the students' intended majors. For
example, students who report intending to major in humanities, on average, have a higher discount
factor, and an F-test of equality across majors marginally rejects the null hypothesis that the time
preference parameter is equal across majors. When we condition on gender, as shown in Panels B1
and C1 of the table, we see sorting by females into majors based on their discount factors. We also
find lower discount factors for non-economics/business majors that have reported taking at least
and this relationship is statistically significant in 82% of the countries. In the country most comparable to our sample,
the United States, the authors find a non-significant relationship between gender and patience.



                                                           12
one course in economics/business relative to non-economics/business majors that have not taken
any economics/business courses (0.86 versus 0.89; p-value = 0.012).
       Panel A2 of Table 5 shows that the average risk aversion parameters also differ by the students'
intended majors, with students intending to major in humanities the most risk averse, on average.
However, this seems to be driven by the gender sorting into majors. Conditional on gender, the
variation in risk preferences across majors does not show any systematic patterns (panels B2 and
C2).
       We next explore other correlates of these preference parameters. Table 6 regresses each measure
onto gender, ability (SAT Math and Verbal Scores), race (binary indicators for White and Asian,
omitted category: Black, Hispanic, and Other Races), and parental income. Gender continues
to be significantly correlated with these measures of risk and time preference measures, even after
controlling for a rich set of other observable characteristics. This is consistent with past work (Dave
et al., 2010) which finds similar significant correlations between risk preference and gender.
       We also see a significant correlation between quantitative skills and the risk coefficient in the
full sample: a 100-point increase in the SAT Math score is associated with a 0.187 lower CRRA
coefficient.7 We also look at this relationship separately by gender and find that this relationship is
largely driven by the subgroup of women. We also see that women's SAT Math score is negatively
related with patience. In addition, we find that race is significantly correlated with time preferences,
with White students having significantly higher discount factors relative to the omitted racial
category (non-Whites and non-Asians).8 It is worth noting that these covariates explain a fairly
small amount of variation in these preference parameters, as indicated by the low R-square values
reported at the bottom of the Table.
   7
       Recall that our sample is primarily high-ability students in a selective university, meaning that the relationship
we observe is for the right tail of the SAT score distribution with half of the students having a 700 or higher on the
SAT math test. Since there is a large mass of students very close to the ceiling of the score distribution, we re-run
the regression from above and find non-linearity in this relationship, with only the top quartile of SAT scores being
associated with less risk aversion.
   8
     Benjamin et al. (2010) find that the average discount factor for a population of Black college students is lower
than White college students, but that making students' ethnicity salient makes both Asian Americans and native
Black Americans more patient. Our sample is too small to analyze Black students separately, but our results are
broadly consistent with their findings in an un-primed sample of college students.




                                                            13
3.3    Relating Risk Aversion and Patience Parameters to Expectations about
       Major Choice and Earnings

In this Section, we explore the relationship between our measures of risk aversion and patience and
a student's beliefs about the likelihood of choosing a given major and their expected earnings for
each major.
   For comparability to our model (that we describe in the next section), our outcome of interest
                                                                              ~ik ), which is the
is the log relative probability of graduating in major k for an individual i (P
natural log of the likelihood of choosing major k relative to the likelihood of choosing Humanities
/ Social Sciences. We regress this measure on the individual specific discount factor i , CRRA
risk parameter i , a dummy for gender (Malei ), and demographic controls (Xik ) which include
SAT math and verbal scores, race dummies, parental income and expected earnings at age 22
in the major k relative to humanities. We replace all cases where students report zero as the
percent chance of graduating in a major with 0.001. We standardize the risk and time preference
parameters to have mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, which eases the interpretation
of the coefficients.
   Our specification is given by:

                           ~ik = 0 + 1 M alei + 2 i + 3 i + 4 Xik + i .
                           P

Table 7 presents the results from this reduced-form regression. The choice of major is significantly
correlated with gender, with women reporting a lower likelihood than men of choosing all majors
relative to humanities/social sciences. A higher discount factor (more patience) is associated with a
lower probability of majoring in economics/business relative to the humanities and this relationship
is statistically significant. A higher risk coefficient (higher degree of risk aversion) is associated with
a lower probability of majoring in any of the majors relative to humanities, although the relationship
is not statistically significant. These findings are consistent with the pattern of unconditional
averages by intended major reported in Table 5, demonstrating that the relationship between
majoring in economics/business and patience is not driven by selection into the major on observable
characteristics.
   The lack of a significant relationship between these measures and intended major could reflect
the fact that these preferences alone are not enough to explain major choice. Not all students have
the same expectations about earnings ­ the level, the extent of uncertainty, and growth ­ across
majors. For example, if some students see humanities degrees as risky and others see them as sources

                                                    14
of steady income, students with the same level of risk aversion would report different likelihoods
of selecting this major. Moreover, students' beliefs about future earnings could be affected by
their risk aversion or patience if those characteristics change how they acquire information about
earnings associated with a major.
   To address these concerns, we look at whether the risk and patience parameters are associated
with expectations about own earnings in a major and one's expectations about population earnings
in a major relative to US average earnings within that major (i.e., the information given in the
treatment). The first exercise tests whether more patient or risk averse students perceive their
own earnings potentials in each major differently than the less patient or risk averse students. The
second analysis tests whether more patient or risk averse students have different beliefs about the
population distribution of earnings associated with each major.
   First, we evaluate the correlation between the relationship between expected earnings at various
points in the life cycle and our measures of risk aversion and impatience. We do this by pooling our
data for all majors (so that there are 5 observations for each individual corresponding to the 5 major
categories) and then look at the binned scatter plot of expectations of earnings at age 22 and the
expectations of earnings growth between ages 22 and 30 against risk and time preferences separately.
The expected earnings growth for each individual and major is defined as the percent change in
expected earnings between ages 22 and 30. Figure 2 reports the results of this binned scatter
plot by gender. On average, more patience and more aversion to risk are associated with lower
initial earnings, especially for male students. The coefficients obtained from the regressions of these
measures of own expected earnings on the risk aversion and patience parameters also reflect a similar
relationship (though the estimates are not precisely estimated). Further, Panel B of Figure 2 shows
that more patience is also associated with higher earnings growth (again, this is particularly true
for men). There seems to be little systematic relationship between risk preferences and expected
earnings growth. Together, these scatter plots suggest that more patient (male) students expect
higher earnings further in the future rather than immediately after graduation. Similarly, we find
that more risk averse students also have more conservative expectations of earnings at age 22.
Primarily due to data limitations, the standard approach in the literature generally assumes that
preference parameters are not systematically related with expectations. However, these patterns
suggest that might not be a good assumption. This also makes the case for collecting such data
directly from respondents.
   Next, we explore whether there is a relationship between risk and time preference and the


                                                  15
accuracy of beliefs about beliefs about population earnings. We construct a measure of accuracy
of beliefs for individual i and gender g for major k using the percent difference between beliefs and
                       Earnings Beliefsigk -Truthgk
true earnings: 100 ×            Truthgk             ,   where Beliefigk is the belief about full time earnings
at age 30 for individual i of gender g graduating from major k , and Truthgk is the true full time
earnings for an individual of the same gender g graduating from major k in the US (as was revealed
in our information treatment). Table 8 reports the mean values of these error terms by major and
gender. We report both the actual values as well as the absolute values of the error since the mean
of the actual error may be close to 0 even if there are large positive and negative values of similar
magnitudes. We find that there is substantial heterogeneity in belief error, both by gender as well
as by major. Students overestimate the average earnings for an economics/business major by much
more than they do any other major, although there are substantial differences in the degree of
error by gender. Women overestimate population earnings in economics/business by 27 percent,
on average, which is much larger than the degree to which men overestimate (4 percent). On the
other hand, both men and women tend to underestimate the population earnings for an engineering
major. Average errors are significantly larger for women, though the gender difference in average
absolute errors is smaller. We find that the largest mean absolute errors for the full sample are for
Economics/Business majors and for not graduating.
   Similar to our earlier exercise, next, we pool the error data across majors for individuals and
plot the individual specific measures of patience and risk aversion against the absolute percent
error in beliefs, as shown in Figure 3. We also report the coefficients obtained from regressing the
absolute percent error on each of the risk aversion and patience measures. We find that there is a
positive relationship between the discount factor and the absolute error for both genders (though
the relationship is not precisely estimated). That is, more patient students seem to have less
accurate population beliefs. We find no systematic relationship between the risk preferences and
the absolute error in population beliefs.
   Taken together, these results suggest that patience and risk aversion are associated, in varying
degrees, with how students form expectations about earnings in a major, but it less clear how
these beliefs impact major choice. To better understand the relationship between these preferences
and major choice, in the next Section, we therefore incorporate students' expectations about the
earnings path associated with each major and their preferences into a unified structural model of
major choice.




                                                          16
4     Model

In this Section, we specify the model of college major choice. Throughout, we refer to aspects of
our survey design that inform the modeling decisions. As mentioned above, the survey provides
us with students' subjective expectations about future income conditional on all possible major
choices, allowing us to be more flexible in the structure we place on their beliefs and decisions.


4.1   Within-College Preferences and Beliefs

Individuals start in period t = 0 as college students who have not yet chosen a college major. After
realizing a shock to their utility from each major, each student then chooses a major from the
choice set k = 1, ..., K , where each option represents graduating in one of K - 1 majors or not
graduating from college. This timing is consistent with our survey design; the survey is conducted
with currently-enrolled college students, who are therefore in period t = 0 and have not realized
their graduation/major outcome yet.
    Utility for person i for each college major k at time t = 0 is given as follows:

                                       Vik0 = ik +     ik   + E[Vik1 ]                                (1)

There are three components: a) known tastes ik , b) a mean-zero taste "shock"      ik ,   and c) expected
future labor market earnings E[Vik1 ].
    The ik component represents the student's known taste for major k during the initial period.
This component captures all major-specific outcomes that are known to the student during college,
excluding expectations about future earnings in the major which are contained in E[Vik1 ]. ik
includes major characteristics that are realized during college, such as interest in the coursework,
as well as non-pecuniary outcomes that are realized post-college, such as knowledge about the
work/life balance associated with careers within that major. Because we do not impose a parametric
structure on this taste parameter, there is no loss of generality in modeling the time-invariant tastes
as preferences over both current and future events.
    The   ik   term represents the preference shock for a major that is unknown to a student before
they choose their major. This "shock" can be thought of as either a shock to perceived ability
in each major or taste for the major that is unknown before the student commits to a major.
Since the choice of k is the decision to graduate in a given major, the inclusion of this type of
shock allows us the flexibility to address the fact that many students come into college planning on
choosing one major and then later switch majors after realizing that the courses are harder or less

                                                  17
interesting than anticipated.9 Because we survey students about their likelihood of choosing each
major prior to graduation, we assume that these reports are occurring prior to the realization of the

 ik       shock. The invariant taste parameter, ik , reflects the fact that some students have stronger a
priori preference for a given major than other students, making it more likely that they will persist
in their initial major choice rather than switching majors upon realizing the                    ik   preference shock.
We might, in fact, expect a great deal of change in how much a freshman in college knows about
the career opportunities available to economics majors versus a senior in college. In our model,
these taste parameters, ik , can vary by the student's age and time until graduation. But we do
not explicit model any particular learning process, as in previous work (Arcidiacono, 2004 and
Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2013), but do assume that the major-specific preference shocks,

 i1 , . . . , iK ,    will be known to the student when they choose their major, resolved through some
implicit, unspecified learning process.


4.2          Post-College Preferences and Beliefs

In period t = 1, individuals leave college and enter the labor market, where they work and consume
income until period t = T .10 Each period, the individual receives utility from consumption and
consumes their entire income for that period. Individuals have standard constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA) preferences, governed by their coefficient of risk aversion, i . Section 3 describes
how we elicited this parameter for each individual. Students discount future period's utility at
rate i , a parameter also elicited in the survey through a series of hypothetical choices about the
timing of a monetary reward receipt. Students have heterogeneous beliefs about the distribution
of earnings in major k at time t, denoted Gikt (w). We also scale utility from consumption with a
free parameter , which we estimate. This parameter scales utility from earnings to be in the same
units as the taste shock parameter.11
      9
          For an overview on the prevalence of switching majors, see Arcidiacono (2004), Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner
(2012), Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2013), and Arcidiacono et al. (2012).
  10
     We specify T = 55 in the estimation and do not model utility flows after this age. While individual's beliefs
about labor supply and earnings may depend in part on their expectations regarding the end of life period, given
the long horizon between college and age 55, omitting any explicit modeling of the period after age 55 has negligible
consequences for approximating the utility from major choice.
  11
     The scale of utility is in the same units as this shock rather than in dollars. We can make one standardization of
scale and do that when we later impose structure on the taste shock parameter, assuming students receive this as a
draw from a type I extreme value distribution. Therefore, we need  to convert the scale of EV1 from dollars to the
scale of the         shock.



                                                             18
       Post-graduation utility for student i in major k is thus given by:

                                                            t   w1-i
                                       E[Vik1 ] =           i         dGikt (w).                                  (2)
                                                      t
                                                                1 - i

Following Wiswall and Zafar (2015), our specification of future value deviates from the standard
approach to human capital models. In a typical human capital investment problem, one must
solve for the optimal decisions and outcomes (e.g., labor supply, etc.) given that human capital
investment. Because we ask each student how much they expect to earn at different ages conditional
on major choice, we are able to avoid explicitly solving for the optimal choice path post- college and
instead substitute the students' reported beliefs about their choices into the utility function. This
is both more general, as it allows for students to have heterogeneous and non-rational expectations
about their future earnings, and it also makes the model more tractable in terms of computation.
       Note that we do not incorporate information about subjective beliefs about future likelihood
of marriage, fertility, etc. into our utility specification, though students were asked about their ex-
pectations about likelihood of marriage and their expectations about their future spouses' earnings
conditional on their own-major choice. Attanasio and Kaufmann (2017) and Wiswall and Zafar
(2018b) find that educational choices are in fact impacted by marriage market considerations. We
abstract away from those factors in this paper; marriage market and family considerations will be
subsumed in the taste term.
       Our key innovation is to allow for the discount factor and the coefficient of relative risk aversion
to be individual-specific, while imposing limited structure on the choice problem. In much of the
literature on dynamic discrete choice, measures of i and i are not available and are difficult to
separately identify from other modeling features using observed choices.12 The standard approach
is therefore to make ad hoc functional form assumptions that allow for identification from standard
data, set values for these parameters, or typically both. For the discount rate, a usual approach is to
set it to some reasonable value, such as 0.95. For the risk aversion parameter, the standard approach
is to either choose a simple functional form for utility, such as the natural log of consumption
(i.e., the limit of CRRA as  goes to 1) or linear utility (i.e.,  = 0), or assume a homogeneous
 conditional on some observables (for example, assuming that all females have a homogeneous
risk preference). In principle, one could allow for heterogeneity in  and , but this typically
only identified from standard data if one imposes some parametric restriction on the population
  12
       See, for example, Rust (1994) and Magnac and Thesmar (2002) who show that the discount factor is not identified
from choice data without further restrictions on functional forms.



                                                           19
distribution of the parameter. Our survey questions allow us to relax these types of parametric
assumptions, and recover a unique individual-specific measure of time and risk preferences, without
imposing any assumptions on how they are distributed in the population.
    Note that the distribution of future post-graduation earnings Gikt (w) describes "unresolvable"
uncertainty as students will not know their true post-college earnings path in each major at the
time of major choice. We allow for heterogeneity in these beliefs across students and do not need
to assume that students are either fully informed or that they behave consistently with rational
expectations. Instead, these beliefs should be thought of as deriving from a mix of public and private
information available to students during college as they are making the major choice decision. They
are the beliefs that the student holds about their own earnings potential in a major, which may
be quite distinct from their beliefs about the population distribution of earnings in that major. A
student may know that engineering majors on average have high earnings, but believe that he will
earn less than average due to private knowledge about his own abilities in engineering.
    If we combine equations (1) and (2), a student's utility from choosing major k is given by

                                                  t    w1-i
                            Vik0 = ik +           i          dGikt (w) +   ik .                   (3)
                                            t
                                                       1 - i

This is the general structure for choice-specific utility we take to the data.


5     Identification and Estimation

In this section, we describe how the parameters of the model are identified and estimated. For this
purpose, we use our panel data on beliefs about earnings and major choice. The model parameters
include the parameters that define the earnings distribution for each student i for each major k pre-
and post- treatment, the risk parameter (i ), the discount factor (i ), and the utility parameters
(i and ik ).


5.1   Earnings Parameters

Although we have rich data on earnings beliefs for each individual in our sample, we do not of
course have data about the perceived distribution of earnings at all possible future dates. As de-
scribed above, for each sample member, we have 7 unique moments about each of 5 possible majors
(including not graduate) and the pre- and post- experiment periods, a total of 70 earnings moments
for each individual. To "fill-in" the remaining information, we need to assume some parametric


                                                  20
structure to earnings beliefs, although we allow this structure to be individual specific and impose
no global restrictions on the population distribution. We assume a flexible wage structure that
allows individual-specific beliefs about the mean earnings as well as beliefs about the dispersion of
earnings by major to grow over the life cycle.
   Individual i's belief about earnings (wijkt ) in major k at age t during treatment period j are
drawn from a distribution Gijkt (w). We impose a log Normal structure on Gijkt (w) such that,

                        log wijkt  N (µijkt , ijkt ),
                        where µijkt = µijk0 + µijk1 (t - 22) + µijk2 (t - 22)2                            (4)
                        ijkt = ijk0 + ijk1 (t - 22)

Here the mean of the log of earnings for individual i in major k at age t during treatment period j is
a quadratic function of age whereas the dispersion of log of earnings is governed by a linear function
of age. Therefore, for each individual, there are 5 × 5 × 2 unknown parameters (five parameters for
each of the five majors and pre-/post- treatment).
   Our data provides information on various moments of the individual-major specific expectations,
including beliefs about average earnings at age 22, age 30, and age 45 and the probability of
earning more than $35, 000 and $85, 000 at ages 30 and 45. Under the parametric assumptions on
the distribution of log wijkt we are able to identify the 50 (5 × 5 × 2) parameters of the earnings
distribution using these 50 moments (5 moments × 5 majors × 2 treatment). Appendix B provides
details of the estimation method and identification of the µ and  terms.


5.2   Identification of Preference Parameters

Identification of the risk and time preferences has already been discussed. This leaves us with the
parameters of the utility function. We now add a subscript j for pre- and post- treatment value of
the major to the value function in equation (3):

                                                  t     w1-i
                          Vijk0 = ik +            i           dGijkt (w) +     ijk .
                                             t
                                                        1 - i

We begin by assuming that the preference shocks,          ijk ,   are distributed i.i.d. Extreme Value across
major choices and across individuals. Note that while this imposes a particular distribution on the
taste shock, we place no restriction on the permanent component of tastes ik . Because the latter
is unrestricted, the distributional restriction on      ijk   is without loss of generality since there is no
parametric restriction on the combined individual taste term ijk =             ijk   + ik .


                                                     21
   Then, the probability a student chooses major k can be written as:

                                                     t        1   1-i
                                   exp ik +        t i       1-i wijkt   dGijkt
                          Pijk =                                                   .
                                                         t     1   1-i
                                   s exp   is +        t i    1-i wijst   dGijst

Taking humanities/social sciences as the reference major (henceforth denoted with the subscript
k = 0), we can re-write the log relative probability of choosing major k as:

             Pijk                                1                            1
        ln         = ik - i0 +         t
                                       i            w1-i dGijkt -                w1-i dGij 0t .
             Pij 0                 t
                                               1 - i ijkt                   1 - i ij 0t

We then evaluate the integral using simulation. We approximate a student's expectations over earn-
ings by taking draws r = 1, . . . , R (with R = 100) from the earnings distribution Gijk (^
                                                                                          µijkt , ijk )
defined previously and computing the average of utility over those draws:

               Pijk                            1           1    1-i     1            1
          ln           = ik - i0 +         t
                                           i                   witrjk -                 w1-i        (5)
               Pij 0                   t
                                               R   r
                                                         1 - i          R     r
                                                                                   1 - i itrj 0
             ~ijk
             P                                                    fijk


               ~ijk = fijk + ijk .
               P                                                                                    (6)

By combining terms, we now have a linear relationship between the known quantities in the data, the
                                               ~ijk and the expected relative utility from earnings,
log relative probability of choosing major k , P
fijk , and an unknown component ijk made up of the relative preference parameters  and a
measurement error term eijk which varies across treatments, ijk = ik - i0 + eijk .
   Because we would expect fijk to be correlated with ijk through the correlation of expected
                                                         ~ijk on fijk will likely yield biased estimates
earnings with tastes for a major, a linear regression of P
of  and . Previous estimates of the relationship between subjective expectations about earnings
and major choice suggest we should expect these estimates to be biased upwards (Wiswall and
Zafar, 2015): individuals with a high relative taste for a major typically also expect to earn more
in that major. The information experiment in our setup creates panel data, allowing us to use a
fixed effects identification strategy to identify the preference parameters.
   For each student, we have data for their expected earnings for each major and the likelihood
that they will choose each major, both pre- and post- the information treatment. Because there
is a short time frame between reporting their initial preferences, receiving information about the
true earnings distribution, and reporting their post-treatment preferences, we assume that the only
part of the utility that changes between the pre- and post- stages are students' expectations about

                                                   22
earnings, not their persistent taste for a major. Thus, any changes in the reported likelihood of
choosing a major k would show up in fijk or in the idiosyncratic measurement error eijk ; ik would
be unchanged across pre- vs. post- treatment. This assumption is quite plausible in our setting,
where the pre- and post- treatment elicitation of beliefs are minutes apart.13 On the other hand,
in panels separated by several months or years (e.g., Lochner, 2007; Zafar, 2011; Stinebrickner
and Stinebrickner, 2012; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2013), this assumption could be less
defensible: students may learn more about themselves or the majors over extended periods of time,
and their tastes for majors may evolve.
       This implies that for each person we have two data points for each major k :

                                               ~i1k = (fi1k ) + i1k
                                               P
                                               ~i2k = (fi2k ) + i2k .
                                               P

       Taking differences between the two, we can rewrite the relationship as:

                  ~i2k - P
                  P      ~i1k =  fi2k - fi1k + i2k - i1k ,

                                  =  fi2k - fi1k + (ik - i0 ) - (ik - i0 ) + ei2k - ei1k ,

                                  =  fi2k - fi1k + ei2k - ei1k .                                                    (7)

With panel data, we can eliminate the time-invariant taste for major component, ik , allowing
us to estimate an unbiased coefficient on expected utility from earnings. These taste components
contain individual-specific major "tastes" that we expect would not change in the short period of
time in which they are taking the survey. For example, upperclassmen likely have higher costs
associated with switching majors than freshmen, but these costs are the same at the beginning of
the survey and the end of the survey. This final equation is equivalent to regressing the log relative
probability onto the utility from earnings, with individual and major fixed effects. Identification of
 depends on the assumption that the change in beliefs about unobserved components on utility,
or ei2k - ei1k , are mean-independent of the change in observed beliefs about earnings. The major
fixed effects control for any effects of the information treatment that may vary systematically by
major.
       Using this estimate of , we can back out the persistent taste component of utility ik - i0
without needing to impose any structure on the distribution of this component (e.g. that it is
  13
       Any beliefs about major characteristics that change in response to the treatment are thus contained in eijk . For
example, to the extent to which beliefs about spouses' earnings conditional on own major change, this is contained
in this error term.


                                                            23
Normally distributed). Following from equation 5, we can estimate               ^ i1k . Without
                                                                         ~i1k - f
                                                                  ^ ik = P
the experimental panel data, we cannot separately identify tastes from beliefs about the earnings
potential associated with each major. Past research relies on parametric restrictions on the joint
distribution of taste parameters (e.g., Berger, 1988; Arcidiacono, 2004; Beffy et al., 2012. This could
be problematic: using a more restrictive model, Wiswall and Zafar (2015) show the distributions
of major tastes implied by our experimental data suggest that the commonly-assumed forms of
Normal or extreme value distributions are not good approximations of the true distributions. The
current study extends that finding to non-parametrically identify tastes in a panel setting under
more general assumptions about the functional form for utility that incorporate heterogeneity in
risk and time preferences.14


6         Estimates

6.1         Earnings Parameters

We have already outlined the earnings expectations process in Section 5.1. Table A-6 presents
the average estimated parameters of the earnings process, averaged by gender, estimated using
the method outlined in Appendix B. The estimates are consistent with individuals expecting an
increasing but concave life cycle earnings profile, as is typically found using actual realized earnings.
Appendix Figure A-1 shows the median expected earnings path for each major before and after
the information treatment. We simulate 100 draws from the Log-Normal distribution using the
parameters estimated to plot median earnings at each age along with a [0.25, 0.75] confidence
interval.15 We also compare the evolution of these beliefs about the earnings distribution with the
actual life cycle growth of earnings for respondents in the American Community Survey (ACS).
This allows us to characterize the difference in beliefs relative to the "true" age-earnings profile.
This provides some indication that the beliefs reported are sensible, although given our sample
composition, and the fact that these are beliefs, not realized earnings, we do not expect a perfect
match. Appendix Figure A-2 also shows that the average fitted earnings profile for each major
qualitatively matches the one calculated from the ACS quite well.
    14
         In contrast to that earlier paper (Wiswall and Zafar, 2015), we do not consider labor supply or spousal earnings.
    15
         Note that we do not have any moments after age 45, and assume that the earnings profile is flat between 45 and
55 years of age.




                                                              24
6.2   Preference Parameters

We estimate  and ik , using two approaches. In the first ("cross-sectional approach"), we regress
~i1k onto fi1k and a set of dummies for major in the cross-sectional pre-treatment data:
P

                                    ~i1k = (fi1k ) + k + ei1k .
                                    P

This estimation method implies that ik = k + residual. If fi1k is correlated with ik , this will
result in a biased estimate of , with a positive correlation implying an overestimate of  in this
estimation method.
   Rather than restrict ik in this way, our second approach ("Pre/Post Treatment Diff. Data")
takes advantage of the variation induced by the information treatment, which gives us two obser-
vations of an individual's choices and expectations, pre- and post- treatment (denoted with j ). As
described in equation (7), we can use the experiment to relax the assumption that fijk is uncorre-
                                                                        ~i2k - P
lated with ik by differencing the data across treatments and regressing P      ~i1k onto fi2k - fi1k

and a set of major dummies:

                              ~i2k - P
                              P      ~i1k =  fi2k - fi1k + k + ik .                              (8)

   The richness of our data then allows us to test how functional form restrictions can lead to
biased inference and different estimates. To do this, we estimate five different versions of the
discrete choice problem described above. Model 1 is the most general version of the model in which
we allow for individual heterogeneity in both i and i . In Model 2, we restrict  to be constant
across all students and equal to the mean value of i in the sample, 1.7. In Model 3, we add a
second restriction to Model 2 and set  = 0.95, allowing us to compare a specification with no
individual heterogeneity in both the risk and time parameters to the more general version of utility
in Model 1. We choose to use  = 0.95 to mirror the value often used in the literature, usually
chosen without consideration for whether this represents the actual time preferences of a sample.
In practice, our sample has a lower discount rate than 0.95; the median value of  in the sample is
0.89. We therefore again use homogeneous values of  and  in Model 4, but use the median values
( = 0.89 and  = 0.94), rather than the literature-consistent value of  and the mean value of 
used in Model 3. Finally, in Model 5, we allow  to vary across individuals again, but put in place
a more stringent restriction on risk preference: risk neutrality or  = 0.
   Table 9 shows the parameter estimate of  for each of the five models, using both estimation
approaches. The estimate of  is significantly different than zero in the cross-sectional data with

                                                 25
no controls (Column 1) for all models. We see that the coefficients are similar when we control for
demographic characteristics that might be correlated with the unobserved component of preferences
for a major (Column 2). When we use the differenced pre- and post- treatment data (in the last two
columns of the table), the estimate of  is similar for Model 1 but smaller for all other models. With
the exception of Model 5 (which assumes risk neutrality), the estimates are significantly different
from 0 at conventional levels.16
       Because we have major-specific observations for each person, we are also able to estimate
individual-specific  values by re-estimating equation 8 with the utility from income component
(fi2k - fi1k ) interacted with individual identifier dummy variables. The coefficient on this interac-
tion for person i is then i , an individual-specific scaling parameter for utility from income. Table
10 shows the distributional moments for these  for Model 1 (truncated to exclude outliers below
the 5th percentile and above the 95th percentile) for the full sample (row 1), women (row 2) ,
men (row 3), upperclassmen (row 4), and underclassmen (row 5). We use 200 bootstrap draws to
estimate standard errors for these estimates and report whether the mean, 10th, 50th and 90th
percentile are significantly different than zero.
       The individual-specific estimates of  suggest that there is a great deal of heterogeneity in
how students adjusted their expected likelihood in choosing a major in response to changes in
their expectations about the future earnings because of the information treatment. The average
income scaling parameter is positive, consistent with the typical assumption that a major with
higher expected earnings is, all else equal, preferred to a major with lower expected earnings. Men
have significantly higher average  values than women (p-value = 0.051), suggesting that men are
more sensitive to potential future earnings when choosing a major. We also see higher parameter
estimates for freshmen than upperclassmen (i.e., sophomores and juniors), consistent with the fact
that upperclassmen are more likely to be decided on a course of study and face switching costs with
changing major (p=0.201). Moreover, the other moments of the distribution make it clear that
not all students respond to the prospect of more earnings as we might expect. The 10th percentile
estimates indicate that a non-trivial proportion of the sample has negative values of , meaning
that an increase in expected earnings makes these students less interested in choosing that major.
       We next use the  estimates from estimation Method 2 (column 3 of table 9) to calculate the
  16
       Wiswall and Zafar (2015), using the same data set, regress the log relative probability of each major, differenced
pre- and post- treatment, on a differenced version of log expected earnings at age 30. They find a positive relationship
between earnings and major choice.



                                                            26
"taste" residual, , using the pre-treatment expected likelihood:

                                                 P i1 k
                                  ik - i0 = ln          - (fi1k )
                                                 Pi10

By construction, our model's estimate of the likelihood of choosing each major is then exactly equal
to the reported likelihood of choosing the major pre-treatment. To assess model fit, we compare the
untargeted post-treatment major likelihood with the estimated probability of choosing each major
post-treatment, using the post-treatment expected earnings and the estimated  and  parameters.
Appendix table A-7 reports the actual reported likelihood of choosing the major post- treatment
and the model predictions for each model, for the full sample (Panel A) and for freshmen alone
(Panel B). We are able to match the overall trends well, with the model predicting the correct
ranking of major preferences and only deviating by less than 4 percentage points in value for all
majors and models. Our model is more predictive of major preferences for freshmen, with deviations
from the true value by less than 1 percentage point for economics/business, natural science, and
not graduating and by less then 3 percentage points for engineering and humanities/social science.


6.3   Elasticities

To compare these parameter estimates across models as well as to previous papers' findings about
the relationship between expected earnings and major choice, we must first convert these structural
parameters into a form that allows us to compare across utility function types. For example, in
Wiswall and Zafar (2015), the authors estimate a much larger value of the parameter that scales
major-specific utility from earnings but use a very different utility function, implying that the
magnitude of the scaling parameter in that paper is not comparable to the scaling parameter in
the current paper.
   To solve this problem, we compute major choice elasticities using the estimated structural
parameters reported in Table 9. Specifically, we compute the percent change in the likelihood that
a student chooses major k when earnings are increased by 10% in major k and held constant in all
other majors. These choice elasticities are heterogeneous across individual student and will depend
on the earnings distribution we estimated, their individual risk and discounting parameters, and the
taste parameters implied by our estimates of the earnings scaling parameter, . For this exercise
and throughout the main text of the paper, we report results based on estimation Method 2 (column
3 of Table 9); robustness checks using the non-differenced versions as well as the individual specific
's are reported in Appendix C.

                                                 27
   Table 11 displays the average percent change in the likelihood of choosing a major implied by
each of the utility specifications in response to a 10% increase in earnings for each year of the
student's life, using the  estimated in column 3 of Table 9. To test whether we can reject the
hypothesis that these elasticities are equal to zero, we report the 90-percent confidence intervals
based on 200 bootstrapped estimates in brackets. We can reject an elasticity equal to 0 for Model
1 (heterogeneous  and ), Model 2, and Model 3 at the p < 0.05 level and for Model 4 at the
p < 0.10 level. We also conduct a t-test for equality of means across the models to compare the
elasticities across utility specifications (denoted by asterisks on the elasticity estimates), and find
that the elasticities are significantly higher for all majors in models without heterogeneity in risk
and time preferences.
   For our model with full heterogeneity in risk and discounting parameters (Model 1), excluding
not graduating, we estimate average percent changes in the range 0.67-0.98, indicating that a 10
percent change in earnings for major k increases the probability of majoring in k by less than
1 percent. These estimates correspond to 1 percent earnings change elasticities in the range of
0.07- 0.1. These small elasticities are comparable to estimates found in previous papers, such as
Arcidiacono (2004), Beffy et al. (2012), and Wiswall and Zafar (2015), which suggests that major
choice is not particularly responsive to expected earnings. For example, Wiswall and Zafar (2015)
estimate average elasticities of major choice to changes in future earnings in each period of between
0.03 and 0.07, which overlaps with our range of estimates.
   A key finding for this paper is that these elasticities differ across utility specifications. Consis-
tent with past work, we find higher major choice elasticities for the risk-neutral model (Model 5)
compared to models which allow for risk aversion. Under risk neutrality, the elasticities are around
double that of the estimates in the models with risk aversion, particularly for high-earning majors.
This is consistent with the findings in Wiswall and Zafar (2015), who also report a higher elasticity
of major choice for models that assume utility is linear in earnings.
   Our novel finding, however, is that assumptions about the distribution of the discount rate
and the coefficient of risk aversion also change the estimates of how responsive individuals' major
choices are to changes in expected earnings. Past papers using subjective expectations data assume
homogeneous values of  or  because they do not have enough information to identify individual
level values for the discount rate and the coefficient of risk aversion. A common assumption is that
 = 0.95. By comparing the results for Model 1 (which uses heterogeneous values of  or ) to those
of models 2-4, we are able to see how much assuming homogeneity in risk/time preferences changes


                                                  28
estimates of income elasticity in major choice. Notably, Table 11 shows that the models with full
homogeneity (Models 2-4) result in higher elasticities. In addition, the fact that elasticity estimates
are quite similar for Models 2 and 3 (with the difference being that the latter also homogenizes  )
suggests that it is the heterogeneity in risk preferences that seems to matter the most.17
         For the remainder of the paper, we focus on comparing the most general model which allows
for full heterogeneity in  and  (Model 1) with the model which assumes both these parameters
are homogeneous (Model 3), to highlight the effects of incorporating individual-specific risk and
discounting preferences into models of major choice. Additional results for the other models are
presented in Appendix C.2.


7         Counterfactuals

We next conduct a series of counterfactual exercises to explore how much the different majors'
earnings profiles drive students' choices of major and whether the conclusions are sensitive to the
heterogeneity in time and risk preferences. These counterfactuals provide a meaningful metric to
understand the implied magnitude of our estimates.
         The first counterfactual explores how much expectations about the variance of earnings within
a major can explain students' major choices. To do this, we equalize the expected riskiness of
earnings across majors for a student by setting the  values (dispersion in log earnings) for each
major equal to the student's  values for humanities/social sciences. On average, earnings dispersion
is lowest in humanities/social sciences out of all four major categories. Thus, since uncertainty in
earnings makes more risk averse students less likely to choose a major, we should expect that this
counterfactual will push students away from humanities/social sciences.
         In our second counterfactual, we look at how students respond to expected earnings growth
by equalizing the parameters that govern earnings growth across majors. For each student, we
set the µ1 and µ2 parameters in equation (4) to be equal to the individual-specific estimates for
humanities/social sciences, while not changing the absolute level of earnings (governed by µ0 ) and
uncertainty of earnings (governed by 0 and 1 ). On average, values for µ1 and µ2 are fairly similar
for all college majors in the post-treatment data, but slightly smaller for not graduating. If students
value high earnings growth, we therefore would expect that this counterfactual would shift away
    17
         We, in fact, estimate an alternative model with homogeneous  but heterogeneous , and find average elasticities
that are similar to Model 1 (results available from the authors upon request).




                                                            29
from not graduating at all. We also would expect that the effects of this counterfactual should be
higher in Model 3 due to the higher value of  , which makes students discount future earnings less.
   The third counterfactual tests whether the differences in levels of expected earnings across
majors can explain students' major choices. To do this, we equalize the starting level of earnings
across majors by setting µ0 to be equal for all majors to the humanities/social sciences µ0 , but
leave earnings growth and uncertainty unchanged. Since students on average believe that earnings
in this major are lower than other majors, we would expect this counterfactual to push students
into humanities/social sciences. This counterfactual does, on average, increase the starting earnings
level for not graduating, which should increase the weight a student puts on their likelihood of not
graduating.
   Finally, we combine all three of these counterfactuals to see how students' likelihood of choosing
each major would change if they expected the same earnings distribution across majors and equal
to that of humanities/social sciences. To the extent that we think students are selecting into high-
paying majors such as economics/business or engineering due to the higher anticipated earnings
rather than due to a taste for those subjects, we would expect this counterfactual to induce students
to increase their likelihood of choosing lower paying majors.
   The various panels of Table 12 show the results of the four counterfactuals. Note that the
effects of these counterfactuals are in general heterogeneous and depend on individual preferences
and earnings beliefs. We report the median percent change in the likelihood of choosing a major
under the counterfactual. The 10th and 90th percentile of the changes are reported in parentheses as
well. For example, the median effect of counterfactual 3 on the likelihood of choosing an economics/
business major in Model 3 is a 3.20 percent decrease from a base rate of 30.26%, which is equivalent
to the average likelihood decreasing by about 1.0 percentage point.
   The results of these counterfactuals demonstrate that more favorable expectations about relative
earnings profiles in economics/business, engineering, and natural sciences majors are one reason why
students select these majors. Though the median effect of these counterfactuals are small, there is a
great deal of heterogeneity in students' responses, as shown by the 10th and 90th percentiles of the
distributions of percent changes. These students represent the marginal students. Some students in
our sample have already decided on a major and report a very high percent likelihood of graduating
in a major; for these students, the taste parameter, , is large and changes in expected earnings
would do little to change their mind about what major to choose. Other students, however, are
not as unmovable: for example, counterfactual 4 makes students at the 90th percentile about 1.8


                                                 30
percent more likely to major in humanities/social sciences in Model 1 and causes students at the
10th percentile for economics/business to decrease their likelihood by 2.2 percent.
         Taking account of heterogeneity, we also see that assuming all students have the same preference
parameters can severely bias the inference regarding how much earnings matters for students. For
example, in our fourth counterfactual, more responsive students (i.e., 10th percentile students)
reported a 2.2 percent lower likelihood of choosing economics or business as a major in the model
with full heterogeneity of risk and discounting parameters compared to a 12 percent lower likelihood
in a model with  = 0.95 and  = 1.7.
         These differences in counterfactual results, combined with the differences in elasticities across
models, suggest that the common practice of calibrating risk parameters and discount rates may
be over-estimating how sensitive individuals' choices are to their future income. The average
student in our sample has a  lower than 0.95. The importance of incorporating heterogeneity in
discounting and risk is most apparent in low-earning majors, such as humanities/social sciences
and not graduating, which is consistent with the argument that students choose low-paying majors
partially because they heavily discount future income relative to the present consumption value of
taking classes in a major they enjoy.


8         Gender Gaps in Major Choice

Given that most studies find that there are gender differences in risk and patience (including ours),
these studies typically conclude with the argument that these disparities in preference parameters
likely translate to different human capital investment decisions for men and women.18 Specifically,
men may be more drawn to high-paying, high-risk majors or occupations.
         We next use our preferred unrestricted model, Model 1, to decompose major choice into different
components ­ expectations about earnings, risk preferences, discount rates, and taste ­ to evaluate
the importance of each of these factors in explaining gender differences in earnings. We start by
setting each respondent's parameters about earnings (µijk0 , µijk1 , µijk2 , ijk0 , and ijk1 ), risk (i ),
discounting (i ) , and residual taste (ik ) equal to the average values of these parameters for men in
our sample. Note that for all our decomposition exercises related to earnings, we use the earnings
estimates derived from the post-treatment earnings expectations.
    18
         For example, Eckel and Grossman (2008)'s discussion of gender differences in risk aversion concludes by stating,
"Differences in risk attitudes may play a role in the documented differences in earnings between women and men...
[and] contribute to lower lifetime earnings and wealth for women."


                                                             31
    Table 13 shows the evolution of the gender gap in the likelihood of choosing each major, defined
as the average likelihood for women choosing that major subtracted from the average likelihood for
men. At the baseline (column 1), both genders have the same likelihood of choosing each major,
equal to the sample-level average for men. We then progressively re-introduce heterogeneity in each
individual's utility parameters, starting with the  parameters which govern earnings uncertainty
(column 2), then µ1 and µ2 parameters which govern earnings growth (column 3), then µ0 param-
eters which governs initial earnings (column 4), then the coefficient of risk aversion (column 5),
then the discount rate (column 6), and then finally the residual "taste" component for the major,
 (column 7).
    Focusing on columns 2 through 6, we can see that the elements of the model related to earnings
do very little to explain gender differences in major choice. We do not see any substantial gender
gap until we add the "taste" residual in column 7. In fact, adding in the risk and discounting
parameter moves the gender differences in choosing natural sciences in the opposite direction of the
actual gender gaps. Though we see heterogeneity in the student's risk and time preferences across
gender, these differences cannot fully explain why students choose different majors. This suggests
that gender differences in preferences for risk or patience cannot explain why women select into
lower-paying majors.


9    Conclusion

This paper combines an experiment, a survey of earnings expectations, and measures of risk pref-
erences and discounting to investigate the role that risk aversion and time discounting play in
education choices. The primary contribution of this analysis is to introduce two forms of hetero-
geneity previously under-studied in the college major choice literature, revealing four key findings
about the relationship between major choice and subjective expectations about earnings.
    First, our estimates of the distribution of risk and time preference parameters in a college-
student population allow us to relate these traits with students' major choices, as well as with
demographic characteristics such as gender. We find that men are less risk averse and more im-
patient than women, which is consistent with previous analyses on more representative samples.
However, while these traits systematically vary across gender, they do not seem to be systematically
associated with individuals' choices of major.
    Next, the richness of our data set, which combines a survey of subjective expectations about



                                                 32
labor market outcomes, an experiment, and a set of hypothetical games to elicit risk and time pref-
erences, allows us to estimate a more general model of the college-major decision than is typically
possible. Because we can use our data to identify each individual's discount factor and coefficient
of risk aversion, we are able to compare a general model that allows for this heterogeneity to more
restricted models. We show that models without heterogeneity in these parameters are likely to
overstate how sensitive college major choice is to earnings. It is, in particular, the heterogeneity in
risk preferences that seem to matter in drawing conclusions regarding choice elasticities.
   Third, we show that earnings expectations play a role in the choice of majors, but that this
role is small compared to the role of other characteristics of the major for most students. Our
counterfactuals show that there are marginal students who are very responsive to changes in the
expected earnings path associated with a major, with the largest changes in the estimated likelihood
of choosing majors occurring in the counterfactual where we equalize the level of earnings, rather
than the earnings growth or earnings uncertainty. However, major-choices in our data are still
largely the result of heterogeneity in the unobserved "taste" component of major-choice. In our
framework, one can think of tastes as preferences for major-specific outcomes realized in college
(e.g., enjoying the courses), or major-specific post-graduation outcomes (e.g., work-life balance in
a particular occupation related to major). These could be pecuniary or non-pecuniary in nature.
   Lastly, our analysis of the gender gap in major choice suggests that gender differences in risk
preferences and patience cannot explain the pattern of women being less likely to select into high-
paying, but risky, majors such as Business/Economics. Earnings expectations differences across
genders also cannot explain this gender gap. We find that the gender gap in major choice stems
primarily from the unobserved taste component, not the heterogeneity in  or . In light of the
finding that there are gender differences in risk aversion and patience in lab settings, researchers
often conclude that these gender differences could contribute to broader gender inequalities in the
labor market. Our results suggest that while these preferences vary across gender, there does not
appear to be a robust link between gender gaps in these preferences and gender gaps in major
choice. It could, however, be the case that these preferences influence the jobs and careers that
students choose conditional on a major. In fact, Wiswall and Zafar (2018a) show that students
perceive substantial variation in non-wage amenities of jobs they expect would be available if they
were to graduate with different majors. Importantly, there is substantial heterogeneity in the kinds
of workplaces ­ in terms of earnings, earnings risk, job stability ­ that students expect to enter
even conditional on major. Future work that investigates the role of time and risk preferences, and


                                                  33
gender differences within them, on sorting into careers would be valuable.


References

J. G. Altonji. The Demand for and Return to Education When Education Outcomes are Uncertain.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1, Part 1):48­83, jan 1993. ISSN 0734-306X. doi: 10.1086/
  298317. URL https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/298317.

S. Andersen, G. W. Harrison, M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutstr¨
                                                        om. Eliciting Risk and Time Preferences.
  Econometrica, 76(3):583­618, may 2008. ISSN 0012-9682. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0262.2008.00848.x.
  URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1468-0262.2008.00848.x.

P. Arcdiacono, V. J. Hotz, A. Maurel, and T. Romano. 10.3386/w20626. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, oct 2014. URL https://www.nber.org/papers/
  w20626.pdf.

P. Arcidiacono. Ability sorting and the returns to college major. Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-
  2):343­375, 2004. URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/econom/v121y2004i1-2p343-375.
  html.

P. Arcidiacono, E. M. Aucejo, and K. Spenner. What happens after enrollment? An analysis of the
  time path of racial differences in GPA and major choice. IZA Journal of Labor Economics, 1(1):5,
  dec 2012. ISSN 2193-8997. doi: 10.1186/2193-8997-1-5. URL http://izajole.springeropen.
  com/articles/10.1186/2193-8997-1-5.

O. P. Attanasio and K. M. Kaufmann. Education choices and returns to schooling: Mothers' and
  youths' subjective expectations and their role by gender. Journal of Development Economics,
  109:203­216, 2014.

O. P. Attanasio and K. M. Kaufmann. Education choices and returns on the labor and marriage
  markets: Evidence from data on subjective expectations. Journal of Economic Behavior &
  Organization, 140:35­55, aug 2017. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2017.05.002.

G. Bamberger. Occupational choice: The role of undergraduate education. 1988.

D. Barth, S. H. Shore, and S. T. Jensen. Identifying idiosyncratic career taste and skill with income



                                                 34
  risk. Quantitative Economics, 8(2):553­587, jul 2017. ISSN 17597323. doi: 10.3982/QE424. URL
  http://doi.wiley.com/10.3982/QE424.

G. S. Becker and C. B. Mulligan. The endogenous determination of time preference. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 112(3):729­758, 1997.

M. Beffy, D. Foug`
                 ere, and A. Maurel. Choosing the Field of Study in Postsecondary Education:
  Do Expected Earnings Matter? Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1):334­347, feb 2012.
  ISSN 0034-6535. doi: 10.1162/REST a 00212. URL http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/
  10.1162/REST{_}a{_}00212.

C. Belzil and M. Leonardi. Risk Aversion and Schooling Decisions. Annals of Economics and
  Statistics, No.111/112 Special Issue on Education:35­70, 2013. doi: 10.2307/23646326.

D. J. Benjamin, J. J. Choi, and A. J. Strickland.    Social Identity and Preferences. American
  Economic Review, 100:1913­1928, sept 2010. doi: 10.1257/aer.100.4.1913.

M. C. Berger. Predicted Future Earnings and Choice of College Major. ILR Review, 41(3):418­
  429, apr 1988. ISSN 0019-7939. doi: 10.1177/001979398804100306. URL http://journals.
  sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/001979398804100306.

H. Bonin, T. Dohmen, A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde.        Cross-sectional earnings risk and
  occupational sorting: The role of risk attitudes. Labour Economics, 14(6):926­937, dec 2007.
  URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927537107000462.

T. Brodaty, R. J. Gary-Bobo, and A. Prieto. Do risk aversion and wages explain educational
  choices? Journal of Public Economics, 117:125­148, sept 2014. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  jpubeco.2014.05.003.

G. Brunello, C. Lucifora, and R. Winter-Ebmer. The wage expectations of european business and
  economics students. Journal of Human Resources, 39(4):1116­1142, 2004.

B. C. Cadena and B. J. Keys. Human Capital and the Lifetime Costs of Impatience. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(3):126­153, aug 2015. ISSN 1945-7731. doi: 10.1257/
  pol.20130081. URL http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/pol.20130081.

M. Coller and M. B. Williams. Eliciting Individual Discount Rates. Technical report, 1999. URL
  http://community.middlebury.edu/{~}jcarpent/EC499/CollerandWilliams(1999)EE.pdf.

                                                35
R. Croson and U. Gneezy. Gender Differences in Preferences. Journal of Economic Literature, 47
  (2):448­474, may 2009. ISSN 0022-0515. doi: 10.1257/jel.47.2.448. URL http://pubs.aeaweb.
  org/doi/10.1257/jel.47.2.448.

C. Dave, C. Eckel, C. Johnson, and C. Rojas.         Eliciting risk preferences: When is simple
  better?   Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 41(3):219­243, 12 2010. ISSN 0895-5646. doi:
  10.1007/s11166-010-9103-z.

M. De Paola and F. Gioia. Risk aversion and field of study choice: The role of individual ability.
  Bulletin of Economic Research, 64:s193­s209, dec 2012. URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
  1467-8586.2012.00445.x.

E. W. Dillon. Risk and Return Trade-Offs in Lifetime Earnings. Journal of Labor Economics, 36
  (4):981­1021, oct 2018. ISSN 0734-306X. doi: 10.1086/697475. URL https://www.journals.
  uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/697475.

M. Dittrich and K. Leipold. Gender differences in time preferences. Economics Letters, 122(3):
  413­415, 2014.

C. C. Eckel and P. J. Grossman. Sex differences and statistical stereotyping in attitudes toward
  financial risk. Evolution and Human Behavior, 23(4):281­295, jul 2002. ISSN 1090-5138. doi: 10.
  1016/S1090-5138(02)00097-1. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S1090513802000971.

C. C. Eckel and P. J. Grossman. Forecasting risk attitudes: An experimental study using actual
  and forecast gamble choices. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 68(1):1­17, oct
  2008. ISSN 0167-2681. doi: 10.1016/J.JEBO.2008.04.006. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S0167268108000978.

E. Eide and G. Waehrer. The role of the option value of college attendance in college major choice.
  Economics of Education Review, 17(1):73­82, 1998. URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/
  RePEc:eee:ecoedu:v:17:y:1998:i:1:p:73-82.

A. Falk and J. Hermle. Relationship of gender differences in preferences to economic development
  and gender equality. Science, 362(6412):eaas9899, 2018.




                                                36
F. A. Flyer. The Influence of Higher Moments of Earnings Distributions on Career Decisions.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 15(4):689­713, oct 1997. ISSN 0734-306X. doi: 10.1086/209842.
  URL https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/209842.

D. Fouarge, B. Kriechel, and T. Dohmen.         Occupational sorting of school graduates: The
  role of economic preferences.   Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 106:335­351,
  oct 2014. ISSN 0167-2681. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S016726811400208X.

S. Frederick, G. Loewenstein, and T. O'Donoghue. Time discounting and time preference: A
  critical review. Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2):351­401, 2002. ISSN 00220515. URL
  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2698382.

R. Freeman. The market for college trained manpower. 1971.

P. Giustinelli.    Group Decision Making with Uncertain Outcomes:              Unpacking Child-
  Parent Choice of the High School Track *.               International Economic Review,       57
  (2),   May      2016.        URL     https://economics.wustl.edu/files/economics/imce/
  vrptrackchoicepaper{_}sept13{_}pgiusti.pdf.

C. A. Holt and S. K. Laury. Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects. American Economic Review, 92:
  1644­1655, dec 2002. doi: 10.1257/000282802762024700.

K. M. Kaufmann. Understanding the income gradient in college attendance in Mexico: The role
  of heterogeneity in expected returns. Quantitative Economics, 5(3):583­630, nov 2014. ISSN
  17597323. doi: 10.3982/QE259. URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.3982/QE259.

S. D. Levitt, J. A. List, and S. Sadoff. The effect of performance-based incentives on educational
  achievement: Evidence from a randomized experiment. Working Paper 22107, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, March 2016. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w22107.

L. Lochner. Individual Perceptions of the Criminal Justice System. American Economic Review, 97
  (1):444­460, feb 2007. ISSN 0002-8282. doi: 10.1257/aer.97.1.444. URL http://pubs.aeaweb.
  org/doi/10.1257/aer.97.1.444.

T. Magnac and D. Thesmar. Identifying Dynamic Discrete Decision Processes. Econometrica, 70:
  801­816, mar 2002.


                                               37
C. F. Manski. Adolescent econometricians: How do youth infer the returns to schooling? In Studies
  of supply and demand in higher education, pages 43­60. University of Chicago Press, 1993.

C. Montmarquette, K. Cannings, and S. Mahseredjian. How do young people choose college majors?
  Technical report, 2002. URL www.elsevier.com/locate/econedurev.

M. Niederle. Gender. Working Paper 20788, National Bureau of Economic Research, December
  2014. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w20788.

H. S. Nielsen and A. Vissing-Jorgensen.          The Impact of Labor Income Risk on Ed-
  ucational Choices:    Estimates and Implied Risk Aversion *.          Technical report, 2006.
  URL https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2a43/c98022c53b654566e129079a5c975d79a977.
  pdf?{_}ga=2.117443657.1364505584.1552779231-1306858675.1552779231.

P. Oreopoulos. Do dropouts drop out too soon? wealth, health and happiness from compulsory
  schooling. Journal of Public Economics, 91(11-12):2213­2229, 2007. URL https://EconPapers.
  repec.org/RePEc:eee:pubeco:v:91:y:2007:i:11-12:p:2213-2229.

A. I. Ruder and M. Van Noy.      Knowledge of earnings risk and major choice: Evidence from
  an information experiment. Economics of Education Review, 57:80­90, apr 2017. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2017.02.001.

J. Rust. Structural estimation of markov decision processes. In R. F. Engle and D. McFadden,
  editors, Handbook of Econometrics, chapter 51, pages 3082­3143. Elsevier Press, 1994.

R. E. Saks and S. H. Shore.          Risk and Career Choice.        The B.E. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Analysis & Policy, 5(1), jan 2005.           ISSN 1935-1682.   doi:   10.1515/1538-0637.
  1414. URL https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/bejeap.2005.5.issue-1/bejeap.2005.5.
  1.1414/bejeap.2005.5.1.1414.xml.

A. Siow. Occupational Choice under Uncertainty. Econometrica, 52(3):631­645, May 1984. URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/a/ecm/emetrp/v52y1984i3p631-45.html.

T. Stinebrickner and R. Stinebrickner. Learning about Academic Ability and the College Dropout
  Decision. Journal of Labor Economics, 30(4):707­748, oct 2012. ISSN 0734-306X. doi: 10.1086/
  666525. URL https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/666525.




                                                38
T. Stinebrickner and R. Stinebrickner. Academic Performance and College Dropout: Using Longitu-
  dinal Expectations Data to Estimate a Learning Model. Technical report, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research, Cambridge, MA, apr 2013. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w18945.pdf.

M. Wiswall and B. Zafar. Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification using an Informa-
  tion Experiment. The Review of Economic Studies, 82(2):791­824, apr 2015. ISSN 0034-6527.
  doi: 10.1093/restud/rdu044. URL https://academic.oup.com/restud/article-lookup/doi/
  10.1093/restud/rdu044.

M. Wiswall and B. Zafar. Preference for the Workplace, Investment in Human Capital, and Gender.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133:457­507, feb 2018a. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/
  qjx035.

M. Wiswall and B. Zafar. Human capital investments and expectations about career and family.
  (22543), 2018b.

B. Zafar. How Do College Students Form Expectations? Journal of Labor Economics, 29(2):301­
  348, apr 2011. ISSN 0734-306X. doi: 10.1086/658091. URL https://www.journals.uchicago.
  edu/doi/10.1086/658091.

B. Zafar. College Major Choice and the Gender Gap. Journal of Human Resources, 48(3):545­595,
  jul 2013. ISSN 0022-166X. doi: 10.3368/jhr.48.3.545. URL http://jhr.uwpress.org/lookup/
  doi/10.3368/jhr.48.3.545.

G. A. Zarkin. Occupational Choice: An Application to the Market for Public School Teachers.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(2):409­446, 1985. URL https://ideas.repec.org/
  a/oup/qjecon/v100y1985i2p409-446..html.




                                               39
    Tables and Figures

             Time Discount Factor (i )                                     CRRA Coefficient (i )




Figure 1: Kernel Density of Risk and Time Preference Parameters
Note that the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test results show that men have i that is smaller than women at the 1 percent
level (p = 0.059) and i that is smaller than women at the 1 percent level (p = 0.001).




                                                        40
                                 Panel A: Earnings Expectations at Age 22
              Time Discount Factor (i )                                      CRRA Coefficient (i )




                           Panel B: Earnings Growth between Age 22 and Age 30
              Time Discount Factor (i )                                      CRRA Coefficient (i )




Figure 2: Bin Scatter of Earnings Expectations with Risk and Time Preference Parameters
Note. This figure shows the binned scatter plot between earnings expectations, and discount factor and CRRA risk
coefficient. Panel A shows this plot for age 22 earnings and Panel B shows the same plot for earnings growth between
age 22 and age 30. The earnings are top and bottom coded at $500,000 and $10,000 respectively. We pool the data
across majors so that we have 5 observations per individual. The figure also reports the coefficient and the standard
error for the linear regression of the earnings expectations on the discount factor and CRRA coefficient (with no other
controls) for men and women separately. We also report the p-value of the test of difference between the coefficients
for men and women. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level for the pooled major regressions. * p < 0.1,
** p < 0.05,*** p < 0.01




                                                          41
                Time Discount Factor (i )                                                           CRRA Coefficient (i )




Figure 3: Bin Scatter of Absolute Value of Population Belief Error with Risk and Time Preference
Parameters
Note. This figure shows the binned scatter plot of the absolute value of population belief error with discount factor
and CRRA risk coefficient, separately by gender. The absolute population error for individual i of gender g for major
                        Earnings Beliefsigk -Truthgk
k is defined as the |             Truthgk
                                                     |    for major specific full time population earnings at age 30. The earnings
are top and bottom coded at $500,000 and $10,000 respectively. We pool the data across majors so that we have 5
observations per individual. The figure also reports the coefficient and the standard error for the linear regression
of the error on the discount factor and CRRA coefficient (with no other controls) for men and women separately.
We also report the p-value of the test of difference between the coefficients for men and women. Standard errors are
clustered at the respondent level for the pooled major regressions. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



                                                       Table 1: Sample Statistics

                                              Full Sample                                Men                                    Women
                                     Mean      Standard Deviation          Mean       Standard Deviation            Mean        Standard Deviation
 SAT Math                          700.460            (77.442)            712.905            (81.175)            692.881             (74.228)
 SAT Verbal                        682.577            (72.579)            680.426            (75.493)              683.893           (70.865)
 White                               0.386             (0.487)              0.429             (0.496)               0.361            (0.481)
 Asian                               0.446             (0.498)              0.448             (0.499)               0.445            (0.498)
 Freshman                            0.417             (0.494)              0.474             (0.501)              0.384             (0.487)
 Sophomore                           0.365             (0.482)              0.325             (0.470)               0.388            (0.488))
 Parental Income ($10,000)          14.843            (12.265)             15.775            (12.921)              14.294            (11.853)

 Observations                         417                                    154                                     263
 Note. This table reports mean values for a set of demographic characteristics for the full sample and the sample split by gender. Standard
 deviations are in parentheses. SAT scores have range from 0 to 800; demographic indicators are percentages with range 0 to 1; Parent income
 is scaled in $10,000 increments.* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 denote significance for test of equality of means by gender.




                                                                          42
              Table 2: Beliefs about Earnings by Treatment Status

                                                           Pre- Treatment                Post Treatment

                                                          Men     Women          Men           Women

                                      Economics           12.27   10.91          9.947++       8.062 +++
Panel A :                             Engineering         9.016   9.765          8.428         8.190+++
Average Earnings ($ 10,000) at Age    Humanities          6.441   6.712          6.751         6.076
30                                    Natural Sciences    8.266   9.392          7.641         7.333+++
                                                                          
                                      Not Graduate        4.374   3.177          5.234         4.123 ++
                                      Economics           68.52   67.15          55.03+++      46.21 +++
Panel B :                                                                                ++             +++
                                      Engineering         60.34   63.22          54.26         46.72
Percent Chance of Earnings >                                                             +              +++
                                      Humanities          43.94   42.02          38.90         31.48
85,000 at Age 30                      Natural Sciences    55.14   55.16          48.03++       40.03 +++
                                                                          
                                      Not Graduate        17.97   13.39          21.13         11.68
                                                                                         +++
                                      Economics           92.44   91.04          87.50         85.61+++
Panel C :                             Engineering         90.10   88.54          87.38         86.83
Percent Chance of Earnings >          Humanities          83.51   78.22          80.37         77.68
35,000 at Age 30                      Natural Sciences    86.24   83.85          84.89         82.22
                                      Not Graduate        54.32   43.67          61.53++       47.67    +



                                                                          
                                      Economics           16.22   13.58          13.89         9.502 +++
Panel D :                             Engineering         11.44   11.54          11.56         9.710 +++
                                                                                                        +++
Average Earnings ($ 10,000) at Age    Humanities          9.989   9.014          8.980         7.193
                                                                                                        +++
45                                    Natural Sciences    11.19   11.10          10.09         8.688
                                      Not Graduate        6.989   5.430          6.925         4.835 +++
                                      Economics           77.68   76.20          63.75   +++
                                                                                               56.16 +++
Panel E :                             Engineering         71.01   72.97          63.69++       55.52 +++
Percent Chance of Earnings >          Humanities          59.30   58.85          49.32   +++
                                                                                               40.15 +++
85,000 at Age 45                      Natural Sciences    66.61   66.94          57.65   +++
                                                                                               49.24      +++

                                                                                                        +++
                                      Not Graduate        30.30   23.68          26.67         16.07
                                      Economics           91.43   90.44          89.80         88.41
Panel F :                             Engineering         89.66   89.44          89.08         89.33
Percent Chance of Earnings >          Humanities          85.80   84.95          84.61         81.09 ++
35,000 at Age 45                      Natural Sciences    88.33   87.94          87.36         85.32
                                                                          
                                      Not Graduate        64.73   55.11          66.16         55.17
Note. This table reports the moments used to estimate the earnings distribution, by gender and pre- and
post- treatment. Panel A shows the average earnings expected at age 30 conditional on major, in $10,000
units. Panel B shows the average likelihood that students expect they will earn greater than $85,000 at age
30 conditional on major, with scale 0 to 100. Panel C shows the average likelihood that students expect they
will earn greater than $35,000 at age 30 conditional on major, with scale 0 to 100. Panel D shows the average
earnings expected at age 45 conditional on major, in $10,000 units. Panel E shows the average likelihood that
students expect they will earn greater than $85,000 at age 45 conditional on major, with scale 0 to 100. Panel
F shows the average likelihood that students expect they will earn greater than $35,000 at age 45 conditional
on major, with scale 0 to 100. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 denote significance for test of equality
of means by gender within treatment. + p < 0.1, ++ p < 0.05,+++ p < 0.01 denote significance for test of
equality of means by treatment within gender.




                                                     43
      Table 3: Beliefs about Likelihood of Graduating


                       Pre- Treatment            Post Treatment
                       Men       Women           Men       Women
Economics              36.71     23.78           36.31     26.63
Engineering            8.714     5.624           11.24     8.376 ++
Humanities             31.39     49.87           28.30     44.98
Natural Sciences       19.72     18.82           21.47     17.67
Not Graduate           3.461     1.901           2.688     2.342

Note. This table reports the average reported likelihood of graduat-
ing in each of the major categories (economics/business, engineering,
humanities/ social sciences, natural sciences/ math, and not gradu-
ating) on a scale from 0 to 100. To elicit these beliefs, students were
asked: "What do you believe is the percent chance (or chances out of
100) that you would either graduate from NYU with a major in the
following major categories or that you would never graduate/drop-
out (i.e., you will never receive a Bachelor's degree from NYU or
any other university)?" * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 denote
significance for test of equality of means by gender within treatment.
+ p < 0.1, ++ p < 0.05,+++ p < 0.01 denote significance for test
of equality of means by treatment within gender.




                                 44
                         Table 4: Risk and Time Discount Preference, by Gender

                                                     Full Sample       Men       Women          p-value, H0 : Men = Women
                                Mean                     0.874         0.858    0.884                          0.008
Panel A:                        SD                       0.097         0.102      0.094                        0.242
Time Discount Factor            Median                   0.899         0.888     0.918                         0.032
(i )                            10th Percentile          0.722         0.699      0.728                        0.295
                                90th Percentile          0.966         0.958    0.972                          0.000

                                Mean                     1.660         1.38     1.824                         0.0001
Panel B:                        SD                       1.241         1.214      1.230                        0.863
Coefficient of Relative         Median                   0.935         0.935    2.310                          0.000
Risk Aversion (i )              10th Percentile          0.000         0.000      0.000                           -
                                90th Percentile          3.460         3.46        3.46                           -

                                Observations              417           154        263
Note. This table reports the following statistics for the discount factor ( ) in panel A and the coefficient of relative risk
aversion () in panel B: mean, the standard deviation, and the 50th, 10th, and 90th percentiles of the distribution for the
full sample, men, and women. Details on estimation of  and  are in appendix section A.5. The last column reports the
p-value for whether we can reject the null hypothesis that these statistics are equal across gender. We conduct pairwise
t-tests for the difference in means between men and women and a test on the equality of standard deviations. For the three
percentiles, we run a quantile regression of the parameter on an indicator for male and a constant term; the p-value indicates
whether the coefficient on `men' was significant in these regressions. For all tests,  ,   
                                                                                              , and   
                                                                                                         represent significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively




                                                              45
             Table 5: Risk and Time Discount Preferences, by Reported Major and Gender

Panel A: Full Sample                                  All    Economics/ Business         Engineering      Humanities       Natural Science      p-value

                               Mean                 0.874              0.858                 0.852            0.883              0.882           0.056
                               SD                   0.097              0.100                 0.114            0.095              0.092           0.618
Panel A1:
                               Median               0.899              0.888                 0.888            0.928              0.899              -
Discount Factor (i )
                               10th Percentile      0.707              0.680                 0.728            0.707              0.728              -
                               90th Percentile      0.966              0.966                 0.966            0.972              0.966              -

                               Mean                  1.66              1.62                   1.39             1.78               1.59           0.370
Panel A2:                      SD                   1.241              1.232                  1.22             1.29               1.12           0.936
Coefficient of Relative        Median               0.935              0.935                 0.935             2.31              0.935              -
Risk Aversion (i )             10th Percentile      0.000              0.250                 0.000            0.000              0.000              -
                               90th Percentile       3.46              3.46                   3.46             3.46               3.46              -

                               Observations          417                117                    21              204                 75
Panel B: Men                                          All    Economics/ Business         Engineering      Humanities       Natural Science      p-value

                               Mean                 0.858              0.884                 0.871            0.859              0.868           0.325
                               SD                   0.102              0.097                 0.107            0.105              0.106           0.715
Panel B1:
                               Median               0.888              0.884                 0.910            0.884              0.899              -
Discount Factor (i )
                               10th Percentile      0.699              0.699                 0.667            0.707              0.704              -
                               90th Percentile      0.958              0.958                 0.958            0.958              0.962              -

                               Mean                  1.38              1.42                   1.51             1.45               1.14           0.972
Panel B2:                      SD                    1.22              1.27                   1.15             1.32              0.925           0.945
Coefficient of Relative        Median                0.94              0.94                  0.935             0.94               0.94              -
Risk Aversion (i )             10th Percentile      0.000              0.000                 0.000            0.593              0.125              -
                               90th Percentile       3.46              3.46                   3.46             3.46               2.31              -

                               Observations          154                59                     10               55                 30
Panel C: Women                                        All    Economics/ Business         Engineering      Humanities       Natural Science      p-value

                               Mean                 0.877              0.859                 0.857            0.880              0.900           0.035
                               SD                   0.097              0.106                 0.132            0.099              0.081           0.567
Panel C1:
                               Median               0.899              0.888                 0.924            0.930              0.932              -
Discount Factor (i )
                               10th Percentile      0.722              0.667                 0.659            0.707              0.774              -
                               90th Percentile      0.966              0.972                 0.972            0.966              0.972              -

                               Mean                  1.87              1.76                   1.26             1.88               2.13           0.299
Panel C2:                      SD                    1.26              1.19                   1.35             1.27               1.28           0.859
Coefficient of Relative        Median                2.31              2.31                  0.935             2.31               2.31              -
Risk Aversion (i )             10th Percentile       0.25              0.250                 0.000            0.250              0.250              -
                               90th Percentile       3.46              3.46                   3.46             3.46               3.46              -

                               Observations          263                58                     11              149                 45
Note. This table reports the following statistics for the discount factor ( ) and the coefficient of relative risk aversion (): mean, the standard
deviation, and the 50th, 10th, and 90th percentiles of the distribution for the full sample, men, and women, broken down by the major students
reported they were planning on choosing at the time of the survey. Details on estimation of  and  are in appendix section A.5. The last column
shows the p-statistic for an ANOVA test of the null hypothesis that the means are jointly equal across majors and the p-statistic for Bartlett's test
for equal variances across major groups.
                                                                          46
       Table 6: Regression of Measures on Observable Characteristics

                                                Discount Factor                     CRRA Coefficient

                                     Overall         Men         Women     Overall      Men         Women
               Male                  -0.029                                -0.432
                                     (0.010)                               (0.125)
   SAT Math (in 100s)                 -0.004        0.014        -0.016    -0.187      -0.114        -0.226
                                     (0.007)        (0.013)      (0.009)   (0.086)     (0.132)       (0.116)
   SAT Verbal(in 100s)                0.008         -0.001       0.007     -0.131      -0.233        -0.093
                                     (0.008)        (0.013)      (0.010)   (0.093)     (0.149)       (0.121)
               White                 0.046          -0.020       0.075     -0.067      -0.387         0.039
                                     (0.014)        (0.024)      (0.016)   (0.181)     (0.336)       (0.220)
               Asian                  0.017         -0.047       0.044     -0.050      -0.523         0.142
                                     (0.016)        (0.027)      (0.018)   (0.178)     (0.333)       (0.218)
Parent Income ($100,000)              0.002         -0.003       0.006      0.064       0.073         0.057
                                     (0.004)        (0.006)      (0.005)   (0.051)     (0.081)       (0.069)
       Observations                       417        154          263       417         154            263
                R2                        0.07       0.03         0.12      0.06        0.07          0.02
 F-stat (excluding Male)             3.71            0.77        6.22      2.66        2.16           1.21
Note. This table regresses the two preference parameters, the discount factor i and the CRRA coefficient
i , on a series of demographic characteristics and also shows the regression results for subsamples of men and
women in the sample. Omitted from the table are a constant, indicator variables for if the SAT scores are
missing, and an indicator variable for if parental income is missing. SAT scores are scaled to be in terms of 100
point increments. Parental earnings are scaled to be in $100,000 increments. We report the F-stat for a joint
test for significance of coefficients excluding the coefficient on gender. Standard errors are in parentheses,
                           
p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.001




                                                            47
           Table 7: Major Choice and Risk and Time Preferences

                             Log Probability of Graduating in Major (Relative to Hum.)

                            Economics       Engineering     Natural Science        No Graduation

Men                          3.344            2.587              1.868                 2.369
                              (0.809)         (0.775)            (0.770)                (0.688)
Std. Discount Factor         -0.971           -0.0163             -0.267                -0.492
                              (0.397)         (0.341)            (0.368)                (0.349)
Std. Risk Coefficient         -0.0181          -0.213             -0.182                 0.198
                              (0.407)         (0.374)            (0.375)                (0.342)

R2                             0.189            0.135             0.144                  0.076
Observations                    417              417               417                    417
Controls                        Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes
Note. The outcome variable in these regressions is the log relative probability of graduating in each
major relative to the omitted major, humanities/ social sciences. We regress this on an indicator for
gender and standardized versions of the discount factor and the CRRA coefficient (standardized to
have mean = 0, SD = 1). We include controls for SAT math score, SAT verbal scores, dummies for
missing SAT math and SAT verbal scores, dummies for White and Asian race categories (the omitted
category is all other races) and expected earnings at age 22 (relative to humanities). Standard errors
are in parentheses, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                 48
           Table 8: Population Belief Error by Major and Gender

                                                                 Percent Error

                                               Actual                                  Absolute
                                 All          Men          Women           All        Men            Women
Economics                        18.88        4.188        27.14           42.46      34.96         46.68
Engineering                      -10.46       -19.29       -5.489          31.64      29.96         32.58
Natural Sciences                 5.916        -12.82       16.45           39.74      32.12         44.02
Humanities                       8.341        0.754        12.61           34.42      28.38         37.82
Not Graduate                     -7.483       -22.99       1.234           40.33      35.14         43.25
Observations                     1570         565          1005            1570       565           1005
Number of Respondents            314          113          201             314        113           201
Note. Values indicate the average value of the parameter for the sample by gender, where percent
                                                                   Earnings Beliefsigk -Truthgk
error for individual i of gender g for major k is defined as                 Truthgk
                                                                                                ,   and absolute
                                Earnings Beliefsigk -Truthgk
percent error is defined as   |           Truthgk
                                                             |   for major specific full time population
earnings at age 30. Earnings referring to full-time major specific population earnings at age 30.
Columns 1-3 average over the realized values of the error with positive values indicating an over-
estimate of the population distribution's mean and negative values indicating an underestimate;
columns 4-6 average over the absolute values of the error indicating the typical magnitude of
the error regardless of direction. Note that the error is not defined for men who received the
treatment about female earnings and females who received the treatment about male earnings.
For more details on the treatment, refer to Appendix A1. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
denote significance for test of equality of means by gender.




                                                    49
                                 Table 9: Estimates of Preference Parameter: 

                                 Method 1        Method 1 w/ controls          Method 2       Method 2, Truncated Sample
                                         Cross-Sectional Data                        Pre/Post Treatment Diff. Data
Model 1                           0.00124                0.00096                0.0014                     0.0014
                                 (0.000545)             (0.000485)             (0.00079)                  (0.00075)
R2                                  0.072                  0.183                 0.025                      0.024
Model 2                          0.0437                 0.0422                 0.0245                      0.0245
                                   (0.008)                (0.008)               (0.0123)                   (0.0122)
R2                                  0.087                  0.198                 0.024                      0.020
Model 3                          0.0620                 0.0628                  0.0172                     0.0151
                                   (0.009)                (0.008)              (0.00879)                  (0.00825)
R2                                  0.107                  0.221                 0.021                      0.018
Model 4                           0.310                  0.313                  0.0743                     0.0732
                                   (0.034)                (0.032)               (0.0400)                   (0.0415)
R2                                  0.131                  0.244                 0.020                      0.018
Model 5                           0.112                  0.119                   0.0302                     0.0633
                                   (0.025)                (0.022)               (0.0300)                   (0.0490)
R2                                  0.093                  0.201                 0.018                      0.022

Number of People                     417                    417                   417                         417
Number of Observations              1668                   1668                   1668                       1580
Note. These are the phi coefficients estimated by regressing log relative probability of choosing a major on relative expected
utility from earnings and major fixed effects. Model 1 is the  estimate for utility specification with individual heterogeneity
in both i and i . Model 2 is the  estimate for the the utility specification with individual heterogeneity in i , but with
homogeneous  = 1.7. Model 3 is the  estimate for the utility specification with homogeneous  = 1.7 and  = 0.95. Model
4 is the  estimate for the utility specification with homogeneous median values of  (0.94) and  (0.89). Model 5 is the
 estimate for the utility specification with risk neutrality,  = 0 and heterogeneity in i . In all cases, the omitted major
is humanities/social sciences and major dummies are included for the remaining majors: economics/business, engineering,
natural sciences, and no graduation. Column 1 uses only pre-treatment cross-sectional data, with no demographic controls.
Column 2 includes controls for race, gender, and class year. Column 3 uses the differenced pre- and post- treatment data.
Column 4 excludes observations for individuals who adjusted their expected earnings by more than 100,000 following the
                                                                                                                               
intervention. Boot-strapped standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the individual level;        p < 0.1,
            
p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                               50
         Table 10: Demographic Heterogeneity in Estimates of i

                          Mean          10th percentile       50th percentile   90th percentile
 Full Sample              0.126             -0.274                  0.003          0.670
                       (0.0310)             (0.0689)               (0.0033)        (0.1306)
    Women                 0.081             -0.218                  0.001          0.433
                       (0.0298)             (0.0602)               (0.0016)        (0.1361)
      Men                 0.210             -0.398                  0.029          1.142
                       (0.0718)             (0.0934)               (0.0300)        (0.2609)
Upperclassmen             0.084              -0.218                 0.001          0.540
                       (0.0445)             (0.1762)               (0.0037)        (0.1426)
   Freshmen               0.164             -0.276                  0.005          0.850
                       (0.0501)             (0.0578)               (0.0064)        (0.2234)
Note. Individual  calculated by regressions of log relative probability on utility component
interacted with an indicator for unique identifier, all results for the most general model (hetero-
geneous  and ). Sample truncated at the 5th and 95th percentile of the i estimates to remove
outlier values. Boot-strapped robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at
                                                    
the individual level      p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.




                                                       51
Table 11: Own Earnings Choice Elasticities: Average percent change in the likelihood of choosing
a major due to a 10% increase in earnings in that major

                  %  Probability              %  Probability           %  Probability            %  Probability                  %  Probability
               Economics/Business                Engineering            Humanities/SS            Natural Sciences                 Not Graduate
 Model 1                  0.68                         0.96                     0.88                      0.98                              4.09
                      [0.05, 1.48]                 [0.05, 1.91]             [0.05, 1.27]              [0.06, 2.13]                  [0.33, 10.97]
 Model 2                 3.33                        4.20                      2.92                     3.89                           6.14
                      [0.038,4.75]                 [0.50, 5.91]             [0.36, 4.15]              [0.50, 5.97]                  [1.07, 13.13]
 Model 3                 3.30                        4.23                      3.15                     3.98                           6.12
                      [0.35, 4.52]                 [0.47, 6.14]            [0.35, 4.542]              [0.46, 6.08]                  [0.98, 13.20]
 Model 4                 4.22                        5.53                      3.64                     4.87                            5.67
                       [1.01,8.43]                [1.28, 11.10]             [0.75, 6.47]              [1.11, 9.51]                  [1.27, 10.85]
 Model 5                 1.77                        2.34                       1.16                    1.85                           1.32
                      [-1.22,6.75]                [-1.40, 7.61]             [-0.59, 3.08]            [-1.07, 6.04]                   [-0.65, 3.47]
 Note. Model 1 is the  estimate for utility specification with individual heterogeneity in both i and i . Model 2 is the  estimate for the the
 utility specification with individual heterogeneity in i , but with homogeneous  = 1.7. Model 3 is the  estimate for the utility specification with
 homogeneous  = 1.7 and  = 0.95. Model 4 is the  estimate for the utility specification with homogeneous median values of  (0.94) and  (0.89).
 Model 5 is the  estimate for the utility specification with risk neutrality,  = 0 and heterogeneity in i . To convert the percent change in likelihood
 of choosing a major to an elasticity, divide by 10%, corresponding to the change in earnings. 90% bootstrapped percentile interval for elasticity in
                                                                                                                                                           
 brackets; Significance level for two-sided t-test of null hypothesis H0 : Elasticity for Model K = Elasticity for Model 1:      p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,
 p < 0.01




                                                                          52
                  Table 12: Counterfactual Results: Equalizing Earnings Across Majors

                                        Econ./Business         Engineering         Hum./S.S.         Nat. Science            Not Grad.
Panel A:                 Model 1               0.00                  0.00               0.00                0.00                 -0.01
Counterfactual 1                           [-0.12, 0.27]        [-0.14, 0.41]      [-0.14, 0.10]      [-0.18, 0.30]          [-2.51, 1.10]

Equalizing Risk          Model 3               0.04                  0.02              -0.03                0.01                 -0.97
                                           [-0.77, 1.49]        [-1.51, 1.80]      [-1.35, 0.89]      [-1.36, 1.65]         [-13.55, 2.07]
Panel B                  Model 1               0.00                  0.01               0.00                0.00                 -0.03
Counterfactual 2                           [-0.25, 0.64]        [-0.25, 0.81]      [-0.31, 0.50]      [-0.34, 0.75]          [-5.54, 1.15]

Equalizing Growth        Model 3               0.04                  1.38              -0.00                0.09                 -3.74
                                           [-4.59, 8.19]        [-4.27, 9.47]      [-5.99, 6.25]      [-6.27, 8.71]         [-27.63, 14.65]
Panel C                  Model 1               -0.10                -0.15               0.12                -0.01                1.16
Counterfactual 3                           [-3.46, 0.05]        [-2.77, 0.15]      [-0.12, 1.95]      [-1.84 ,0.71]          [0.05, 27.72]

Equalizing Levels        Model 3               -3.20                -5.82               3.36                -0.38                32.40
                                          [-17.87, 1.51]        [-19.62, 3.25]    [-1.41, 22.44]     [-12.66, 10.46]        [5.22, 112.85]
Panel D                  Model 1               -0.09                -0.10               0.11                -0.01                0.98
Counterfactual 4                           [-2.18, 0.04]        [-2.13, 0.32]      [-0.05, 1.81]      [-1.24, 0.79]          [0.09, 35.30]

Equalizing All 3         Model 3               -2.97                -4.11               4.07                -0.19                31.72
                                          [-12.35, 0.58]        [-15.13, 5.24]    [-0.46, 18.56]      [-8.05, 10.49]         [8.15, 97.10]
Mean Likelihood, Model                         30.26                 9.22              38.86                19.11                2.54
Note. This table depicts the effects of counterfactuals 1 through 4, reporting the median percent change in choosing each major, as well as
the 10th and 90th percentile of changes in brackets below. Model 1 is the utility specification with individual heterogeneity in both i and i .
Model 3 is the utility specification with homogeneous  = 1.7 and  = 0.95. `Mean Likelihood, Model' is the likelihood of choosing each major
in the absence of the counterfactual.




        Table 13: The Gender Gap in Likelihood of Choosing Major, Equalization Exercise

                                  (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)
                             Baseline          Add           Add µ1 , µ2           Add µ0          Add              Add           Add 
Econ/Business                    0.00            -0.00             0.01              -0.00          -0.01           0.05            9.35
Engineering                      0.00            -0.00             -0.00             -0.01          -0.01           0.01            3.64
Hum./S.S.                        -0.00           0.00              -0.00              0.01           0.01           -0.05          -15.57
Nat. Science                     0.00            -0.00             -0.01             -0.01          -0.04           -0.09           3.13
Not Grad.                        0.00            -0.00             -0.00              0.01           0.04           0.07            -0.55
Note. This table shows the gender gap in the likelihood of choosing each major, where a positive value of 1 indicates
women are 1 percentage point more likely to choose the major than men. The exercise uses model 1, in which each
individual's  and  parameters were estimated assuming heterogeneous values of i and i .



                                                                     53
Appendices
A      Survey Questions

This section describes the data sources used for the information treatments, the survey instrument,
and the hypothetical games.


A.1      Information Treatments

Table A-1 describes the information treatments that students received between the initial survey
of beliefs and the final survey of beliefs.
    Sources:

    1. CPS: The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly survey of about 50,000 households
      conducted by the Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The survey has
      been conducted for more than 50 years. The CPS is the primary source of information on
      the labor force characteristics of the U.S. population. The sample is scientifically selected to
      represent the civilian non-institutional population.

    2. NSCG: The 2003 National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) is a longitudinal survey,
      designed to provide data on the number and characteristics of individuals. The Bureau of
      the Census conducted the NSCG for the NSF (National Science Foundation). The target
      population of the 2003 survey consisted of all individuals who received a bachelor's degree or
      higher prior to April 1, 2000.

    Methodology:

    1. CPS: Our CPS sample is taken from the March 2009 survey. Full time status is defined as
      "usually" working at least 35 hours in the previous year, working at least 45 weeks in the
      previous year, and earning at least $10,000 in the previous year. Average employment rates,
      average earnings, and percent with greater than $35,000 or $85,000 earnings is calculated
      using a sample of 2,739 30 year old respondents.

    2. NSCG: We calculate inflation adjusted earnings using the Consumer Price Index. The salary
      figures we report are therefore equivalent to CPS figures in 2009 March real dollars. Full
      time status is defined as in the CPS sample. Given the need to make precise calculations for

                                                 54
         each field of study group, we use the combined sample of 30-35 year old respondents and age
         adjust the reported statistics for 30 year olds. This sample consists of 14,116 individuals. To
         calculate average earnings, we use an earnings regression allowing for separate age intercepts,
         one each for 6 ages 30-35. The predicted value of earnings from the regression is used as
         the estimate of average earnings for 30 year olds. For the percent full time employed, and
         percent with earnings greater than $35,000 and $85,000, we use a logit model to predict these
         percentages for 30 year olds and include a separate coefficient for each of the 6 ages 30-35.


A.2        Survey Instrument

Because we wanted to approximate life cycle utility from each major, we collected beliefs about
both initial earnings (i.e., just after college graduation), and for later periods, when earnings might
be believed to be much higher. We collected post-graduation beliefs for three periods:

   1. First year after college graduation (when most respondents would be aged 22-24)

   2. Age 30

   3. Age 45

       At each of those periods, we ask respondents for their beliefs about their own earnings (including
measures of dispersion), work status (not working, part time, full time), probability of marriage,
and spouse's earnings.
       An example question on expected earnings at age 30: "If you received a Bachelor's degree in
each of the following major categories and you were working FULL TIME when you are 30 years
old what do you believe is the average amount that you would earn per year? "19 The instructions
emphasized to the respondents that their answers should reflect their own beliefs, and not use any
outside information.20
  19
       We also provided definitions of working full time ("working at least 35 hours per week and 45 weeks per year").
Individuals were instructed to consider in their response the possibility they might receive an advanced/graduate
degree by age 30. Therefore, the beliefs about earnings we collected incorporated beliefs about the possibility of
other degrees earned in the future and how these degrees would affect earnings. We also instructed respondents to
ignore the effects of price inflation.
  20
     We included these instructions: "This survey asks YOUR BELIEFS about the earnings among different groups.
Although you may not know the answer to a question with certainty, please answer each question as best you can.
Please do not consult any outside references (internet or otherwise) or discuss these questions with any other people.
This study is about YOUR BELIEFS, not the accuracy of information on the internet."


                                                           55
   Our questions on earnings were intended to elicit beliefs about the distribution of future earn-
ings. We asked three questions on earnings: beliefs about expected (average) earnings, beliefs
about the percent chance earnings would exceed $35,000, and percent change earnings would ex-
ceed $85,000. As detailed below, we use this information to estimate individual-specific distribution
of earnings beliefs.
   Beliefs about labor supply at age 30 were elicited as follows: "What do you believe is the percent
chance of the following: (1) You are working full-time, (2) You are working part-time, (3) You are
not working at all, when you are 30 years old if you received a Bachelor's degree in each of the
following? Note: Your answers should sum to 100 for each major category."
   The full survey questionnaire is available from the authors upon request.


A.3    EG Game: Survey Question

The following text is the text provided in the choice problem which elicits risk preferences.
   Consider the hypothetical situation below (Table A-2) where you are presented with 6 different
games of chance. The payoff in each game depends on the toss of a coin. For example, Game 2
below pays $24 if the coin lands on Heads and $36 if it lands on Tails. Since half of the times a
coin will land on Heads and half of the time if will land on Tails, there is a 50% chance of receiving
$24 under game 2, and a 50% chance of receiving $36. Similarly, in game 6, there is a 50% chance
of receiving $2 and a 50% chance of receiving $70. Which game would you like to participate in?
(Choose one)


A.4    CW Game: Survey Question

The following text is the text provided in the choice problem which elicits patience parameters.
   Consider the hypothetical situation below (Table A-3) where you are chosen to receive $3000,
and are given the choice of two payment options: Option A and Option B . If you choose Option
B, you will receive a sum of money 7 months from today. If you choose Option A, you will receive
a sum of money 1 month from today, but this Option (A) will pay a smaller amount than Option
B. For each of these alternatives below, please choose your preferred option.


A.5    Risk and Discounting Parameters

We use student's responses to the previously described lottery games to identify the coefficient of
risk aversion, , and the discount factor,  . Our approach is quite similar to that of Andersen

                                                 56
et al. (2008), who use both time and risk price lists to jointly estimate discounting and curvature
parameters.
   The six choices in EG Game define regions of  consistent with choosing a given lottery over
all other lotteroies. The ex ante expected utility over a lottery is:
                                               1-                   -
                                            1 ch  -1           1 c1
                                                                  t   -1
                           U (ch , ct ) =                  +
                                            2   1-             2   1-

We assume a Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) form for the utility function where  is
heterogeneous among the agents. To back out , we look for  such that the ex- ante expected
utility is equal from the two lotteries.
   Once we have these critical values of  for the games with the closest expected values, we can
back out the intervals of  for the choices. The choices in the game correspond to the following
intervals of :                              
                                            (3.47, )       if Game 1,
                                            
                                            (1.16, 3.47)
                                                           if Game 2,
                                            
                                            (0.71, 1.16)
                                            
                                                           if Game 3,
                                     =
                                            
                                            (0.50, 0.71)
                                                           if Game 4,
                                            
                                            (0, 0.50)      if Game 5,
                                            
                                            (-, 0)
                                            
                                                           if Game 6.

For choice 2 through 5, we assign students the  value that corresponds to the mid-point of the
value range. For a choice of game 1, we assign  = 3.47 and for the game 6, we assign  = 0.
   We then use these  values and students' choices in CW Game to identify their discount factor.
In the survey, students were given the choice of receiving Option A in one month or Option B in
seven months, were told the annual interest rate, and asked to choose which option they preferred
in ten different games. In all cases, the present discounted value of Option B is the same as Option
A + r × Option A, where r is the effective interest rate over a six month time period, with interest
compounded quarterly.
   In this scenario, a person chooses option A if:

                        U (w + Mt ) +   U (w) > U (w) +   U (w + Mt+ )

w indicates one's consumption in a period in addition to the prize; Mt is the money received at
time t; Mt+ is the money if received at time t +  ;  is one's discount factor. If we assume a CRRA


                                                     57
functional form for utility with coefficient of risk aversion given by , we can rewrite the above as:

                         (w + Mt )1-    (w)1-                   (w)1-    (w + Mt+ )1-
                                     +                    >           + 
                            1-           1-                      1-          1-



To solve for  , we must make some assumptions about what consumption would be in the absence
of the prize.21 We assume w = 8400, a value approximately equivalent to the earnings associated
with a 20 hour per week job throughout the school year for a NYU student at the time of the
experiment. Then, if we plug in Mt = A, Mt+ = B ,  = 1
                                                     2 , a person is indifferent between the two

options if :

                                          1                                     1
                     (A + 8400)1- +  2 (8400)1- = (8400)1- +  2 (B + 8400)1-
                                                                                                      2
                                                                (A + 8400)(1-) - 8400(1-)
                                                      =
                                                                (8400 + B )(1-) - 8400(1-)

Table A-4 shows the discount factors associated with indifference in each of the ten choices in game
1 and each of six possible  implied by the choices in the EG Game.
       For a rational student, there should be a single point where they switch from choosing A to
choosing B and then all games following should choose B. We assign students who behave rationally
the  value that corresponds to the midpoint of the  for the game they last pick option A and the
 for the game in which they first pick option B, given .


B        Earnings Estimation Details

B.1        Parameter Estimation

In this section, we outline the algorithm for retrieving the moments of the earnings distribution
specific to each individual, major and treatment status.
       For each student i, major k , and experimental treatment status j = 1, 2 at age t, we estimate
a log normal distribution with the following structure:

                              log wijkt  N (µijkt , ijkt ),
                              where µijkt = µijk0 + µijk1 (t - 22) + µijk2 (t - 22)2                           (B-1)
                              ijkt = ijk0 + ijk1 (t - 22)
  21
       In the previous game, we assumed that consumption in a `period' was equal to zero net of the prize because the
dollar values of the prize were small enough that one could consume that prize in a single day. With the larger prizes
in this lottery, it is more reasonable to conceive of a period as a year, rather than a single day.


                                                           58
    Our estimation algorithm proceeds in two steps. In Step 1, we assume combinations of values
of ijk0 and ijk1 over a grid of values from 0 to 4. We then calculate the closed form solutions
for µijk0 , µijk1 and µijk2 . Using the distribution generated from the 5 parameters, we calculate the
average earnings at age 22, 30 and 45 as well as the probability of earning more than $85000 at age
30 and 45. These are moments that we observe in the data. In Step 2, we calculate an objective
function that is the difference between the above moments in the data and those generated by the
guesses of ijk0 and ijk1 . Our estimator searches for the parameters that minimizes this objective
function using a grid search method.
    In this section, we derive the closed form solutions for the µijk0 , µijk1 , µijk2 conditional on ijk0
and ijk1 . Under the assumption of a log normal distribution, we can write the log of expected
earnings at ages 22, 30 and 45 in terms of the 5 unknown parameters µijk0 , µijk1 , µijk2 , ijk0 and
ijk1 .

                                                             2
                                   log(wijk22 ) = µijk0 + 0.5ijk 0                                  (B-2)


                log(wijk30 ) = µijk0 + µijk1 (30 - 22) + µijk2 (30 - 22)2 + 0.5ijk
                                                                               2
                                                                                   30               (B-3)


                log(wijk45 ) = µijk0 + µijk1 (45 - 22) + µijk2 (45 - 22)2 + 0.5ijk
                                                                               2
                                                                                   45               (B-4)

    From equation B2 for a given ijk0 , we can back out µijk0 siuch that

                                  µijk0 = log (wijk22 ) - 0.5ijk0 2                                 (B-5)

We then take the difference between equations B3 and B2 (referred to as D30 below) and rearrange
to obtain the following expression:

    D30 = log(wijk30 ) - log(wijk22 ) = µijk1 (30 - 22) + µijk2 (30 - 22)2 + (30 - 22)ijk0 ijk(B-6)
                                                                                              1
                             D30
                                      = µijk1 + µijk2 (30 - 22) + ijk0 ijk1                   (B-7)
                           (30 - 22)
    Similarly, we can take the difference between equations B4 and B2 (referred to as D45 below)
and obtain an analogous expression:

   D45 = log(wijk45 ) - log(wijk22 ) = µijk1 (45 - 22) + µijk2 (45 - 22)2 + 0.5(ijk
                                                                                2        2
                                                                                    45 - ijk22 ) (B-8)


    Using B7 and B6, we obtain an expression for µijk2
                    D45       D30                                              2
                           -                = µijk2 (45 - 30) + 0.5 × (30 - 22)ijk 1                (B-9)
                  (45 - 22) (30 - 22)
                                                   D45           D30
                                                 (45-22)   -   (30-22)        2
                                     µijk2 =                             - 0.5ijk 1                (B-10)
                                                    (45 - 30)

                                                   59
   Finally we can write µijk1 in terms of µijk2 , ijk1 and ijk0 :

                                   D30
                       µijk1 =             - µijk2 × (30 - 22) - ijk1 ijk0                      (B-11)
                                 (30 - 22)

   We then use a grid search estimator over ijk0 and ijk1 and solve for the analytical solutions
of µijk0 , µijk1 and µijk2 in terms of ijk0 and ijk1 (as derived above). We specify a grid of 200
points between the values of 0 and 4 for ijk0 and the values of -0.5 and 0.2 for ijk1 and choose the
sigma vector that minimizes an objective function. The objective function that we choose is the
square of the distance between the data moments and the predicted moments. For our estimation
we use moments about the average earnings at ages 22, 30 and 45. We also use the probability of
earning more than $85,000 at age 30 and 45.
   Note that there are a small number of individuals, who have values for mean and probability of
earning more than 35000 that cannot be rationalized by a log earnings distribution for reasonable
values of ijk0 and ijk1 . For these observations, we replace them by the mean of ijk0 andijk1 in
our sample.
   We then simulate draws from the estimated distribution to plot the median age earnings profile
and compare our estimates to the true distribution in the ACS. Note that like our data, we recode
simulation draws above $500,000 as $500,000 and earnings below $10,000 at $10,000. We also set
earnings past age 45 to be constant, since we do not have data moments on expectations past age
45 to identify the curvature in those years. Since the earnings profiles are fairly flat post age 45
in the ACS, we believe these profiles reflect true earnings profiles observed in the data. In Figure
A-1, we plot these profiles before and after the information treatment for each major. Although the
curvature is similar, there is less dispersion in the beliefs at every age after the students have been
exposed to the treatment. We also report the fit for our estimates relative to the true age- earnings
profiles. Figure A-2 shows fit for our mean age-earnings profiles by major relative to the mean age
earnings profile in the ACS. For each major, the wage function is similarly concave reflecting the
standard hump shaped age-earnings profiles.




                                                  60
C     Robustness checks

In our discussion of parameter identification (Section 5), we proposed two different estimation
specifications for . This section reports the results of our analyses for the more restrictive approach
of estimating .


C.1    Elasticities

In this section, we present estimates of the major-choice elasticities under the alternative estimation
approach.
    Table A-8 reports how elastic major choice is to a 10 percent increase in earnings for the
specification in which the  and ik are estimated using a linear regression of earnings expectations
on major choice likelihoods in the cross-sectional data (column 1 of Table 9).
    When compared to estimates in Table 11, the magnitude of the elasticities is much larger for
Models 2-5 (it is similar for Model 1 due to the similar estimates of  across the estimation methods).
Given that Method 1 generally yields higher estimates of  than the second method (Table 9), this
is not surprising.
    Across estimation specifications, however, the main takeaway of this exercise is the same: model
specification matters when considering how sensitive major choice is to earnings. In all three
estimation methods, the most general model of utility has the smallest elasticities.


C.2    Counterfactuals

In this section, we conduct robustness checks for the counterfactuals. First, in Table A-9, we report
the results of all four counterfactuals for Model 2 ( = 1.7, heterogeneous i ), Model 4 (median
values of  and  ) and Model 5 (risk neutrality,  = 0), using Method 2 from Table 9. We also
report the results for counterfactual 4 using the more restrictive method of estimating  (Method
1 from Table 9); this is reported in Table A-10; we do not report the other three counterfactual
results under this specification due to space, but the qualitative results are similar.
    As in the elasticity robustness checks, the counterfactual results under the less general estimates
of  are larger, but in the same direction as our main results. Even in the least conservative model
(Model 4), the effect of this counterfactual is small in real terms: it decreases the likelihood of
majoring in economics by 23.64 percent, which is equivalent to 7.2 percentage points. This suggests
that the results we report in our main paper are more conservative estimates of the true effect of


                                                  61
earnings on major choice, but that the general pattern we find of small average impacts of earnings
on major choice holds across estimation methods.




                                                62
Appendix Figures and Tables

               Figure A-1: Median Earnings Pre and Post Treatment
                                Economics / Business
        Pre-Treatment Beliefs                          Post-Treatment Beliefs




                                    Engineering
        Pre-Treatment Beliefs                          Post-Treatment Beliefs




                                    Humanities
        Pre-Treatment Beliefs                          Post-Treatment Beliefs




                                        63
                        Natural Sciences
Pre-Treatment Beliefs                      Post-Treatment Beliefs




                        No Graduation
Pre-Treatment Beliefs                      Post-Treatment Beliefs




                              64
Figure A-2: Mean Earnings (Pre-Treatment) by Age Compared to Mean Earnings in ACS
         Economics/ Business                                Engineering




            Humanities                                Natural Sciences




                                 Not Graduating




                                       65
                                     Table A-1: Information revealed in the study


                   Info Treatment 1: Information about age 30 individuals (All Individuals Treatment)
The following information is from the US Census Bureau.

Among all individuals (including college and non-college graduates) aged 30:

The percentage that are working full time is                                                 59.80%

The percentage of those that are working full time who are women is                          42.70%

The average annual earnings of those that are working full time is                           $45,726

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $35,000 per year is   59.00%

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $85,000 per year is   7.30%



             Info Treatment 2: Information about age 30 college-graduate individuals (College Treatment)
The following information is from the US Census Bureau.

Among all college graduates currently aged 30:

The percentage that are working full time is                                                 69.80%

The percentage of those that are working full time who are women is                          52.80%

The average annual earnings of those that are working full time is                           $60,376

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $35,000 per year is   80.70%

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $85,000 per year is   14.80%



Info Treatment 3: Info about age 30 female college-graduate indivs, by major (Female Major Specific Treatment)
The following information is from the US Census Bureau.

Among all female college graduates aged 30 who received a Bachelor's degree in major (M):

                                                                                              Econ      Eng       Hum       Nat      No Grad

The percentage that are working full time is                                                 60.6%     72.8%     52.3%     55.3%      51.6%

The average annual earnings of those that are working full time is                           $60,730   $75,086   $49,154   $60,021   $34,603

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $35,000 per year is   85.5%     99.0%     72.2%     84.0%      44.9%

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $85,000 per year is   27.5%     26.9%      8.0%      8.5%      1.6%



Info Treatment 4: Info about age 30 male college-graduate individuals, by major (Male Major Specific Treatment)
The following information is from the US Census Bureau.

Among all male college graduates aged 30 who received a Bachelor's degree in major (M):

                                                                                              Econ      Eng       Hum       Nat      No Grad

The percentage that are working full time is                                                 93.5%     91.6%     77.6%     81.9%      72.1%

The average annual earnings of those that are working full time is                           $74,542   $82,377   $52,937   $72,583   $47,803

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $35,000 per year is   92.4%     95.2%     78.8%     90.6%      65.2%

The percentage of those that are working full time that earn more than $85,000 per year is   31.5%     33.6%      8.7%     24.2%      5.7%



                                         Also Revealed to All Respondents in Final Stage
                                                                                              Econ      Eng       Hum       Nat      No Grad

Among all college graduates aged 30 who received a Bachelor's degree in major (M):

The percentage of those who are women is                                                     34.70%    18.20%    55.20%    48.00%    42.30%




                                                                      66
              Table A-2: Schedule of Payments, EG Game

                    Choice      Heads            Tails
                    Game 1        $28             $28
                    Game 2        $24             $36
                    Game 3        $20             $44
                    Game 4        $16             $52
                    Game 5        $12             $60
                    Game 6        $2              $70
                    Note.   Payoff matrix shown to partici-
                    pants in the game which elicits risk pref-
                    erences. This method of elicitation was
                    derived from Eckel and Grossman (2002).




              Table A-3: Schedule of Payments, CW Game

Game     Option A (1 mo.)        Option B (7 mo.)        Annual Interest Rate
1                3000                    3075                       5
2                3000                    3152                      10
3                3000                    3229                      15
4                3000                    3308                      20
5                3000                    3387                      25
6                3000                    3467                      30
7                3000                    3548                      35
8                3000                    3630                      40
9                3000                    3713                      45
10               3000                    3797                      50
Note. Payoff matrix shown to participants in the game which elicits time prefer-
ences. This method of elicitation was derived from Coller and Williams (1999).




                                        67
                    Table A-4: Discount Rates Associated with Matrix of Game Choices

                       EG Gamble 1        EG Gamble 2         EG Gamble 3     EG Gamble 4       EG Gamble 5                   EG Gamble 6

CW Game Payoffs                =3.47             =2.31             =0.94              =0.61             =0.25                            =0

A=3000 B=3075                     0.97              0.97               0.96              0.96              0.95                          0.95
A=3000 B=3152                     0.95              0.93               0.92              0.91              0.91                          0.91
A=3000 B=3229                     0.92              0.90               0.88              0.87              0.87                          0.86
A=3000 B=3308                     0.90              0.87               0.84              0.84              0.83                          0.82
A=3000 B=3387                     0.87              0.85               0.81              0.80              0.79                          0.78
A=3000 B=3467                     0.85              0.82               0.78              0.77              0.76                          0.75
A=3000 B=3548                     0.83              0.80               0.75              0.74              0.72                          0.71
A=3000 B=3630                     0.81              0.77               0.72              0.71              0.69                          0.68
A=3000 B=3713                     0.69              0.69               0.68              0.68              0.68                          0.68
A=3000 B=3797                     0.77              0.73               0.67              0.65              0.64                          0.62

Observations                    104.00             93.00            112.00              38.00             28.00                         42.00
Note. This table reports the  values that would make a person indifferent between receiving payment A in one month versus payment B in six
months in the CW game, conditional on their implied  from the EG game. For more information on how these are derived, see Appendix section A.5




                          Table A-5: Percent of Sample with Top and Bottom Coding

                                                   Economics       Engineering     Humanities       Natural Science        No Graduation

                                   Top code            0.48            0.48             0.48               0.48                  0.24
                     Age 22
                                Bottom Code            1.92            1.43             1.67               1.92                   6.4

                                  Top Code             3.11            0.95             0.71               0.95                 0.719
                     Age 30
                                Bottom Code            1.43            1.20             1.43               1.43                  5.99
Pre-Treatment
                                  Top Code             5.27            2.39             2.39               2.64                  2.39
                     Age 45
                                Bottom Code            0.96            1.20             1.67               1.20                  4.07

                                  Top Code             2.87            1.67             1.20               1.67                  1.20
                     Age 30
                                Bottom Code            1.43            1.67             1.20               1.20                  2.39
Post-Treatment
                                  Top Code             1.92            1.20             0.96               1.43                  1.67
                     Age 45
                                Bottom Code            1.67            1.20             1.43               1.20                  3.35
Note. This table reports the percent of the sample whose expected earnings are top-coded to $500,000 or bottom-coded to $10,000. N= 417.




                                                                     68
                           Table A-6: Wage Parameters, By Treatment, Major, and Gender

                              Economics/Business                Engineering                Humanities                Natural Science                Not Graduate
                               Men          Women            Men         Women          Men         Women            Men          Women            Men         Women
                      µ0      -0.778         -0.932            -0.736     -0.931        -1.065         -1.303       -0.963         -1.122           -1.886      -2.183
                      µ1       0.107          0.103          0.0647      0.0890         0.0647         0.0904       0.0725         0.0965          0.0484       0.0521

Pre-Treatment         µ2     -0.00300       -0.00287       -0.00172     -0.00251       -0.00141     -0.00229       -0.00172       -0.00265     -0.000424      -0.000453
                      0        0.387          0.472            0.340      0.496         0.368           0.507        0.424          0.521            0.747      0.896
                      1      0.00196        0.00158         0.00417     0.000288       0.00341     -0.000271       0.00102       -0.000101       -0.00273      -0.00594

                      µ0      -0.842         -0.944            -0.815     -0.903        -1.142         -1.256       -0.972         -1.088           -1.709      -2.154
                      µ1      0.0777         0.0699          0.0611      0.0655         0.0787         0.0761       0.0728         0.0724          0.0877       0.107

Post-Treatment        µ2     -0.00185       -0.00192       -0.00143     -0.00179       -0.00210     -0.00214       -0.00189       -0.00202       -0.00223      -0.00298
                      0        0.482          0.499            0.449      0.492         0.437           0.449        0.453          0.496            0.610      0.747
                      1     -0.000274      -0.0000750     0.000381      -0.00153       0.000535      0.00256     -0.0000707       -0.00106       -0.00205      -0.00428

Note. Values indicate the average value for each gender of the parameters governing the individual wage distributions pre- and post- the information treatment.
We assume that the earnings process for individual i of age t in major k during treatment period j is distributed as log wijkt  N (µijkt , ijkt ). The parameters µ0 ,
µ1 and µ2 are parameters for evolution of mean of that distribution such that µijkt = µijk0 + µijk1 (t - 22) + µijk2 (t - 22)2 whereas 0 and 1 are parameters for
the evolution of the dispersion of wages over the lifecycle such that ijkt = ijk0 + ijk1 (t - 22). Earnings are estimated at the scale of $100,000 for computational
tractibility; see Appendix Section B for estimation methods.




                                                                                  69
                           Table A-7: Model Fit: Post- Treatment Likelihood of Major

                                 Economics/Business           Engineering         Humanities/SS              Natural Sciences      Not Graduate
                 Data                     0.302                    0.095                 0.388                      0.191                 0.025
                 Model 1                  0.286                    0.068                 0.428                      0.189                 0.028
 Panel A:        Model 2                  0.284                    0.068                 0.431                      0.189                 0.028
Full Sample      Model 3                  0.283                    0.068                 0.432                      0.189                 0.028
                 Model 4                  0.282                    0.068                 0.433                      0.190                 0.027
                 Model 5                  0.283                    0.069                 0.433                      0.190                 0.026
                 Data                     0.307                    0.093                 0.390                      0.185                 0.026
                 Model 1                  0.301                    0.068                 0.414                      0.185                 0.031
 Panel B:        Model 2                  0.298                    0.068                 0.417                      0.185                 0.032
 Freshmen        Model 3                  0.298                    0.068                 0.417                      0.185                 0.032
                 Model 4                  0.297                    0.069                 0.417                      0.185                 0.031
                 Model 5                  0.300                    0.069                 0.417                      0.185                 0.030
Note. This table compares the untargeted moment, likelihood of choosing each major post- information treatment (data) and the predicted values for
each model. Model 1 is the  estimate for utility specification with individual heterogeneity in both i and i . Model 2 is the  estimate for the the
utility specification with individual heterogeneity in i , but with homogeneous  = 1.7. Model 3 is the  estimate for the utility specification with
homogeneous  = 1.7 and  = 0.95. Model 4 is the  estimate for the utility specification with homogeneous median values of  (0.94) and  (0.89).
Model 5 is the  estimate for the utility specification with risk neutrality,  = 0 and heterogeneity in i .




                    Table A-8: Own Earnings Choice Elasticities:  estimation method 1

                 %  Probability              %  Probability            %  Probability            %  Probability              %  Probability
              Economics/Business                Engineering             Humanities/SS            Natural Sciences              Not Graduate
Model 1                   0.59                        0.83                      0.76                         0.84                     3.49
Model 2                   6.07                        7.67                      5.31                         7.10                    11.34
Model 3                  12.45                       16.07                     11.87                     15.11                       23.90
Model 4                  18.84                       25.06                     16.16                     21.94                       25.81
Model 5                   6.84                        9.11                      4.49                         7.17                     5.09
Note. This table shows elasticities when  is estimated using only cross-sectional data and no demographic controls, not the panel data created in
the experiment. Model 1 is the  estimate for utility specification with individual heterogeneity in both i and i . Model 2 is the  estimate for the
the utility specification with individual heterogeneity in i , but with homogeneous  = 1.7. Model 3 is the  estimate for the utility specification with
homogeneous  = 1.7 and  = 0.95. Model 4 is the  estimate for the utility specification with homogeneous median values of  (0.94) and  (0.89).
Model 5 is the  estimate for the utility specification with risk neutrality,  = 0 and heterogeneity in i .




                                                                         70
                 Table A-9: Counterfactual Results: Equalizing Earnings Across Majors

                                       Econ./Business          Engineering         Hum./S.S.         Nat. Science              Not Grad.
Panel A:                 Model 2               0.04                  0.01              -0.03               0.01                    -0.72
Counterfactual 1                           [-0.55 1.89]         [-1.26, 1.75]      [-1.14, 0.84]      [-0.94, 1.68]            [-11.22, 1.76]

Equalizing Risk          Model 4               2.66                  4.15              -3.68               0.05                   -23.78
                                          [-1.28, 13.75]        [-5.14, 19.32]    [-18.11, 0.68]     [-10.01, 10.38]        [-47.39, -4.74]

                         Model 5               -0.00                 0.00               0.01              -0.00                    -0.22
                                           [-1.51, 0.61]        [-1.72, 1.59]      [-1.72, 1.31]       [-0.74,0.87]            [-4.29, 1.53]
Panel B                  Model 2               0.04                  0.34              -0.00               0.04                    -1.01
Counterfactual 2                           [-3.16, 8.17]        [-2.74, 9.31]      [-4.34, 3.91]      [-4.80, 7.88]         [-28.53, 10.61]

Equalizing Growth        Model 4               0.04                  1.55              -0.02               0.08                    -2.59
                                          [-6.87, 11.90]        [-5.62, 16.54]     [-8.38, 9.19]      [-7.45, 12.77]        [-19.66, 17.84]

                         Model 5               0.01                  0.20              -0.00               0.02                    -0.17
                                           [-2.40, 6.02]        [-2.29, 8.98]      [-4.12, 3.45]       [-2.95,6.69]            [-8.37, 4.65]
Panel C                  Model 2               -2.13                -3.33               2.28              -0.21                    23.32
Counterfactual 3                          [-20.97, 0.76]        [-22.81, 2.22]    [-1.25, 25.05]      [-14.74, 8.52]           [2.62, 167.95]

Equalizing Levels        Model 4               -3.20                -5.82               3.36              -0.38                    32.40
                                          [-17.87, 1.51]        [-19.62, 3.25]    [-1.41, 22.44]     [-12.66, 10.46]           [5.22, 112.85]

                         Model 5               -0.96                -1.36               0.93              -0.04                    8.53
                                           [-9.19, 0.61]        [-10.77, 1.97]    [-0.61, 12.57]      [-6.32, 5.00]            [0.64, 66.86]
Panel D                  Model 2               -1.90                -2.83               2.25              -0.26                    23.11
Counterfactual 4                          [-13.10, 0.61]        [-16.61, 3.21]    [-0.75, 18.40]      [-9.33, 8.07]            [3.28, 146.63]

Equalizing All 3         Model 4               -4.92                -6.43               6.34              -0.13                    41.97
                                          [-18.05, 0.39]        [-20.27, 8.87]    [-0.18, 33.01]     [-11.27, 17.92]           [13.04, 96.24]

                         Model 5               -0.94                -1.09               1.32              -0.02                    6.76
                                           [-7.61, 0.16]        [-8.47, 2.87]     [-0.01, 12.76]      [-4.49, 6.33]            [1.08, 25.72]
Mean Likelihood, Model                         30.26                 9.22              38.86              19.11                    2.54
Note. This table depicts the effects of counterfactuals 1 through 4 for Model 2, Model 4, and Model 5 using the  calculated with estimation
method 2, reporting the median percent change in choosing each major, as well as the 10th and 90th percentile of changes in brackets below.
Model 2 is the utility specification with individual heterogeneity in i , but with homogeneous  = 1.7. Model 4 is the  estimate for the utility
specification with homogeneous median values of  (0.94) and  (0.89). Model 5 is the utility specification with risk neutrality,  = 0 and
heterogeneity in i . `Mean Likelihood, Model' is the likelihood of choosing each major in the absence of the counterfactual.




                                                                     71
                              Table A-10: Counterfactual 4:  Estimation Method 1

                                    Econ./Business          Engineering          Hum./S.S.          Nat. Science             Not Grad.
Model 1                                     -0.08                 -0.09                 0.10              -0.00                  0.85
                                        [-1.91, 0.04]         [-1.81, 0.28]      [-0.04, 1.58]       [-0.97, 0.69]           [0.08, 30.18]
Model 2                                     -3.62                 -5.09                 3.89              -0.60                  44.83
                                       [-23.92, 0.90]        [-28.04, 5.64]      [-2.05, 35.09]     [-16.16, 14.74]         [5.87, 401.01]
Model 3                                    -11.81                -15.68                 13.14             -2.16                 163.14
                                       [-41.87, 0.98]       [-47.53, 18.72]      [-3.93, 81.23]     [-30.58, 42.80]         [31.69,943.85]
Model 4                                     23.64                -28.31                 21.42             -4.77                 305.22
                                       [-60.47, 0.16]       [-64.54, 36.09]     [-4.42, 209.89]     [-44.90, 79.66]        [64.60, 1471.76]
Model 5                                     -3.79                 -4.10                 4.60              -0.09                  26.88
                                       [-26.55, 0.44]       [-28.30, 10.60]      [-0.06, 54.29]     [-16.54, 24.18]         [4.05, 133.37]
Mean Likelihood, Model                      30.26                 9.22                  38.86            19.11                   2.54
Note. This table shows counterfactual 4 when  is estimated using only cross-sectional data, not the panel data created in the experiment. In
counterfactual 4, students believe all majors have the same earnings parameters as a humanities major. We report the median percent change
in choosing each major, as well as the 10th and 90th percentile of changes in brackets. Model 1 is the utility specification with individual
heterogeneity in both i and i . Model 2 is the utility specification with individual heterogeneity in i , but with homogeneous  = 1.7. Model
3 is the utility specification with homogeneous  = 1.7 and  = 0.95. Model 4 is the  estimate for the utility specification with homogeneous
median values of  (0.94) and  (0.89). Model 5 is the utility specification with risk neutrality,  = 0 and heterogeneity in i . `Mean Likelihood,
Model' is the likelihood of choosing each major in the absence of the counterfactual.




                                                                      72
