                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CAN LOW RETIREMENT SAVINGS BE RATIONALIZED?

                                          Jason S. Scott
                                         John B. Shoven
                                          Sita N. Slavov
                                         John G. Watson

                                       Working Paper 26784
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26784


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We thank Hannes Schwandt and participants at the Stanford 2019 Working Longer and
Retirement Conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26784.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jason S. Scott, John B. Shoven, Sita N. Slavov, and John G. Watson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Low Retirement Savings Be Rationalized?
Jason S. Scott, John B. Shoven, Sita N. Slavov, and John G. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 26784
February 2020
JEL No. D14,D15,H55,J26

                                            ABSTRACT

Simple presentations of the life cycle model often suggest a constant level of real consumption in
retirement. Similarly, financial planners commonly suggest that people save for retirement in
such a way as to enable them to maintain a level retirement standard of living equal to their
standard of living while working. However, constant consumption with age is only optimal under
the precise and unlikely condition that the subjective rate of time preference is equal to the real
interest rate. Most people exhibit a positive rate of pure time preference and additionally discount
the future by both mortality and morbidity risks. In comparison, the real interest rate is roughly
zero percent and the term structure of interest rates suggests that this condition is likely to persist.
These considerations suggest that optimal consumption in the life cycle model declines with age.
This finding has major implications for optimal retirement saving. For instance, we find that for
many, perhaps most, people in the bottom half of the lifetime earnings distribution, it is optimal
to spend out their retirement wealth well before death and to live on Social Security alone after
that. Very low earners may find it optimal to not engage in retirement saving at all.


Jason S. Scott                                     Sita N. Slavov
jscott457@yahoo.com                                Schar School of Policy and Government
                                                   George Mason University
John B. Shoven                                     3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1
Department of Economics                            Arlington, VA 22201
579 Serra Mall at Galvez Street                    and NBER
Stanford, CA 94305-6015                            sslavov@gmu.edu
and NBER
shoven@stanford.edu                                John G. Watson
                                                   725 Magnolia Street
                                                   Menlo Park, CA 94025
                                                   United States
                                                   jgwatson@stanford.edu
                           Can Low Retirement Savings Be Rationalized?
                 Jason S. Scott, John B. Shoven, Sita N. Slavov and John G. Watson


    1. Introduction

        Numerous academic articles, and hundreds of stories in the popular press have been

devoted to the issue of inadequate financial preparation for retirement. The general consensus

seems to be that Americans are woefully unprepared for retirement (see, for example, Gomes,

Hoyem, Hu and Ravina (2018)). But what does it mean to be prepared for retirement? While

the particular targets may vary, "prepared for retirement" means being able to sustain a

particular standard of living, corresponding to a fixed level of consumption spending,

throughout retirement. The target standard of living typically corresponds to the pre-

retirement standard of living and is expressed as a fixed percentage of pre-retirement earnings.

The assumed percentage can vary, but most studies conclude that being able to replace

somewhere between 65% and 85% of pre-retirement income corresponds to adequate

retirement preparation. 1 A recent contribution of this type is Ghilarducci, Papadopoulos and

Webb (2017), who assume that the target replacement rate is 85 percent for low income

individuals and 65 percent for high income people.

        The desirability of a constant level of consumption is an article of faith in these studies,

but it is not a necessary outcome of an economic optimization. The standard life cycle model

does suggest that level consumption is optimal, but only under very specific conditions. For

example, economic theory suggests that the utility from future consumption should suffer a



1
 The needed income is less than 100% because of lower tax rates, lower work-related expenses and no longer
needing to save for retirement.

                                                                                                             1
discount relative to the utility from current consumption. The difficulty many individuals have

delaying gratification speaks to the appropriateness of this discount. However, future

consumption also can be had at a discount due to prevailing real interest rates. Only when an

individual's subjective rate of time preference is perfectly offset by earned interest is steady

consumption optimal.

       Many factors that go into life cycle optimization suggest optimal consumption should be

declining. The essential question compares the discount rate for future utility to asset returns

that make future consumption cheaper. Beyond a pure rate of time preference reflecting

impatience, future utility may be discounted for mortality. Survey evidence further suggests

individuals attach a lower value to consumption in bad health states, particularly in states with

mental impairments like dementia (Goda et al. (2015)). All of these factors push in the direction

of declining consumption over the life cycle, particularly at older ages when health and

mortality risks are greater and liquidity constraints no longer bind. These factors are stronger

for lower wage workers, who typically face higher mortality and health risks (see, e.g., Chetty et

al. 2016) and receive a Social Security benefit that replaces a relatively high percentage of their

pre-retirement income.

       The asset return side of the ledger has seen dramatic change over the past 10-15 years.

Real interest rates have collapsed to 0 percent, and yield curves suggest this level of interest is

likely to persist for decades. As we will show, even if utility discounting and asset returns

previously offset each other, resulting in steady consumption, the collapse of interest rates

should bring consumption forward and result in declining optimal consumption.




                                                                                                      2
       Declining optimal consumption prior to and in retirement has implications for numerous

financial planning topics. For example, needed savings for retirement could be dramatically

lower if declining consumption is optimal. In fact, observed saving behavior is more easily

understood when viewed through the lens of optimal declining consumption. Delaying Social

Security may no longer be optimal even if it results in a higher expected present value of

benefits, as Social Security income remains steady in real terms and one cannot borrow against

future Social Security benefits. Our analysis suggests that for moderate to low income

individuals living in a world of high discount rates and low interest rates, optimal consumption

at older ages should be declining, assets accumulated for retirement should be relatively low,

and full reliance on Social Security should occur fairly early in retirement. Our analysis should

not be interpreted as a recommendation to individuals, who must consider numerous other

factors that are not captured in our stylized life cycle model. Rather, we derive a set of

conditions under which low saving can be rationalized within a life cycle model.

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature on

optimal consumption paths in life cycle models. In section 3, we solve a standard life cycle

model and explore its implications for the optimal path of consumption. In Section 4, we

motivate relevant parameters for the three main discount factors driving consumption: time,

mortality and health. In Section 5, we consider the impact of these parameters on the pattern

of optimal consumption. In Section 6, we consider the impact of optimal declining

consumption on Social Security claiming behavior and demand for private annuities. Section 7

summarizes our conclusions and mentions areas for further exploration of this topic.




                                                                                                    3
   2. Literature on Optimal Consumption Paths

       In the standard life cycle model, individuals maximize utility by smoothing consumption

over their lifetime, given their preferences and the relative prices of current and future

consumption (Friedman 1957; Modigliani 1966). While consumption smoothing avoids sharp

jumps in consumption, it does not necessarily imply steady consumption. The slope of optimal

consumption over the lifetime depends on the difference between the interest rate and the

subjective rate of time preference. Additional features have been added to the basic life cycle

model to better fit the data (see Attanasio and Weber (2010) for a review); for example, Shefrin

and Thaler (1988) add features from behavioral economics to account for less-than-perfect

rationality. There is also a literature relating standard financial planning advice to the life cycle

model (see e.g., Kotlikoff (2006); Scholz and Seshadri (2009); Scott et al. (2019)). Most relevant

to our work in this paper, financial planning often relies on a target replacement rate, or ratio

of post-retirement to pre-retirement income. However, that assumption can be at odds with

the predictions of a life cycle model. For example, Scholz and Shshadri (2009) use a life cycle

model to show that optimal replacement rates can vary greatly across the population and are

often not consistent with the standard range of replacement rates used in financial planning.

Scott et al. (2019) show that the target replacement rate should be adjusted in response to low

returns and low wage growth. This paper contributes to that literature by showing that

declining consumption during retirement, not the steady consumption implied by a target

replacement rate, may be optimal for most individuals.

       Many papers in the life cycle consumption literature examine the pattern of saving,

income and consumption during working years. Not many examine these patterns during


                                                                                                        4
retirement years, and only a few papers especially emphasize the possibility that declining

consumption with age may be optimal, or that exhausting financial assets well in advance of

death can be part of the optimized plan as well. One such set of papers focuses on the so-called

"hump shaped" profile of optimal consumption. Gourinchas and Parker (2002) is representative

of this set of papers, and their results suggest that optimal consumption (adjusted for family

size) begins to fall at roughly age 45. Relatedly, the authors estimate the pure rate of time

preference to be between 4.0 and 4.5 percent, the degree of risk aversion to be between 0.5

and 1.4 and the real, safe after-tax interest rate to be 3.44 percent. Therefore, the degree of

impatience exceeds the market return to patience (the real interest rate). Part of what makes

our paper valuable is that the real interest rate since 2009 has been roughly zero percent and

financial markets are forecasting that extremely low interest rates are here to stay for the long

haul. Banks, Blundell, Levell and Smith (2019) establish empirically that consumption declines in

both the United Kingdom and the United States after age 60, even before the dramatic decline

in real interest rates that occurred in 2009. Presumably, the observed negative slopes would be

steeper in the current zero real interest rate environment.2

        The two papers closest to ours are Hurd (1989) and Hammermesh (1984).

Hammermesh (1984) examines consumption early in retirement using the first two waves of

the Retirement History Study from the early 1970s. He finds that consumption in the year or


2
  Another literature has been concerned with changes in consumption at the time of retirement. The life cycle
framework implies that consumption does not change with respect to anticipated changes in income. Early papers
in this literature such as Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg (2001) and Hurd and Rohwedder (2003) found that
consumption dropped discontinuously at the time of retirement, in contradiction to the life cycle hypothesis.
Later studies, such as Hurd and Rohwedder (2006) and particularly Hurst (2008) found that the earlier work had
relied too much on food consumption, both at home and away from home, and transportation costs. With more
comprehensive consumption data, Hurst finds that the discontinuity at retirement largely disappears. This work is
only tangentially related to our work.

                                                                                                                5
two immediately after retirement tends to exceed sustainable consumption, obtained by

annuitizing all financial wealth and adding Social Security benefits. He also observes that

consumption declines on average 5 percent per year for the same people in the two interview

waves, two years apart. He concludes that the most likely cause of the observed decline in

consumption is that for many people the subjective rate of time preference is substantially

higher than the real interest rate. That is, declining consumption is actually optimal for many in

his data set.

       While the Hammermesh contribution is primarily empirical, Hurd (1989) lays out a

theoretical continuous time life cycle model in a very similar manner to the discrete time

version of this paper. He concentrates on the impact of mortality risk and bequest motives on

the optimal consumption path for retirees. In his primary estimation, which uses the 1969-

1979 Retirement History Study, he finds that optimal consumption declines fairly rapidly in

retirement. He assumes a 3 percent real interest rate and estimates the pure rate of time

preference to be roughly 5 percent. His primary estimate of the degree of risk aversion is quite

low, namely about 0.73. His estimates indicate that for most people the utility value of leaving

a bequest is quite low. He finds that for many people it is optimal to spend down bequeathable

wealth in the first few years of retirement and live on Social Security or other annuities

thereafter. This is consistent with our results.

       There are several new aspects to this paper. First, we don't presume that everyone has

the same rate of time preference (impatience). However, with after tax, safe, real interest rates

being zero, essentially everyone would seem to prefer higher consumption earlier in life and

lower consumption later. This negatively sloped optimal consumption path means that it takes


                                                                                                 6
less wealth at retirement to fund the optimal life cycle plan. Second, like Hurd (1989) we

incorporate mortality risk, but using recent cohort life tables from Social Security which

generally have substantially reduced age-specific mortality risks relative to those assumed by

Hurd. Third, we introduce the possibility that certain health outcomes, particularly dementia,

may involve lower utility from a given consumption bundle. The incidence of dementia at very

old ages is quite high and this alone may reduce the attractiveness of saving money for these

situations. Finally, we concentrate on the lower half of the lifetime earnings distribution. For

those in this part of the distribution, Social Security provides a higher replacement of earnings

in retirement. This group in particular may find it optimal to save less in the face of zero

interest rates and relatively generous annuitized Social Security benefits.



   3. Standard Life-Cycle Model and Consumption Trajectories

       To illustrate the factors contributing to the optimal consumption pattern, consider the

following standard life cycle utility function:

                                                  

                                          =    ( )
                                              =0


In this formulation, utility each year ( ) derived from consumption in that year,  , and is

discounted by a time specific factor,  . Here, ( ) is the felicity function. This time-specific

discount rate captures factors that differentially affect consumption based expected utility. We

consider a discount factor with three components, time, mortality and health status:

                                          =  -    




                                                                                                    7
Our time discount factor,  - captures the fact that later consumption is less desirable than

earlier consumption.  is the probability of survival for t years given being alive initially. The

idea here is that as the likelihood of mortality increases, the individual finds it more and more

difficult to justify setting aside scarce resources to fund spending in years where survival is less

and less certain. Finally, we have a health status factor,  , reflecting a discount to future utility

that reflects the possibility of having a health impairment that reduces the value of

consumption. Similar to mortality, this factor captures a possible preference that favors

spending in younger states that are likely to be relatively free of physical or mental

impairments. We assume  = 1 if the individual anticipates being healthy (or receiving the

same utility from consumption regardless of health), and  < 1 if the individual anticipates a

risk of having an impairment that reduces the value of consumption.

        Wealth evolves via the following equation of motion:

                                    +1 = ( +  -  )  

Here we have assets,  ; Social Security benefits and income,  ; consumption,  ; and a gross

return,  . Before optimization can occur, we must discipline consumption with a budget

constraint. In the simple model, we constrain consumption by requiring assets to be non-

negative,   0, and ending wealth to be zero, +1 . Later we will relax this constraint to

consider borrowing. Finally, we choose a CRRA utility function with risk aversion parameter, ,

as the felicity function.

        To illustrate the optimal consumption trajectory, consider a simple case where an

individual begins with initial wealth, but never receives additional income, i.e.  = 0 for all .

Optimal consumption is then


                                                                                                       8
                                       =   -1              (1)

where

                                                   1
                                                    
                                     =                 .         (2)
                                             -1

As evidenced by the above equation, there are three factors at play in determining the path of

optimal consumption. On the plus side, delaying consumption allows one to earn a return that

facilitates additional consumption. On the downside, that additional consumption is enjoyed in

a relatively inferior state captured by the ratio of annual discount rates. If the product of these

factors exceeds one, then optimal consumption is upward sloping through time. If less than

one, consumption declines. Only in the special circumstance where these factors exactly offset

is consumption constant. This formulation also illustrates the role of risk aversion. When

viewed across time, increasing or decreasing consumption counts as disperse consumption that

is undesirable for a risk-averse agent. As risk aversion increases, the ratio of future

consumption to current consumption tends towards unity. Infinite risk aversion is also

sufficient to ensure constant consumption.

        To get an idea of the magnitude of potential optimal consumption decline, we need

more specifics on the parameter choices. We model the gross return from  - 1 to ,  , is:

                                                -1
                                        =                  (3)
                                                

Where  is the survival rate appropriate for annuity pricing. Note, we can model the absence

of a functioning annuity market by assuming  = 1 for all . The ratio of the survival rates

reflects the annual mortality relevant for pricing between period t-1 and t. Combining (1), (2),

and (3) yields the Euler equation


                                                                                                      9
                                                                      1
                                                                       
                                         -1    
                                  =  (-)                                   -1         (4)
                                           -1  -1

The recursive nature of (4) and cancellation yields 3:

                                                                                        1
                                                                                         
                                                                      (r- )   
                           =   -1  -2  1  0 =                                                 0
                                                                              



           To gain intuition as to the importance of these various factors, consider optimal

consumption of an individual that sets up a plan at age 65. Assuming interest rates equal the

individual's time discount,  =  , annuity markets are functioning and perfectly compensate for

mortality risk, St = St and the prospect of poor health does not impact wealth allocation,  = 1,

then consumption at age 85 equals consumption at age 65. Now consider what happens to

optimal consumption at age 85 as we change these assumptions. For example, suppose the

annual time discount rate exceeds the interest rate by 3 percent. Assuming a risk aversion

parameter of 3, optimal consumption 20 years into retirement then becomes:

                                                  1                     1
                                                   
                             20 =  (-)20               0 = ( -0.6 )      3    0 = 0.820

If we further assume the survival probability to age 85 is 50%, and assume a lack of relevant

annuity markets, S20 = 1, then optimal age 85 consumption drops to 65% of initial retirement

consumption. Adding a discount to utility reflecting the possibility of incapacitation by age 85,

20 = 0.7, drops optimal age 85 consumption down to 58% of initial consumption. It is

important to note that risk aversion plays a large role in maintaining high levels of optimal

consumption late in retirement. In his seminal paper, Hurd (1989) argues for a much lower risk



3
    Note, this assume the individual is currently alive (S0 = S0 = 1) and healthy (0 = 1).

                                                                                                  10
aversion parameter than often considered in the literature. He has two separate estimates of

, namely 0.73 and 1.12. Assuming this level of risk aversion implies optimal consumption is

much more responsive to mortality and health risk. In these three cases, changing the assumed

risk aversion parameter to 1.0 shifts optimal consumption at age 85 from 82%, 65% and 58% to

59%, 32%, and 23%, respectively. Needless to say, if optimal consumption at age 85 is less than

50% of consumption at age 65, many assumptions regarding retirement and retirement

readiness need to be re-examined.



   4. Discounting the future

       In this section, we explore the various factors that could contribute to optimal declining

consumption in retirement. Three factors argue for declining consumption in retirement: time,

mortality and health.

           a. Time: Time discount () vs. interest rates (r)

       In our life cycle model, we separately consider the pure rate of time preference, , and

the potential reductions in future utility from mortality and morbidity. A key factor in the

pattern of optimal consumption over time is the difference between  and r, the real safe rate

of interest. The intuition is that  represents time preference or the amount of impatience that

an individual or household exhibits and r represents the real return for patience offered in

financial markets. If  > r, then shifting consumption from the future towards the present may

increase lifetime utility, whereas the opposite is true in the case where  < r. With  > r, the

optimal allocation would have the marginal utility of consumption increasing over time,

meaning that consumption would decrease with age.


                                                                                                 11
       There is no reason to assume that everyone exhibits the same rate of time preference,

. For many years researchers have tried to uncover  by asking a sample of people whether

they would prefer $100 immediately or $Y one year in the future. Through a series of such

questions, researchers try to find the point of indifference for each person interviewed. An

early example of this approach was Fuchs (1982), whereas more recent examples include

Huffman, Maurer and Mitchell (2016) and Goda, Levy, Manchester, Sojourn and Tasoff (2015).

These studies tend to find surprisingly high rates of time preference. For instance, the average

rate of time preference found by Huffman, Maurer and Mitchell (HMM) in a special supplement

to the 2014 wave of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) was 54 percent for their sample of

individuals over 70 (the median was 58 percent). The answers presumably combine the effects

of impatience, mortality and morbidity. The cumulative distribution of personal discount factors

found by HMM is shown here as Figure 1. Note that roughly 80 percent of those interviewed

displayed discount factors greater than 20 percent, with roughly 60 percent having discount

factors exceeding 40 percent. While these results are higher than the rest of the literature

based on these experimental questionnaires, probably because the sample population is much

older, it is common for the mean personal discount factor to be 25 percent or more.




                                                                                               12
Figure 1. Cumulative Distribution of Measured IRR Values for Older (70+) HRS Respondents




       The validity of this type of study can be challenged as the questions are hypothetical and

even the hypothetical stakes are usually low, such as $100. Still, the results are consistent with

other non-experimental studies, all of which find most people have discount factors far greater

than the interest rate. For example, Hausman (1979) who examined the choices consumers

made between appliances of varying energy efficiency. He found the effective discount rate

applying to the energy saving of more expensive and efficient appliances was roughly 20

percent.

       Warner and Pleeter (2001) examine the choices of 66,000 U.S. military personnel

(55,000 enlistees and 11,000 officers) who were offered two distinct severance packages ­ a

lump sum or an annuity ­ in 1992-3 as part of the downsizing of the services following the




                                                                                                13
collapse of the Soviet Union. 4 The annual rate of discount that equated the present value of the

annuity offer with the lump sum offer ranged from 17.5 to 19.8 percent. The annuity was not

inflation adjusted, so this internal rate of return discount rate should be thought of as a

nominal rate of return. This was in an era of roughly 3 percent inflation and Treasury-Bill

interest rates were in the 3.5 to 5 percent range. The real interest rate was thus 0.5 to 2.0

percent and the real return on the annuity was roughly 16 percent. With these choices, more

than 90 percent of enlisted personnel chose the lump sum offer, as did more than half of the

officers. The authors estimate that the average personal discount factor of enlisted personnel

was between 35 and 50 percent. The modal education level of the enlistees was high school

graduate, whereas the vast majority of officers were college graduates.

        Simon, Warner and Pleeter (2015) examined another choice faced by members of the

military. The choice was whether to stay with a less generous pension plan and accept $30,000

cash or switch to the newly available more generous pension annuity. The choice was faced

by a particular cohort of military members with 15 years of service and dealt with the pension

plan that they would enjoy at the 20-year mark.

        Even though the typical "money earlier or later" study finds quite high personal discount

rates, there are reasons to question whether this implies a high rate of time preference, .

Conceptually, the rate of time preference is a discount applied to "utils" enjoyed further in the

future relative to utils enjoyed closer to the present. In our model and in the classic life cycle




4
  One choice was a lump sum amount of 15 percent of annual base salary times the number of years of service
(YOS) and the other was an annuity equal to 2.5 percent of base pay times YOS payable annually for two times
YOS. For example, a Sargent in the Army making $35,000 in today's dollars with 10 years of service would have
the choice between a lump sum of $52,500 and twenty annual payments of $8,750.

                                                                                                                14
model, utility at time t depends on consumption at that time. But, these studies are not about

utility and most of them are not about consumption. They are about money received at

different points in time. The implicit assumption is that the incremental money will be

consumed when received and current utility will go up proportionately. But, of course, that is

not the optimal thing to do with an injection of money at a point in time in a life cycle

framework. The connection between the preference for money sooner rather than later and

the rate of time preference  is typically not dealt with explicitly in the experimental studies.

The recent paper by Cohen, Ericson, Laibson, and White (2016) thoroughly examines these

issues. To quote them, "the literature is in discord."

       We think that there is substantial evidence of considerable impatience. However, we

don't think the evidence pins down the right value or values for  in our model. Therefore, we

follow the common practice of looking at a range of values. Our base case will be a value of 

of .03 and we will also report results for this rate of time preference being 5 percent or 10

percent. Our argument regarding the optimality of declining consumption would be even

stronger at higher rates, so we view our assumptions as conservative.

       The real interest rate, r, in our model is easier to pin down. It should reflect the

expected real, safe interest rate over the long-run future, so basing it on r-star, the natural rate

of interest, seems appropriate. The natural rate of interest is the real, short-term interest rate

that is neither expansionary nor contractionary. We discuss it at some length in Scott, Shoven,

Slavov and Watson (2019). One of the most prominent estimates of r-star is by Laubach and

Williams (2003) and they update their estimates quarterly. John C. Williams, one of the

authors, is now the President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank. Figure 2 shows the most


                                                                                                   15
recent Laubach and Williams's estimates, through 3/31/2019. It shows that the natural rate of

interest has hovered in the 0.5 to 0.75 percent range for the past eight years.


          Figure 2: Laubach & Williams Estimate of Natural Rate
                               of Interest
   3.5
     3
   2.5
     2
   1.5
     1
   0.5
     0




We want to emphasize that these are not actual inflation-adjusted Treasury-bill rates, which

were negative through much of this period, but the estimate of the policy neutral real rate.

We believe that these are the best forecast for real short rates over the medium to long-run

horizon. The typical retirement saver could only access these rates through a money market

mutual fund that would have expense ratios in this same 0.5 to 0.75 percent range, leaving the

net real yield approximately zero. Unsophisticated investors, who save via bank deposits,

would do significantly worse, with negative lending rates. With all this in mind, we will set r, the

real, safe short rate in the future at zero for our calculations and that means that the three

cases we examine for  ­ r are .03, .05 and .10.



           b. Mortality: Individual mortality discount (S) vs. Annuity discount ()


                                                                                                 16
           Balancing consumption today and future consumption logically involves considering the

likelihood of survival. According to Social Security Administration cohort mortality projections, a

male born in 1964 has a roughly 50 percent probability of living to age 85; the corresponding

probability for females is roughly 61 percent. 5 However, mortality varies across the population

depending on birth cohort, as well as characteristics such as education, gender, income, and

race. For example, Chetty et al. (2016) document that, at age 40, high-income individuals have

higher life expectancy than low-income individuals, and that this gap has been widening over

time. Brown, Liebman, and Pollet (2002) provide ratios of age-specific mortality rates for

individuals in different education and race groups. For example, at age 62, white men with less

than a high school education have an age-specific mortality rate that is roughly 30 percent

greater than average, and black men with a high school education or less have an age-specific

mortality rate that is almost twice the average.

           The Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a nationally representative panel survey of the

U.S. population aged 50 and older asks individuals to provide subjective estimates of their

mortality and life expectancy, as well as a subjective assessment of their health. Previous

research suggests that these subjective measures are correlated with actual mortality (e.g.,

Delavande and Rohwedder 2011; Siegel, Bradley, and Kasl 2003). Moreover, decisions such as

labor supply and Social Security claiming appear to be related to subjective mortality (e.g.,

Hurd, Smith, and Zissimopoulos 2004). Thus, it is reasonable to assume that individuals

accurately assess their mortality risks and behave accordingly.




5
    These calculations are based on the cohort mortality tables underlying the 2013 Trustees Report.

                                                                                                       17
       Length-of-life risk can be hedged by the purchase of annuities, which guarantee a fixed

level of income (either real or nominal) for the remainder of one's life. A large literature

documents a phenomenon known as the "annuity puzzle," whereby individuals do not purchase

annuities even though standard life cycle models suggest that they raise lifetime utility for risk-

averse individuals (e.g., Yaari 1965; Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown 1999; Warner

and Pleeter 2001).

       One possible explanation for the annuity puzzle is that commercially available annuities

are subject to adverse selection. That is, individuals who buy annuities tend to have longer-

than-average life expectancies, which raises annuity prices and reduces demand. Mitchell,

Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown (1999) show that even with actuarially unfair pricing,

annuities raise lifetime utility. Moreover, a large literature has shown that individuals decline to

purchase even actuarially advantageous annuities. Specifically, delaying Social Security claiming

is equivalent to buying an annuity; those who delay forgo benefits now in exchange for higher

benefits for life. Even though this annuity is actuarially advantageous for most singles and

primary earners (see, e.g., Meyer and Reichenstein 2010, 2012; Sass, Sun, and Webb 2013; and

Shoven and Slavov 2014a, 2014b), delaying Social Security beyond full retirement age is rare

(see, e.g., Goda, Shoven, and Slavov 2018). Survey evidence suggests that people would be

more willing to delay Social Security if they could receive the gains from delay as an actuarially

fair lump sum rather than an annuity (Maurer, Mitchell, Rogalla, and Schimetschek 2018).

       Overall, the evidence suggests that people accurately assess their mortality risks and

behave accordingly. It also suggests that annuitizing income is not a popular strategy when




                                                                                                 18
annuities are subject to adverse selection and may remain unpopular even if actuarially fair or

advantageous annuities were available.




           c. Health Dependent Utility

       Previously, little research has considered the question of how health impacts utility.

However, individuals could reasonably question why they should set aside resources to fund

consumption in states where they may or not derive much utility from those resources.

Dementia and other impairments can cause permanent institutionalization. In this section, we

explore the plausible implications for health dependent utility, or equivalently, what is the

appropriate assumption for  ?

       Our model utilizes an expected utility framework. We are adding up probability

weighted utility to derive overall utility. When dealing with mortality, we took utility to be the

probability of being alive, St, multiplied by the utility generated from consuming Ct. In principle,

there is a utility term associated with the probability of being dead at time t, 1- St, but this term

is left out of the utility owing to our assumption that there is no bequest motive.

For health, we take a similar expected utility approach, only here both healthy and unhealthy

states contribute to the overall utility function. The discount for health-dependent utility is

modeled as:

                            () =      () + (1 -  )     ()

Where Qt is the probability of good health during year t,  is the utility multiplier for good

health, and  is the utility multiplier for poor health.  () captures all the non-health related


                                                                                                   19
utility terms. We normalize good health as the base case  = 1, implying our parameter for

health dependent utility is:

                                      =  + (1 -  )  

While estimates of the probability of poor health are readily available, the utility discount

associated with poor health has not received much attention. However, a recent paper (Brown

et. al. 2013) provides sufficient information to formulate an estimate. In this paper, a

representative sample of individuals are asked to imagine there is an even chance that they are

in good or poor health at age 80. They are then asked to how they would allocate a $10,000

windfall between those two possibilities. Would they prefer to have all, most, some or none of

the windfall in the healthy or unhealthy state? Of interest for our work is that the answers,

while volatile, tended to allocate wealth between the unhealthy and healthy outcome at an

approximately 1:2 ratio.

Using our assumed CRRA utility function, we can translate this wealth allocation ratio into an

estimate for  :

                                                   
                                     =  /  = (1/2)

Where  and  represent the incremental wealth allocated to the poor and good health

state, respectively. Note the impact of risk aversion on the estimate of  . If risk aversion is 1,

 is 0.5. However, if risk aversion is instead much higher at 3, then  is 0.125. When deciding

how to allocate incremental wealth, a high level of risk aversion argues for a more even split. If

individual choose a large wealth disparity, then they must either be highly risk tolerant or

greatly discount utility in the unhealthy state. Throughout this paper, we will assume a 

consistent with the risk aversion assumption under analysis.

                                                                                                 20
      5. Declining Consumption and Optimal Retirement Savings

      In this section, we consider the impact of more reasonable discounting assumption on the

optimal accumulation of assets and consumption trajectory.

               a. Worker Earnings and Replacement Rates

           The Social Security Administration publishes income replacement projections for

hypothetical workers (Clingman et. al. 2019). This analysis tracks five prototypical workers,

each with a different assumed earning profile. For our analysis, we consider the three lower

earning profiles analyzed by the SSA: Very Low Earnings, Low Earnings and Moderate Earnings.

These profiles are defined as earnings that track 25%, 45% and 100%, respectively, of the

average wage index (AWI). 6 The SSA projects that the income replacement rate for a Moderate

earning worker who is age 55 in 2020 is 40.5% assuming the worker claims Social Security at

their full retirement age of 67. Replacement rates for Very Low and Low earning profiles are

75% and 54%, respectively. We assume from a worker perspective that all earned income is

subject to a payroll tax and all Social Security income is tax free. The resulting after tax

replacement rates for Moderate, Low and Very Low earning workers are: 43.2%, 57.6% and

80.0%, respectively.

               b. Consumption and asset profiles for Moderate Earning workers




6
    The AWI in 2019 is $53,864. 25% and 45% of AWI is $13,466 and $24,239, respectively.

                                                                                                21
       To illustrate the impact of discounting on consumption and saving decisions, consider a

Moderate Earning worker. We will initially assume this person arrives at age 55 with zero net

savings, and has twelve years pre-retirement to begin saving in earnest. We normalize annual

pre-retirement income to $100, so in this case income from age 55 to age 66 is $100, and

income from age 67 onwards is $43.20. Under this normalization, all dollar values can be

interpreted as a percent of pre-retirement income. Our baseline case assumes an individual

that has a time discount of 3 percent and can earn a 3 percent real return on assets (r =  = 3%).

For mortality discounting, we assume this individual is female, and has access to annuity

markets that fully compensate her for her mortality (S = S). Finally, we examine a risk aversion

parameter of one, =1, which is roughly in line with the findings of Hurd (1989).




                                                                                                22
       Figure 3 illustrates the results of this baseline analysis. Because all discounting is

perfectly offset by investment returns, there is no preference to shift consumption either

earlier or later, and consumption is perfectly level at approximately $71.73 (i.e. 71.73 percent

of pre-retirement earnings).

       The second scenario we consider eliminates annuities from the analysis. In the absence

of annuities, mortality discounting drives a desire for declining consumption. However,

because mortality is fairly low at early ages, the effects on spending are more pronounced at

older ages. In this case, initial spending at age 55 is $80.08. Spending at age 67 is $74.48,

representing a modest 7% reduction compared to initial spending. Unlike the baseline case,

assets are eventually exhausted, and at ages 87 and above all consumption is fully reliant on

Social Security ($43.20).

       The third scenario allows annuities but assumes that the prevailing real interest rate is

zero percent. This change has a large effect on spending pre-retirement. Initial spending at age

55 is substantially higher at $99.32. Moreover, spending declines more rapidly, so that by

retirement age, spending is $69.29, reflecting a 30% reduction in over that time frame. In this

case, all assets are exhausted four years earlier at age 83.

       The fourth scenario combines both assumptions and assumes real interest rates are

zero and individuals are unable to capture a mortality credit on their investments. This

combination results in an even higher initial spending of $100, and a steeper decline in

spending. Because spending equals pre-retirement income, the borrowing constraint binds. An

individual who did not face a borrowing constraint would increase initial consumption above

$100 and carry a negative asset balance forward, allowing consumption at age 56 to fall below


                                                                                                   23
consumption at age 55. The presence of the borrowing constraint results in flat consumption at

ages 55 and 56.

       Figure 4 reports on the same four scenarios, but tracks asset balances instead of annual

consumption. The impact of discounting on saving levels is sizeable. For the baseline case, the

individual accumulates $434 (434% of pre-retirement income) at retirement. The `no annuities'

case lowers accumulated assets at retirement to $322. Assuming 0 percent interest lowers

accumulated assets to $190, and finally, employing both assumptions drops accumulated assets

at retirement all the way to $145, or roughly one-third of the baseline case.




                                                                                              24
         Note that the scenario suggesting retirement wealth of $145 (or 1.45 times annual

earnings) contains fairly rosy assumptions as it relates to discounting and asset accumulation.

The time discount rate is only 3 percent, whereas higher time discounts can easily be

motivated. Moreover, the mortality discounting assumes an average female, but men and

lower educated individuals tend to have much higher mortality rates. No adjustment for health

concerns has yet been made, and the need for saving is fairly high because Social Security is

only replacing just over forty percent of income. All of these assumptions suggest a need for

fairly high retirement savings, yet the analysis still suggests optimal saving levels are roughly

one-third the savings level predicted by full lifetime consumption smoothing.

         We solve our model for the three stylized earners described above and summarize our

results in Tables 2-4. Each table reports three key statistics: Assets at retirement, consumption

at retirement relative to consumption at age 55, and age when assets are exhausted and

consumption is fully reliant on Social Security. Table 2 reports these statistics for the female

moderate earners depicted in Figures 2 and 3.

                                                 Table 2
                          Moderate Earnings (43.2% Replacement) Summary Statitics
                                    Baseline         No Annuities    0% Interest Rate   No Annuities / r = 0%
Assets At Retirement (% baseline)    $434.03            74.3%             43.8%                33.5%
Consumption (Age 67 / Age 55)        100.0%             93.0%             69.8%                69.3%
Age Assets Depleted                   120                87                83                    78




         Table 3 reports the same statistics for a low earner, who has a 57.6% Social Security

replacement rate. All the other assumptions are the same as they were for the average earner.

Even though the low earner's profile is 45 percent as high as the moderate earner in Table 2,



                                                                                                          25
we once again normalize so that annual earnings are $100. Thus, once again, all dollar amounts

can be interpreted as percentages of pre-retirement earnings.

                                                   Table 3
                              Low Earnings (57.6% Replacement) Summary Statitics
                                      Baseline        No Annuities    0% Interest Rate   No Annuities / r = 0%
Assets At Retirement (% baseline)     $324.00            64.5%             29.6%                22.7%
Consumption (Age 67 / Age 55)          100.0%            93.0%             77.0%                76.8%
Age Assets Depleted                     120               84                77                    74




Because Social Security replacement rates are higher, the need for retirement savings is

reduced in the full smoothing baseline scenario. Assets at retirement now represent only 3.24

times annual income. Adding further discounting has an even larger effect on savings

compared to the moderate earner. The `No Annuities / r = 0%' scenario indicates optimal

savings levels of only 22.7% of baseline. Given the relatively high Social Security replacement

rate, consumption levels decline more gently pre-retirement to roughly 77% when interest

rates are 0 percent. Assets in retirement are also depleted more quickly. This individual

optimally fully relies on Social Security by the age of 74 in the `No Annuities / r = 0%' scenario.

         As reported in Table 4, similar trends are apparent for the Very Low Earner who receives

approximately an 80% wage replacement from Social Security.

                                                   Table 4
                          Very Low Earnings (80.0% Replacement) Summary Statitics
                                      Baseline        No Annuities    0% Interest Rate   No Annuities / r = 0%
Assets At Retirement (% baseline)     $152.83            39.3%             12.1%                 9.3%
Consumption (Age 67 / Age 55)          100.0%            93.0%             88.5%                88.2%
Age Assets Depleted                     120               77                71                    70




                                                                                                           26
Once again, we have normalized earnings at $100 per year, even though actual earnings for

very low earners are one-fourth of moderate earners (or about $13,466 per year in 2019

dollars). For this very low earning woman, baseline wealth at retirement ­ assuming a 3

percent real interest rate and perfect annuity markets ­ is 1.53 times annual earnings. That

relatively modest optimal nest egg at retirement is reduced by more than 60 percent in the

absence of perfect annuity markets and by more than 90 percent with the real interest rate set

to zero and no annuity markets. In that later case, optimal retirement wealth is now less than

15 percent of one year's earnings and even that modest amount is spent down in the first three

years of retirement. To remove the normalization and give the result in absolute 2019 dollars,

the optimal retirement wealth of a very low earner with a zero percent real interest rate and no

annuity markets is less than $2,000.

       All of the results of Tables 2, 3, and 4 are for people with a relatively low 3 percent

subjective rate of time preference. Tables 2A and 2B present the results for moderate earning

single women with pure rates of time preference of 5 and 10 percent, respectively. Now, even

with the baseline real interest rate of 3 percent and perfect annuity markets, optimal

consumption is declining, and optimal retirement wealth is lower than for the case with time

preference of 3 percent. For instance, Table 2B shows that with 3 percent real interest rates

and a 10 percent rate of time preference, optimal retirement wealth accumulation is less than

one year's earnings. Even that small optimal accumulation is significantly reduced if interest

rates fall to zero percent. In the case of zero real interest rates and no annuity markets, it is

optimal for a moderate earning woman to fully deplete her financial assets other than Social




                                                                                                    27
Security in her 70s whether her rate of time preference is 3, 5, or 10 percent (see the final

column of Tables 2, 2A and 2B).

                                                                Table 2A
                                        Moderate Earnings (43.2% Replacement) Summary Statistics
                               (female, delta = 5%, r = 3%, no health discount, annuities available, gamma = 1)
                                    Baseline             No Annuities        0% Interest Rate         No Annuities/r=0%
 Assets at Retirement               $256.70                 73.2%                 45.1%                    38.0%
 Consumption (Age 67/Age 55)         78.7%                 73.2%                 68.3%                    68.1%
 Age Assets Depleted                  93                    81                    77                       75




                                                                Table 2B
                                        Moderate Earnings (43.2% Replacement) Summary Statistics
                               (female, delta = 10%, r = 3%, no health discount, annuities available, gamma = 1)
                                    Baseline             No Annuities        0% Interest Rate         No Annuities/r=0%
 Assets at Retirement               $83.18                 88.1%                 69.5%                   63.5%
 Consumption (Age 67/Age 55)        68.30%                67.80%                 66.40%                  66.10%
 Age Assets Depleted                  74                    73                     72                      71


       Tables 3A and 3B examine the consequences for low-earning women of rates of time

preference of 5 and 10 percent, respectively. Comparing the baseline column of Tables 3 and

3B, the optimal retirement accumulation is reduced by roughly 88 percent for those with a 10

percent rate of time preference relative to those with a 3 percent time preference.

                                                                 Table 3A
                                          Low Earnings (57.6% Replacement) Summary Statistics
                               (female, delta = 5%, r = 3%, no health discount, annuities available, gamma = 1)
                                    Baseline             No Annuities        0% Interest Rate         No Annuities/r=0%
 Assets at Retirement               $140.27                69.5%                 41.3%                    34.8%
 Consumption (Age 67/Age 55)         79.0%                 78.6%                 76.1%                    75.8%
 Age Assets Depleted                  83                    76                    73                       72


                                                               Table 3B
                                        Low Earnings (57.6% Replacement) Summary Statistics

                                                                                                           28
                               (female, delta = 10%, r = 3%, no health discount, annuities available, gamma = 1)
                                    Baseline             No Annuities        0% Interest Rate         No Annuities/r=0%
 Assets at Retirement                $41.27                89.5%                 69.0%                    63.5%
 Consumption (Age 67/Age 55)         75.6%                 75.3%                 74.0%                    73.7%
 Age Assets Depleted                   71                   71                    70                       70


Switching to a zero percent interest regime further reduces accumulated savings at retirement.

Once again, optimal retirement wealth is really quite low. In 2019 dollars, the figure is

approximately $6,000 with zero percent interest rates.

   For very low earners ­ with Social Security replacement rates of 80 percent of pre-

retirement earnings ­ optimal wealth at retirement is basically zero when the rate of time

preferences is above 3 percent. These results are not shown.



   6. Delaying Social Security, Annuity Demand and Time Discounting

   There is a large, recent literature on the best age at which to commence Social Security

retirement benefits (see, for example, Meyer and Reichenstein 2010; Sass, Sun and Webb 2013;

and Shoven and Slavov 2014a,b). The general finding is that with today's low real interest rates

and the improved mortality risks of the last thirty years or so, deferring the claiming of Social

Security retirement benefits is actuarially advantageous for most people. That is, the expected

present value of the increased future benefits exceeds the present value of the foregone

benefits inherent in a deferral strategy. The net expected present value of deferring can be

quite high. Despite this, relatively few people defer benefits beyond the normal retirement age

(soon to be 67).

   This paper offers a possible explanation, at least for those who are in the bottom half of the

earnings distribution during their working lives. The additional Social Security benefits achieved

                                                                                                           29
via deferral come in the form of an incremental inflation-indexed life annuity. While this form

of income is desirable for individuals aiming for constant consumption in retirement, it is

distinctly sub-optimal for those whose optimal consumption pattern declines with age. One

cannot borrow against future Social Security benefits, so much of the incremental Social

Security receipts can only increase consumption at an age where relatively low consumption is

desired. If the gains from deferring Social Security were paid as a lump sum payment upon

commitment to defer, the participant could allocate the additional wealth in such a way as to

finance greater incremental consumption early in retirement and lesser incremental

consumption late in retirement. Given time preference and the mortality and morbidity

considerations we have covered in this paper, individuals may prefer a front loaded payoff from

Social Security rather than an inflation-indexed life annuity. This sub-optimal pattern of

incremental Social Security benefits from deferral may be sufficiently unattractive to make the

whole deferral option unappealing. This phenomenon may explain why individuals report

greater willingness to delay claiming if the gains from delay are paid as a lump sum (Maurer et

al. 2016).

   The same argument does not apply to most people in the upper half of the earnings

distribution. The Social Security replacement rate is lower for them, and exhausting retirement

wealth before death is usually not part of their optimal plan. Therefore they can rearrange their

withdrawals from retirement savings to achieve their optimal consumption plan and still benefit

from the higher Social Security benefits achieved via deferral.

   Similarly, the considerations in this paper may help to explain the lack of demand for private

annuities (e.g., Mitchell et al. 1999; Warner and Pleeter 2001). Spending liquid assets for


                                                                                                30
annuities whose payout pattern does not correspond with optimal consumption isn't

particularly attractive. It is well known that private annuity markets suffer from adverse

selection. Adding a sub-optimal pattern of payouts further reduces the attractiveness of

annuities, especially for those in the lower part of the income distribution.




      7. Conclusions

      In this paper, we have shown that in a zero real interest rate environment, the optimal

pattern of consumption is declining with age. The reason is simple: the market return to patience is zero

and most everyone displays some degree of positive time preference. We argue that mortality risk and

health risk, particularly dementia, steepen the negative slope of optimal consumption for people in their

retirement years. If this zero-interest rate regime ­ which has existed for more than a decade now and

shows no sign of changing ­ persists, then the optimal amount of wealth to accumulate for retirement is

significantly diminished. In fact, for very low earners, with Social Security replacement rates of 80

percent, zero retirement savings or close to it is optimal. For those with low or moderate earnings

histories, the savings target at retirement is greatly reduced by the zero real interest rate environment

and the lack of perfect annuity markets. For them, the optimal plan typically is to spend down their

retirement savings in the first three to ten years of retirement (depending on their subjective rate of

time preference) and then live on Social Security alone after that.


      A large fraction of retirees depend on Social Security for the bulk of their retirement

income. 7 Our analysis suggests that this phenomenon may not be a symptom of widespread




7
    See https://www.ssa.gov/news/press/factsheets/basicfact-alt.pdf.

                                                                                                          31
undersaving for retirement. Rather, it may be due to the relative generosity of Social Security,

the form in which Social Security is paid (as a real annuity), and the extremely low safe rate of

return on retirement assets. Our results suggest that standard financial planning advice, which

centers on constant consumption during retirement, is inconsistent with a life cycle model,

particularly in the current low-interest rate environment.

       We have yet to fully explore the consequences of different degrees of risk aversion and

different discounts for poor health among the very elderly. We expect that health discounting

will strengthen the finding that declining consumption is optimal, and that this finding will be

robust to the choice of risk aversion parameter.




References
Attanasio, O. P., & Weber, G., "Consumption and Saving: Models of Intertemporal Allocation
       and Their Implications for Public Policy," Journal of Economic Literature, 48(3), 2010, pp.
       693­751. https://doi.org/http://www.aeaweb.org/jel/index.php

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner and Steven Weinberg, "What Accounts for the
      Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?" American Economic Review,
      Volume 91, Number 4, September 2001, pp. 832 ­ 857.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Joshua Pollet.. "Estimating Life Tables that reflect
      socioeconomic differences in mortality." In Feldstein, Martin and Liebman, Jeffrey B.
      (eds), The Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security Reform, Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press, 2002.

Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
       Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler, "The Association Between Income and Life
       Expectancy in the United States, 2001­2014." Journal of the American Medical
       Association, 315(16), 2016, pp. 1750­1766.

Clingman, Michael, Kyle Burkhaler, and Chris Chaplain, "Replacement Rates for Hypothetical
      Retired Workers." Social Security Administration. Actuarial Note 2019.9.

                                                                                                    32
Cohen, Jonathan D., Keith Marzilli Ericson, David Laibson and John Myles White, "Measuring
       Time Preferences." NBER Working Paper No. 22455, July 2016 (revised February 2019)

Delavande, Adeline and Susann Rohwedder, "Differential Survival in Europe and the United
      States: Estimates Based on Subjective Probabilities of Survival." Demography, Volume 8,
      2011, pp. 1377­1400.

Fuchs, Victor R., "Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study," in Economic Aspects of
       Health, Victor Fuchs, Ed., University of Chicago Press, 1982, pp. 93-120. Also, appeared
       as NBER Working Paper No. 539, August 1980.

Ghilarducci, T., M. Papadopoulos and A. Webb, "Inadequate Retirement Savings for Workers
       Nearing Retirement," Schwartz Center for Economic Policy Analysis and Department of
       Economics, The New School for Social Research, Policy Note Series, 2017

Goda, Gopi, Shanthi Ramnath, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov, "The Financial Feasibility
       of Delaying Social Security: Evidence from Administrative Tax Data." Journal of Pension
       Economics and Finance 17(4), 2018, pp. 419-436.

Goda, Gopi Shah, Matthew R. Levy, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, Aaron Sojourner, and Joshua
       Tasoff, "The Role of Time Preferences and Exponential-Growth Bias in Retirement
       Savings." NBER WP 21482, August 2015.

Gomes, Francisco, Kenton Hoyem, Wei Hu and Enrichetta Ravina, "Retirement Savings
      Adequacy in United States Defined Contribution Plans, Kellogg School of Management
      Working Paper, November 2018.

Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Jonathan Parker, "Consumption over the Life Cycle,"
      Econometrica, Volume 70, Number 1, January 2002, pp. 47-89.

Hammermesh, Daniel S., "Consumption during Retirement: The Missing Link in the Life Cycle,"
     Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume 66, No. 1, 1984, pp. 1-7.

Hausman, Jerry A., "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy-Using
     Durables," Bell Journal of Economics, Volume 10, Number 1, Spring 1979, pp. 33-54.

Huffman, David, Raimund Maurer and Olivia S. Mitchell, "Time Discounting and Economic
      Decision Making Among the Elderly," NBER Working Paper No. 22438, July 2016.

Hurd, Michael D., James P. Smith, and Julie M. Zissimopoulos, "The Effects of Subjective Survival
       on Retirement and Social Security Claiming." Journal of Applied Econometrics 19 (6),
       2004, pp. 761­775.


                                                                                              33
Hurd, Michael D., "Mortality Risks and Bequests," Econometrica, Volume 57, Number 4, July
       1989, pp. 779 ­ 813.

Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, "The Retirement Consumption Puzzle: Anticipated
       and Actual Declines in Spending at Retirement," NBER Working Paper #9586, March
       2003.

Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, "Some Answers to the Retirement Consumption
       Puzzle," NBER Working Paper #12057, February 2006.

Hurst, Eric, "The Retirement of a Consumption Puzzle," NBER Working Paper #13789, February
        2008.

Kotlikoff, L.J., "Is Conventional Financial Planning Good for Your Financial Health?" Unpublished
        draft, 2006. Retrieved from http://people.bu.edu/kotlikof/Financial%20Health%201-11-
        061.pdf

Laubach, Thomas and John C. Williams, "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest," Review of
      Economics and Statistics, Volume 85, No. 4, November 2003, pp. 1063-70.

Maurer Raimond, Olivia S. Mitchell, Ralph Rogalla, and Tatjana Schimetschek, "Will They Take
      the Money and Work? People's Willingness to Delay Claiming Social Security Benefits for
      a Lump Sum." Journal of Risk and Insurance, 85(4), 2018, pp. 871-1126.

Meyer, William, and William Reichenstein, "Social Security: When to Start Benefits and How to
      Minimize Longevity Risk." Journal of Financial Planning, 23 (3), 2010, pp. 49­59.

Meyer, William, and William Reichenstein, "Social Security Claiming Strategies for Singles."
      Retirement Management Journal, 2 (3), 2012, pp. 61­66.

Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark J. Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown, "New
       Evidence on the Money's Worth of Individual Annuities." American Economic Review, 89
       (5), 1999, pp. 1,299­1,318.

Sass, Steven A., Wei Sun, and Anthony Webb, "Social Security Claiming Decision of Married
        Men and Widow Poverty." Economics Letters, 119 (1). 2013, pp. 20­23.

Scott, Jason, John B. Shoven, Sita Slavov, and John G. Watson, "Retirement Implications of a
        Low Wage Growth, Low Real Interest Rate Economy, NBER Working Paper No. 25556,
        February 2019.

Scholz, J. K., & Seshadri, A., "What Replacement Rates Should Households Use?" (No. WP 2009-
        214). Michigan Retirement Research Center, 2009. Retrieved from
        https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/65069/wp214.pdf

                                                                                               34
Shefrin, Hersh M. and Richard H. Thaler, "The Behavioral Life-Cycle Hypothesis," Economic
       Inquiry, 26(4), 1988, pp. 609-643.

Shoven, John, and Sita Slavov. 2014a. "Does It Pay to Delay Social Security?" Journal of Pension
      Economics and Finance, 13 (2): 121­144.

Shoven, John, and Sita Slavov. 2014b. "Recent Changes in the Gains from Delaying Social
      Security." Journal of Financial Planning, 27 (3): 32­41.

Siegel, Michele, Elizabeth H. Bradley, and Stanislav V. Kasl. 2003. "Self-rated life expectancy as a
        predictor of mortality: evidence from the HRS and AHEAD surveys." Gerontology,
        49(4):265-71.

Simon, Curtis J., John T. Warner and Saul Pleeter, "Discounting, Cognition, and Financial
       Awareness: New Evidence from a Change in the Military Retirement System," Economic
       Inquiry, Volume 53, Issue 1, January 2015, pp. 318-334.

Warner, John T. and Saul Pleeter, "The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
      Downsizing Programs," American Economic Review, Volume 91, Number 1, March 2001,
      pp. 33-53.

Yaari, Menahem E. 1965. "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer."
        Review of Economic Studies, 32 (2): 137­150.




                                                                                                 35
