                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ACROSS-COUNTRY WAGE COMPRESSION IN MULTINATIONALS

                                          Jonas Hjort
                                            Xuan Li
                                        Heather Sarsons

                                      Working Paper 26788
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26788


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We are grateful to David Card for early encouragement and to Alex Mas for suggestions that
significantly improved the paper. We also thank Oriana Bandiera, Sandy Black, Nick Bloom, Jeff
Clemens, Arindrajit Dube, Alex Frankel, Francois Gerard, Gordon Hanson, Simon Jäger, Emir
Kamenica, Alan Krueger, Attila Lindner, W. Bentley MacLeod, Hannes Malmberg, Enrico
Moretti, Suresh Naidu, John Van Reenen, Jonah Rockoff, David Silver, Catherine Thomas, Felix
Tintelnot, and Eric Verhoogen for helpful advice and comments; Madhunika Iyer, Nidhaanjit
Jain, and Jett Pettus for great research assistance; the Company for data access and many helpful
conversations; and seminar audiences at the AEA Annual Meeting, NBER Summer Institute,
Berkeley Haas, Brown, Columbia, LSE, NYU, UCLA, UCL, Uppsala, UCSD, and the briq
Workshop on Firms, Jobs and Inequality for great feedback. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jonas Hjort, Xuan Li, and Heather Sarsons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Across-Country Wage Compression in Multinationals
Jonas Hjort, Xuan Li, and Heather Sarsons
NBER Working Paper No. 26788
February 2020
JEL No. F23,J01,J3,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

Many employers link wages at the firm's establishments outside of the home region to the level at
headquarters. Multinationals that anchor-to-the headquarters also transmit wage changes arising
from shocks to minimum wages and exchange rates in the home country/state to their foreign
establishments. Such multinationals fire more low-skill workers and hire fewer new workers
abroad after a permanent (minimum wage-induced) foreign establishment wage increase
originating in shocks to headquarter wages, but not after a temporary (exchange rate-induced)
one. We show this using data on 1,060 multinationals' establishments across the world and in
employee-level data on the same employers' establishments in Brazil.


Jonas Hjort                                     Heather Sarsons
Graduate School of Business                     Booth School of Business
Columbia University                             University of Chicago
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 622                    Chicago, IL
New York, NY 10027                              and NBER
and NBER                                        heather.sarsons@chicagobooth.edu
hjort@columbia.edu

Xuan Li
LSK 6042, Department of Economics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
Hong Kong
xuanli@ust.hk
1 Introduction
Research in economics has traditionally assumed that labor markets are competitive. In competitive
labor markets, firms adjust so that workers' pay equals the value of their marginal product. When
some firms pay more than others for workers of similar skill levels--most famously, perhaps, multi-
nationals abroad (Brown et al. , 2004; Martins & Esteves, 2015; Card et al. , 2013, 2015; Barth et al.
, 2016; Bloom et al. , 2018; Card et al. , 2018; Alfaro-Urena et al. , 2019), this has been attributed to
technologies or production styles.1 However, there is growing evidence that some multi-establishment
firms are unable or unwilling to adjust to the different contexts they operate in2, and many high-wage
firms are headquartered in a high-wage region (Setzler & Tintelnot, 2019).
     In this paper we investigate a previously undocumented source of firm wage premiums. We
hypothesize that the use of firm-wide wage-setting procedures limits wage differences within firms,
pulling the wages paid at establishments in other regions toward the level at headquarters. Using
job-level data on multinationals, we find strong evidence that many firms indeed "anchor" the wages
they pay abroad to wages at headquarters. Such firms extend externally imposed headquarter wage
increases to their foreign establishments, pointing to a direct link between wages at home and abroad.
We examine the implications for employment outside of the home country and find evidence that
firms that anchor wages lay off more low-skill workers and hire fewer new workers in their foreign
establishments after an exogenous wage increase at the headquarters.
     We rely on two main datasets for our analysis. To document wage anchoring, we use an unusual
2005-2015 dataset of yearly average wages by narrowly-defined occupation in multinationals' estab-
lishments across the world. This dataset was constructed by a consulting company whose expertise
is to harmonize occupations or "jobs" by their tasks and responsibilities to provide employers with
aggregated information about prevailing wages. The dataset covers 1,060 multinationals that span
16 broad sectors and operate in 170 different capital cities around the world. Most of the employers
in the dataset are well-known for-profit firms--the publicly listed U.S. firms in our data account for
about one-third of the total revenue of all publicly listed U.S. firms (see Section 2)--but the dataset
   1 Recognition of and interest in "firm effects" in wages have a long history in labor economics.    For early work, see
e.g. Slichter (1950); Rees & Schultz (1970); Dickens & Katz (1987); Krueger & Summers (1988); Van Reenen (1996);
Abowd et al. (1999, 2002). That multinationals pay workers more than local firms is extensively documented (see Brown
et al. (2004); Lipsey (2004); Lipsey & Sjoholm (2006); Martins & Esteves (2015); Hijzen et al. (2013); Orefice et al.
 (2016); Earle et al. (2018); Setzler & Tintelnot (2019); Hjort et al. (2019); Alfaro-Urena et al. (2019)). See e.g. Aitken
et al. (1996); Conyon et al. (2002); Egger & Kreickemeier (2013); Helpman et al. (2013); Sun (2018) on technological
or production style differences in multinationals that raise worker productivity or attract more productive workers.
    2 See Adams & Williams (2019); DellaVigna & Gentzkow (2019) on firms that do not adjust their product prices

to local contexts, and Clemens & Gottlieb (2017) on benchmarked (to a large competitor) pay-setting. Recent research
has also shown that many societies are averse to pay inequality (Card et al. , 2012; Mas, 2017; Breza et al. , 2017; Cullen
& Perez-Truglia, 2018; Dube et al. , 2019), and that such attitudes can influence firms' wage-setting practices (Harrison
& Scorse, 2010). Cappelli & Chauvin (1991) pioneered the study of institutionally required pay equality within firms.



                                                            2
also contains many multinational public sector employers.
    For our employment analysis, we link the dataset on multinationals to matched employer-
employee administrative data from Brazil. Thirty-seven of the firms in our dataset have establishments
in Brazil, allowing us to investigate the employment implications of wage anchoring in detail.
    The paper proceeds in three parts. We begin by showing that the average wage a given multi-
national pays domestic (non-expat) workers within a given narrowly-defined occupation at foreign
establishments is highly correlated with the average wage the employer pays workers in the same
occupation at the headquarters. The same is true for the employer's wage slope--the difference
between the wages it pays workers in similar jobs of slightly higher versus lower skill requirements.
Wage anchoring is observed across the whole occupation skill range, but the correlation is highest for
low-skill occupations, such as cleaners, drivers, and security guards. The multinationals in our sample
ultimately pay most jobs in lower-income foreign countries wages that, relative to GDP per capita,
are an order of magnitude or more--in some cases two--higher than what they pay workers in the
same position at the headquarters.3 We include fixed effects that rule out conventional explanations
operating through productivity differences across firm×occupations or city×year. The anchoring we
observe in the full sample is driven by multinationals headquartered in inequality-averse countries
as measured by sociologists (Hofstede, 1991, 2001), suggesting that the sources of the multinational
pay premium may go beyond differences in technology and production style.4
    In the second part of the paper we show that multinationals transmit externally imposed changes
in wages at the headquarters to their foreign establishments, indicating that at least part of the
correlation we established in the first part of the paper is causal. To do so we first exploit changes
in home country and state minimum wage laws. We document that low-skill wages in "treated" and
"control" establishments that are located in the same foreign city evolve similarly before the minimum
wage is increased in the country or state where the headquarters of treated establishments is located.
We therefore compare changes in wages across the two groups before and after such events. Next
we compare changes in wages in foreign establishments in jobs for which a home country's or state's
minimum wage is more binding for the same job at the headquarters to other low-skill jobs within the
same foreign establishment for which it is less binding. Finally, we compare changes in wages in the
foreign establishments of firms whose headquarters are highly exposed to minimum wage changes
because of its employment structure and those of other firms that are headquartered in the same
   3 In the Appendix we show that all our results are very similar for private-sector firms and other types of employers.

For simplicity, we use "firm" and "employer" interchangeably.
    4 Hofstede (1991, 2001)'s measures of culture are widely used across the social sciences, including in economics

(Tabellini, 2010; Gorodnichenko & Roland, 2011; Bloom et al. , 2012b; Martinez et al. , 2015; Bandiera et al. , 2019).
We cannot rule out that other ways in which inequality-averse and inequality-tolerant home countries (or the firms head-
quartered in each) differ explain the estimated differences in firm wage-setting, although we find little empirical support
for this possibility. Of course, a firm's "culture" can manifest itself in wage-setting procedures in many different ways.



                                                            3
country or state whose headquarters are less exposed. In combination, these approaches provide
compelling evidence that minimum wage-induced wage increases at the headquarters directly raise
wages in firms' foreign establishments. We show that plausible alternative interpretations, such as
offshoring of jobs or tasks, endogenous timing of minimum wage changes, or induced technological
upgrading, are unlikely to explain the estimated impact on wages paid abroad.
     We exploit exchange rate shocks as a second source of externally-imposed changes to wages
at headquarters. We show for example that, when the measured-in-USD headquarter wages of
a (non-U.S.) multinational increase after an off-trend appreciation of the home country currency,
foreign establishment wages are also increased in response.5 However, exchange rate-induced wage
changes are transitory, suggesting that any impact on employment should be muted relative to that of
long-lasting wage changes arising from increases in the minimum wage of the home country or state.
Transmission abroad of both types of externally-imposed changes to wages at headquarters occurs also
in firms producing and/or purchasing non-tradable goods and services, and for non-offshorable jobs.
     The multinationals that extend wage changes arising from minimum wage and exchange rate
shocks in the home country/state to their foreign establishments are the same ones that descriptively
appear to anchor wages to levels at headquarters: those headquartered in inequality-averse countries.
The implied compression of wages across establishments within firms is in line with how many
firms themselves report to set wages, within and across borders (Culpepper and Associates Inc, 2011;
Alfaro-Urena et al. , 2019).6
     In the third part of the paper, we examine the implications of wage anchoring for employment
using both the multinational data and the Brazilian administrative data. We first confirm that the
results from the earlier parts of our analysis hold also in the Brazilian administrative data. The wage
multinationals pay individual workers in Brazil is robustly correlated with and responds to externally
imposed shocks to the wages of workers in the same position at the headquarters.
     We then explore how the extensive and intensive margins of employment abroad respond to
headquarter wage shocks. We find that multinationals that anchor their wages to the headquarters tend
to lay off workers in low-skill positions and lower hiring in their foreign establishments following an
externally imposed wage increase at the headquarters. We also see some low-skill occupations being
   5 We expect transmission of exchange rate-induced changes in measured-in-USD wages at headquarters to foreign

establishments if either the multinational computes the wages to pay in local currency in a way that ensures partial
alignment across headquarters and foreign establishments, or if the multinationals pays its foreign workers in (or partially
indexes their wages to) the home country currency (see Section 5 for details).
    6 In a recent survey of primarily North American employers operating in multiple locations, 29 percent report

paying the same nominal wages across locations (Culpepper and Associates Inc, 2011). Similarly, a growing list of
firms--including Amazon, IKEA, Walmart, and at least 58 other large employers--have self-imposed, country-wide
wage floors in the U.S. (National Employment Law Project, 2016). Alfaro-Urena et al. (2019) report survey evidence
that multinational corporations pay high wages abroad in part to "ensure cross-country pay fairness within the MNC"
Alfaro-Urena et al. (2019, p. 2).


                                                            4
removed from foreign establishments following a wage increase at the headquarters. This is consistent
with work by Goldschmidt & Schmieder (2017) showing that firms may change their employment
structure by outsourcing some jobs when wages are compressed and downwardly rigid. However,
these findings hold only for permanent (minimum wage-induced) wage increases for low-wage jobs.
We find no employment response to temporary (exchange rate-induced) headquarters (and foreign)
wage increases, as expected. We also find that the types of multinationals that do not transmit
wage increases at the headquarters to their foreign establishments--those from less inequality-averse
societies--also do not to change the occupational structure of their foreign establishments in response
to externally imposed, permanent headquarter wage increases.
    In sum, this paper shows that many large multinationals do not fully adjust wages to local contexts
and instead link the wages of workers abroad to the wages of workers in the same position at the
headquarters. This wage-setting behavior affects such firms' economic activity across countries.
    Our analysis contributes to several strands of the literature on how firms set wages and organize
their activities across space. First, we use a new type of data on large multi-establishment firms'
operations across countries to document a novel regularity, namely that many firms anchor their
wages to the level at headquarters. Our analysis builds on recent findings on invariability in firms'
decisions across different contexts, especially DellaVigna & Gentzkow (2019).7 We connect this body
of evidence with the literature on spatial wage differences, seen by many as key to understanding
the process of economic development itself (see e.g. Moretti, 2011; Clemens et al. , 2019).
    Second, by establishing a particular reason why some firms pay higher wages than others in a
given labor market, this paper helps uncover the nature of the well-known but poorly understood
phenomenon of firm wage effects (see among others Card et al. , 2013, 2015; Barth et al. , 2016;
Bloom et al. , 2018; Card et al. , 2018). The wage anchoring we document is consistent with existing
evidence of rent-sharing (Van Reenen, 1996; Card et al. , 2018) and the use of benchmarks for
pay-setting (Clemens & Gottlieb, 2017), but to our knowledge represents the first direct evidence
of firm "wage cultures".8 Our research design builds on the seminal work of Bloom & Van Reenen
   7 DellaVigna    & Gentzkow (2019) show that many U.S. retailers charge nearly identical prices across large zones
of the U.S. The literature on invariability in firms' decisions across contexts originates in the seminal work of Kahneman
et al. (1986). Recent empirical studies have documented constraints imposed on the wages firms pay different workers
in a given worksite or country by workers' fairness preferences (Card et al. , 2012; Mas, 2017; Breza et al. , 2017; Cullen
& Perez-Truglia, 2018; Dube et al. , 2019). On relative pay comparisons, see also Akerlof & Yellen (1990); Fehr &
Schmidt (1999), and the lab-based experimental studies surveyed in--and following on from--Rabin (1998).
     8 Budd et al. (2005); Martins & Yang (2015) document a high elasticity of average wages in foreign affiliates with

respect to general variation in parent firm profits, consistent with our results. Card et al. (2018) review the broader
literature documenting that some firms share rent with workers via higher wages. Clemens & Gottlieb (2017) show that
payments from private health insurers to small physician groups in the U.S. are often benchmarked to those of a large
public insurer (Medicare). Akerlof & Kranton (2005); Hermalin (2013) survey the literature on corporate culture. This
literature is primarily theoretical--with some important exceptions (see e.g. Guiso et al. , 2015)--and to our knowledge
has not made use of empirical strategies intended to separate firm culture from conventional economic phenomena


                                                            5
(2007); Bloom et al. (2012a) showing that multinationals "transport" their practices across borders,
and Harrison & Scorse (2010)'s evidence that home country attitudes toward pay levels abroad can
influence firms' wage-setting there.
     This paper also presents what to our knowledge is the first evidence of across-country margins
of adjustment to--and components of the incidence of--minimum wages.9 In this sense, and in our
analysis of transmission of exchange rate shocks to wages across borders, the paper also relates to
emerging evidence of shocks spreading across space inside firms (Boehm et al. , 2019; Giroud &
Mueller, 2019; Giroud & Rauh, 2019).
     Finally, we take a first step toward understanding how the use of firm-wide wage-setting pro-
cedures affect the organization of economic activity across countries (see e.g. Feenstra & Hanson,
1996; Dube & Kaplan, 2010; Blinder & Krueger, 2013; Aghion et al. , 2017). The literature on the
consequences of institutionally required pay equality began with Cappelli & Chauvin (1991); see
Propper & Reenen (2010) and Boeri et al. (2018) for more recent evidence. Lemieux et al. (2009)
initiated the study of firms' decision of whether or not to directly tie workers' compensation to their
performance and its consequences for wage inequality. Our analysis also builds on Goldschmidt
& Schmieder (2017)'s evidence that a particular type of German firm--those that generally pay
high wages--outsource the lowest-skill occupations (see also Grossman & Helpman (2007)), and
Harrison & Scorse (2010)'s (mixed) evidence on the consequences for multinationals' operations
in Indonesia of wage increases in response to activism. We provide first-look evidence of the way
that multinationals that anchor their wages to the headquarters change their employment decisions
and occupational structure abroad.

2 Data and Summary Statistics
2.1 Data on job-level wages at multinationals' establishments
The primary dataset we use comes from a consulting company (which we refer to as "the Company")
that gathers information on compensation at establishments--multinationals' headquarters and other
establishments--around the world. When a firm uses the Company's consulting services, its own
Human Resources personnel report information on its positions and corresponding compensation;
specifically, positions that are present in a firm's establishments, the tasks and responsibilities as-
sociated with these positions, and their average gross and net monthly total pay.10 The resulting
that predict similar regularities in a firm's decisions.
    9 The minimum wage literature is large: see e.g. Neumark & Wascher (1992); Card & Krueger (1995); Lee (1999);

Aaronson & French (2007); Draca et al. (2011); Autor et al. (2016); Engbom & Moser (2018); Harasztosi & Lindner
(2019); Horton (2018); Neumark (2018); Haanwinckel (2019); Cengiz et al. (2019).
   10 Pay data come from a firm's HR records while tasks associated with specific occupations are gathered using

in-depth qualitative interviews and quantitative surveys. The Company then maps these tasks/responsibilities associated
with a job into specific, harmonized job titles.


                                                          6
dataset includes 298 harmonized position titles, which we refer to as occupations or jobs. Because
these occupations are defined globally by the Company, whose core business proposition relies on
its ability to harmonize occupations across employers and countries, the data is likely to be far more
comparable across contexts than those generated by heterogeneous statistical agencies.
     The Company maps the 298 jobs into 16 skill levels. Examples of low-skill jobs include cleaner,
guard, and data entry clerk. Middle-skill jobs include administrative assistant, systems analyst, and
finance officer, while high-skill jobs include senior legal counsel, regional office manager, and human
resources director.
     The dataset covers the years 2005 through 2015. While data from the multinationals are collected
each year, not all of their establishments are included every year. As discussed more in the next
section, the dataset is thus an unbalanced panel at establishment×year level.
     Our primary outcome variable is the average nominal gross wage of domestic workers employed
in a given job at a given establishment and year, measured in current U.S. dollars.11 In Section 7
we study the relationship between a firm's wage-setting and the jobs that are present in its foreign
establishments.

2.2 Multinationals in the data, sample construction, and summary statistics
The full sample of multinationals we study includes 1,060 employers. The majority are large private
sector firms, while a sizeable minority are multinational public sector employers (such as large,
international NGOs, multilateral organizations, etc). As shown in Appendix Figure A1, the private
sector firms come from a variety of sectors, including manufacturing (25 percent), financial services
(16 percent), petroleum (11 percent), telecommunications (7 percent), technology (5 percent), and
pharmaceuticals and health services (5 percent).12 The publicly listed U.S. firms in our data account
for about one-third of the total revenue of all publicly listed U.S. firms.13
    As clients of the Company, the multinationals in our data choose which establishments report
data to the Company in a given year. The Company informed us that employers generally choose
a rotation rule for establishments to report14, and that there is some variation in HR personnel's
  11 Our  dataset does not cover expat workers. The Company informed us that expat workers are very rare in most
of the occupations observed in the dataset. Most of the multinationals in the sample report their compensation data
to the Company in USD. The Company converts the data of employers that report in local currency to USD.
   12 Sectors are defined according to the Standard Industrial Classification, with NGOs and other multinational public

sector employers classified separately. The multinational public sector employers in our data also include national banks
and various branches of government that tend to have establishments abroad.
   13 See Hjort et al. (2019), who study macroeconomic consequences of differences in what private-sector multinationals

pay high-skill workers in richer versus poorer countries using a subset of the data from the Company we analyze in
this paper, for details.
   14 Examples of such rules are e.g. "all foreign establishments report every year, but the headquarters only reports

every fifth year" and "foreign establishments rotate in and out, each reporting every third year, and the headquarters
never reports". There is also some regional variation: some multinationals include their foreign establishments across



                                                           7
response/non-response. The establishment×year panel structure of the data appear to confirm this.
The included establishments are also skewed toward local headquarters, though many of these also
employ production workers.
     We include both private sector and public sector multinationals in our primary samples be-
cause the sources of the form of across-country wage compression we study may apply to both
types of employers, and also because the highly saturated econometric specifications we use limit
statistical power in some parts of our analysis. However, we show all key results also for the
private-sector-firms-only subsample; these are generally very similar to those from the full sample.
     The raw dataset includes around 1,800 employers and establishments located in 170 cities around
the world, all but four of which are capital cities, but not all employers in the raw data are multination-
als. The three samples of multinationals we conduct our analysis on are summarized in Table 1. Our
full sample (Sample 1) consists of the 1,060 employers for which we have wage data from at least one
foreign establishment, regardless of whether we have data on the headquarters. This sample includes
5,783 foreign establishments. As shown in Appendix Figure A2, these are distributed across the world.
In contrast--and also shown in the figure--most headquarters are located in Europe and North Amer-
ica, although some are in Asia, Latin America, and Africa, in part because the Company's primary
focus is to collect data on establishments located in low- and middle-income countries. We use Sample
1, in addition to the more narrowly defined samples discussed next, when we analyze the impact at for-
eign establishments of external shocks that influence wages in headquarter locations in sections 4-7.15
     In the descriptive analysis in Section 3 we directly compare the wages of workers in an employer's
foreign establishment to those at the headquarters. For this purpose, we first restrict the sample to
employers for which we observe at least one job in the headquarters and its foreign establishment(s)
(Sample 2). This leaves us with 91 unique employers, their 1,184 foreign establishments, and 79,130
establishment×job×year observations, as shown in Panel A of Table 1. We then further restrict
the sample to those multinationals for which at least one such job is observed in the headquarters
and at least one foreign establishment in the same year (Sample 3). This yields the narrowest
analysis sample (Sample 3), consisting of 74 employers, their 618 foreign establishments, and 20,739
establishment×job×year observations.16 We use samples 2 and 3 both in Section 3 and when we
the globe, while some include only those on certain continents.
   15 Data on wages at the multinational's headquarters are available for around 10 percent of the multinationals in

Sample 1. Estimating the impact of shocks in home countries/states is nevertheless feasible because we observe home
country/state minimum wage changes and exchange rate shocks in auxiliary data. More details are in sections 4-7.
   16 In Sample 2 we do not require that the same occupation is observed in an establishment and the headquarters of

the employer in the exact same year. Some multinationals in our sample do not provide data to the Company on all
of their establishments every year they are surveyed. For this reason, for a substantial fraction of foreign establishment
occupation wages we do not observe a corresponding headquarter occupation wage in the exact same year, but we
do observe such a corresponding occupation wage in another close-in-time year within the same employer. In some
exercises, we impute the missing occupation-specific wage values using observations on the same occupation at the


                                                            8
analyze the impact of external shocks that influence wages in headquarter locations in Sections 4-5.
The right-hand side of Panel A of Table 1 provides more details on which part of the analysis we
use each sample for.
    Panel B of Table 1 display summary statistics for employers in each of the three samples of
multinationals. The mean nominal wage the multinationals in Sample 1 pay across their foreign
establishments is USD 18,512 (in 2005 dollars), with a standard deviation of USD 12,889. The
corresponding numbers are USD 18,615 and USD 12,459 in Sample 2 and USD 23,927 and USD
15,227 in Sample 3. The multinationals in Sample 1 have on average around 25 different jobs, of
9 different skill levels, present in an average of five foreign establishments, while those in samples
2 and 3 have respectively 31/10/11, and 27/10/8.

2.3 Additional data sources
We match our global data on the wages and jobs at multinationals' foreign establishments to three
additional types of data, starting with minimum wage and exchange rate data that enable us to
establish a causal link between wages at headquarters and in foreign establishments. We then bring
in data on attributes of home countries and their firms that may influence wage-setting practices.
Finally, we match the global data to employer-employee administrative data from Brazil to study
the employment consequences of wage anchoring.
    Shocks to headquarter wages We gather information on two types of shocks in home countries
or states that are external to the firm, but that may influence wages at multinationals' headquarters:
changes in minimum wages and exchange rates. Country-level minimum wage data come from the
International Labour Organisation (ILO), and state-level minimum wage data from the United States
(used if the firm is headquartered in the U.S.) come from Vaghul & Zipperer (2016) (see also Cengiz
et al. (2019)). Yearly data on the home country's exchange rate (in local currency units per USD)
come from the World Bank (see Appendix II for details).
    Home country/firm attributes We make use of data on cultural attitudes and the economic
context of home countries and their firms that may predict wage-setting practices. Our preferred
measures of cultural attributes come from Hofstede (2001)'s "cultural dimensions", which were orig-
inally constructed from a survey of IBM employees. These measures are especially useful as they are
available for, and comparable across, over 80 countries, and extensively validated (see e.g. Yoo et al.
, 2011). They are widely used in social science research, including in economics (see e.g. Tabellini,
2010; Gorodnichenko & Roland, 2011; Bloom et al. , 2012b; Martinez et al. , 2015; Bandiera et al. ,
2019). Specifically, we use Hofstede (2001)'s Power Distance measure of inequality-aversion, which
captures a group's willingness to accept inequality among its members. The variation across countries
in this measure of inequality aversion is shown in Appendix Figure A3. Less inequality-averse
same establishment or headquarters in close-in-time surveyed years.


                                                         9
countries and regions include for example France, Eastern Europe, India, North and West Africa,
and the North-Eastern countries in Latin America. More inequality-averse countries and regions
include for example most of Europe, Eastern Africa, the South-Western countries in Latin America,
and Canada and the U.S.17
     We also collect and make use of a range of measures of countries' and country-pairs' eco-
nomic and political context (such as GDP per capita, inequality, regulations, geographic and cultural
proximity, etc), some of which correlate with inequality-aversion.
     Matched employer-employee data from Brazil Finally, we use Brazil's longitudinal matched
worker-firm database, the Relação Anual de Infomações Sociais (RAIS) to study wages and employ-
ment outcomes in multinationals' foreign establishments in granularity, albeit in a more particular
context in which a smaller set of multinationals operate. To do so, we focus on the 37 employers
in the global dataset that operate an establishment in Brazil. More information about these firms can
be found in Appendix II and Appendix Table A1.

3 Anchoring to Headquarter Wages
In this section we begin by documenting a robust correlation between the wages multinationals pay
the workers employed in a given position at the headquarters and in foreign establishments. We
then explore correlates of this relationship to begin to shed light on why some multinationals anchor
wages to the headquarters.

3.1 Across-country wage patterns
We first document patterns in the raw data that point toward a close relationship between the wages
a multinational pays its workers at home and abroad. In Panel C of Table 1, we display employers'
mean headquarter wage at each of the four quartiles of their within-headquarters wage distribution,
focusing on Sample 3 as defined in Sub-section 2.2. The mean wage is roughly USD 13,000 in the
lowest quartile and USD 51,000 in the highest quartile. We also display, by headquarter wage-quartile,
employers' wage levels at their foreign establishments as a percentage of their wage level for the
same jobs at the headquarters. The nominal wages paid to workers in foreign establishments are on
average around 88 percent of those paid to headquarter workers in the same job in the same year,
a number that is quite stable across the wage distribution and similar (77 percent) also for foreign
establishments located in countries that are poorer than the home country. While these numbers
  17 The  strongest predictors of inequality-aversion we found were a higher GDP per capita, higher (Gini) in-
equality, and a stronger regulatory environment. For more information on the Hofstede measures, including the
other five cultural dimensions--Individualism, Masculinity, Uncertainty Avoidance, Long Term Orientation, and
Indulgence--see https://geerthofstede.com/culture-geert-hofstede-gert-jan-hofstede/6d-model-of-national-culture/ and
https://www.hofstede-insights.com/. These usefully explain e.g. why the U.S. is considered (and measured) to be
inequality-averse but individualistic.


                                                        10
are themselves remarkably high, they imply that real wages at foreign establishments are much
higher than headquarter wages, given the countries in which headquarters and foreign establishments
respectively are located (see Appendix Figure A2).
    In Panel D of Table 1 we show results from a decomposition breaking the overall variance
in wages observed among the multinationals in our dataset into its various across- and within-
firm components, akin to Gartenberg & Wulf (forthcoming). 43 percent of the variation in
establishment×job×year level log wages--adjusted only for sector, city, and job--is across-firm,
while only 26 percent is within-firm and across establishments.18 These numbers are similar in
samples 1, 2, and 3, and also if we restrict to private-sector multinationals.

3.2 Estimating wage anchoring
To estimate the extent of wage anchoring, we correlate the wages paid to workers in a particular
occupation at a firm's foreign establishments with the wages paid to workers in the same occupation
at the firm's headquarters. Specifically, we run

                               wjfct = 1HQwjft + 2xjct + fj + ct + jfct                                             (1)

where wjfct is the log average wage of workers in job j at firm f 's establishment in foreign city c
in year t. A job or occupation here means a specific position such as driver, administrative assistant,
or human resources director. HQwjft is the log average wage of workers in the same job at firm
f 's headquarters in year t. We control for a benchmark measure of the foreign city "market" wage of
workers in job j in year t in two ways (both represented by xjct in (1)). The first, w    ¯ j (-f )ct, directly
measures how much multinationals other than firm f in our sample are paying their workers in job j
in foreign city c in year t. The correlation between a multinational's wage level and other employers'
wages in the same city and year is a natural benchmark to which we can compare the correlation
between a given firm's wage level abroad and at home. Our second control for market wages--a
fixed effect for job j in city c in year t, jct--is more restrictive than w ¯ j (-f )ct, but does not yield
a benchmark coefficient to which     ^ 1 can be compared.
     Throughout our analysis we include firm×job fixed effects fj to account for differences across
firms in the productivity of workers in job j , and city×year fixed effects ct so that we only compare
establishments located in a given city and at a given point in time. We measure all wage levels as
the log of the relevant nominal, pre-tax wage in USD, and cluster standard errors at the firm level.
     The results from estimating equation (1) are presented in Table 2, where Panel A shows the results
  18 In addition, 20 percent of the variance in wages is within-establishment and across-occuptions, and 12 percent
within-establishment×occupation, across-years. If we do not adjust wages for sector, city, and occupation fixed effects,
the across-employer and within-establishment×occupation, across-years variance component are considerably smaller
and the within-establishment, across-occupation component considerably larger.


                                                          11
when controlling for the average wage paid by other multinationals and Panel B shows the results
if we instead include the job×city×year fixed effects. We find a strong correlation between foreign
establishment and headquarter wages. As seen in Column 1 of Table 2 and Panel C of Appendix
Figure A4, 10 percent higher wages at the headquarters are associated with 1.5 percent higher
foreign establishment wages for workers in the exact same position. The within-firm-across-country
correlation in wage levels is at least as large as the correlation between a given establishment's wage
level and the local average paid by other multinationals to workers in the same job.
    The estimated correlation between foreign establishment and headquarter wages is robust to
instead including wage observations from foreign establishment jobs that do not necessarily have
a same-job-and-year counterpart at the headquarters in the sample. We do this in four different ways.
In the first two we continue to (as in Column 1) use the sample for which we observe the relevant
job at the headquarters in the same year as at the foreign establishment (Sample 3). In Column 2
we collapse the data to the skill-level and look at the within-year correlation between the foreign
establishment and headquarter wages of jobs that are not necessarily identical positions but of the
same skill level.19 In Column 3, we collapse the data to the firm level and correlate the average wages
paid in the headquarters and establishment, regardless of occupation or skill match.20 In the last two
approaches we extend the analysis to firms for which foreign establishments and the headquarters are
not necessarily interviewed in the same years (Sample 2). To do this, we replace wjfct and HQwjft
with time-adjusted cross-sectional average occupation-specific wages in the establishment and the
headquarters (Column 4), or, alternatively, imputed values of the outcome variable (Column 5). These
four approaches in columns 2-5 all yield estimates of wage anchoring (         ^ 1) that are considerably
larger in magnitude than our preferred estimate of 0.15 from Column 1.21
   19 We correspondingly replace firm×job fixed effects 
                                                                  fj with firm×skill-level fixed effects fl , job-specific local
benchmark w  ¯ j (-f )ct with skill-level-specific local benchmark w    ¯ l(-f )ct (Panel A), and job×city×year fixed effects
jct with skill-level×city×year fixed effects lct (Panel B).
   20 Correspondingly, firm×job fixed effects are replaced with firm fixed effects  , and the controls for market wages
                                                                                            f
are subsumed by city×year fixed effects ct.
   21 In Column 4, the cross-sectional average wage of occupation j in the establishment of firm f located in

city c (either a headquarters or a foreign establishment) is the estimate w          ^ jfc from a two-way fixed effect model
wjfct = wjfc + t + jfct. The corresponding controls for market wages become (1) the cross-sectional average wage
paid to occupation j by other firms in city c, w ¯
                                                 ^ j (-f )c, and (2) occupation×city fixed effects. As HQwjf := w      ^ jfh(f ) is
subsumed by firm×occupation fixed effect fj , we replace fj with firm fixed effect f and occupation fixed effect j .
In Column 5, we impute the values of the outcome variable in missing years using the fitted values from the estimation
of the following two-way fixed effect model: wjfct = wjfc + wjct + jft, w          ^ jfc + w^ jct. All establishments--all foreign
establishments and headquarters--are included in the estimation, while the imputation is conducted only on foreign
establishment occupations to avoid double counting data points which provide effective information. The model has
a fit of R2 = 0.98. As the cross-sectional component w     ^ jfc is mechanically highly correlated with firm×occupation fixed
effect fj , we replace fj with firm fixed effect f and occupation fixed effect j (similarly to in the cross-sectional
regression discussed above). Note that the fact that the estimates are very similar when we compare wages in jobs of
a given skill level in Column 2 versus the exact same position as in Column 1 (see also Panel A of Appendix Figure
A4) may in itself point toward "egalitarian" firm-wide wage-setting policies, a possibility we come back to below.


                                                               12
    The estimates in Table 2 are similar if we restrict the sample to private sector firms, as shown in
Appendix Table A2. In Section 7 we show that these results also hold and are of similar magnitude
when using individual-level data from Brazil.
    The correlation we have established in this sub-section leaves open the possibility that headquar-
ters and foreign establishment wages are not directly linked via firms' wage-setting procedures, but
instead both driven by overlapping third factors, such as changes in a firm's technology or production
style. In sections 4-5 we use external shocks to wages to show that the results in Table 2 are in
part due to headquarter wages themselves affecting foreign establishment wages.22 Before doing
so, however, we explore where and how wage anchoring occurs in more detail.

3.3 Unpacking wage anchoring
To begin to understand the wage anchoring we established in sub-section 3.2, we first demonstrate
that the slope of the wage profile across jobs of consecutive skill levels at multinationals' foreign estab-
lishments is also highly correlated with the slope at the firm's headquarters. We replace the outcome
variable wjfct in equation (1) with a corresponding measure of the establishment's wage slope. To
construct this measure, we consider occupational categories rather than narrowly-defined occupations
(or jobs) themselves. A given occupational category o--for example, administrative jobs--tends to
have jobs of multiple skill levels represented within an establishment.23 Focusing on occupational
categories thus allows us to construct a measure of the difference between the average wage of jobs
that are of skill level l + 1 versus skill level l but otherwise similar, in the foreign establishment of firm
f that is located in city c at time t: wo(l,l+1)fct. We also replace the independent variable of interest
HQwjft with an analogously defined measure of the corresponding wage slope at the headquarters,
HQwo(l,l+1)ft.24 The results, reported in columns 1 and 4 of Panel B in Table 3, are similar
to those in Table 2. A 10 percent larger difference in occupational category-specific headquarter
wages between jobs of consecutive skill levels are associated with a 1.1 percent larger difference
in establishment wages between workers of the same occupational category and skill levels.25
     We next show that, although the slope of the wage profile at multinationals' foreign establish-
ments appears to be linked to that at their headquarters, wage anchoring is significantly greater
in low-skill than higher-skill jobs. We interact HQwjft with indicators for the relevant job being
  22 We also show that there is no evidence of the reverse effect.
  23 The 298 jobs (or occupations) of 16 skill levels in the dataset we analyze belong to 26 occupational categories.
  24 The   first local benchmark measure, occupation-specific average wages paid by other employers w        ¯ j (-f )ct,
is replaced with the analogously defined slope measure w         ¯ o(l,l+1)(-f )ct; and the second benchmark measure,
occupation×city×year fixed effects jct, is also replaced by occupation-category×skill level-pair×city×year fixed
effects o(l,l+1)ct. Firm×occupation fixed effects fj are analogously replaced by firm×occupational category×skill
level-pair fixed effects fo(l,l+1) .
   25 The estimates are similar if we restrict the sample to private firms, as shown in columns 1 and 4 of Panel B in

Appendix Table A5.


                                                           13
respectively middle- and high-skill, as opposed to low-skill. In Appendix Table A3 we show that
10 percent higher wages at headquarters are associated with around 2.7 percent higher foreign
establishment wages in low-skill jobs; 1 percent higher foreign establishment wages in middle-skill
jobs; and 1.2 percent higher foreign establishment wages in high-skill jobs.26
     We expect firm-wide wage-setting procedures to be more common in some types of firms than
others. To investigate, we first relate the extent of wage anchoring we observe in a firm to cultural
attributes of the home country, specifically the measure of attitudes toward inequality described in
Section 2. We estimate

                        L
            wjfct = 1 + 1 Low Ineq. Aversionh(f ) HQwjft + 2xjct + fj + ct + jfct                                    (2)

where Low Ineq. Aversionh(f ) = 1 if multinational f is headquartered in an inequality-tolerant coun-
try.27 Such countries have a higher degree of tolerance for power and income inequality than average.
     We find that the correlation between foreign establishment and headquarter wage levels observed
in the full sample is driven by multinationals headquartered in inequality-averse countries. We show
this in columns 2 and 5 of Table 3 and panels B and D of Appendix Figure A4. Thus, for wage
anchoring to operate through worker productivity, a firm's headquarters and foreign establishment
workers would need to become more or less productive simultaneously; such concurrent changes
in productivity would need to occur to a greater extent for workers in low-skill jobs; and across-
country concurrent changes in productivity would need to occur only in firms headquartered in
inequality-averse countries.
     In contrast, we find no relationship between inequality aversion in the country where a given for-
eign establishment is located and the extent to which its wages correlate with those of the parent multi-
national's headquarters, as shown in columns 3 and 6 of Panel A in Table 3. The correlation between
wage slopes at multinationals' foreign establishments and their headquarters is also concentrated in
multinationals headquartered in inequality-averse countries, but statistically unrelated to inequality
aversion in establishment countries, as seen in columns 2 and 5 versus 3 and 6 of Panel B in Table 3.28
     While we cannot rule out that the estimated relationship between inequality aversion and wage
  26 The results are again very similar when the control for market wages is the average job-specific wage paid by other

firms and occupation×city×year fixed effects respectively (see columns 2 and 4 of Appendix Table A3). The results
are also similar if we restrict the sample to private-sector firms, as shown in Appendix Table A4.
   27 We classify home countries as culturally inequality-averse or not based on whether they score above or below the

median of Hofstede (2001)'s Power Distance measure (see Sub-section 2.3).
   28 Like our sample-wide estimates of wage anchoring discussed in Sub-section 3.2, our estimates of the degree to

which anchoring of wages to the headquarters is driven by cultural attitudes are very similar when we restrict the sample
to private sector firms, as shown in Appendix Table A5. Note also that we find no evidence that firms learn over time
such that anchoring-to-the-headquarters falls with time spent operating in a given foreign city (results available from
the authors upon request).



                                                          14
anchoring captures other home country or firm characteristics that influence wage-setting practices,
we find little empirical support for this possibility. To show this we re-run (2) with additional
interactions between the job-specific log wage at the headquarters and three categories of country
and country-pair level attributes included: (i) measures of the home country's economic environment,
such as the country's income inequality, GDP per capita, collective bargaining and/or union coverage
in the public and the private sectors, its regulatory environment, and urbanization and education
levels; (ii) measures of the bilateral relationship between the home country and foreign establishment
countries, including whether the establishment country is higher-income than the home country,
and Head & Mayer (2014)'s measures of "gravity" (in particular various measures of cultural and
historical bonds, geographical proximity, and trade connections); and (iii) characteristics of the sector
the multinational operates in, such as the sector's labor share, skill share, input and output tradeability
measures, and job offshorability.29
    The results are presented in appendix tables A6-A8. Some of the home country and home-foreign
establishment country-pair characteristics themselves predict wage anchoring in a multinational.30
However, none explain the relationship between home country inequality aversion and anchoring,
which remains large in magnitude and statistically significant throughout. Several other measures of
home country culture that are correlated with inequality aversion, such as altruism, positive reciprocity,
and trust (Falk et al. , 2018), also predict wage anchoring, but none as robustly as inequality aversion.
    Of course, a firm's "culture" can manifest itself in its wage-setting procedures in many different
ways. For example, firms headquartered in culturally inequality-averse countries may benefit more
than other firms from entering into multilateral relational contracts with the firm's entire workforce
rather than bilateral relational contracts with smaller groups of employees (Levin, 2002). Another
possibility is that monitoring workers' productivity may conflict with the broader management
practices that prevail in inequality averse countries (Falk & Kosfeld, 2006; Blader et al. , forthcoming;
de Rochambeau, 2019), in which case firms headquartered in such countries may adopt HR systems
in which a given wage is attached to a given job (Lemieux et al. , 2009, 2012). This could lead some
multinationals to index the wages of foreign workers in a given position to that of headquarter workers
in the same position. We leave testing between such underlying motivations for future research.
  29 The gravity measures include a common language index, a dummy for common religion, a dummy for common

legal origin, a dummy for a historical colonial relationship, bilateral migrant stocks, the distance between capital cities,
a dummy for sharing a border, a dummy for sharing a time zone, a dummy for regional trade agreements, etc. See
details of the measures in (i), (ii) and (iii) in Appendix II.
   30 The signs of the estimated coefficients on these predictors are generally unsurprising. For example, wage anchoring

is more common among firms headquarted in countries with lower levels of inequality, although inequality itself predicts
wage anchoring to a much smaller extent than inequality-aversion.




                                                            15
4 Changes in Foreign Wages in Response to Externally Imposed
      Changes in Headquarter Wages: Minimum Wage Shocks
In this and the next section we provide evidence of a direct link between a multinational's headquarter
wages and the wages of domestic workers in its foreign establishments, suggesting that at least part
of the correlation we established in Section 3 is causal. We demonstrate this using two sources of
exogenous variation in headquarter wages: minimum wage and exchange rate shocks in a firm's
home country or state. We primarily focus on the full sample of multinationals (Sample 1 in Table
1), providing corresponding estimates for samples 2 and 3 where relevant.

4.1 Event study analysis of minimum wage shocks
To test whether minimum wage shocks in a multinational's home country or state affect the wages
of foreign establishment workers, we begin with an event study analysis. We look within a city,
using establishments whose headquarters are located in countries/states that experience a minimum
wage increase in year t as our treated establishments and establishments in the same city whose
headquarters are in a country/state that does not experience a minimum wage increase in year t as
control establishments. We then compare the evolution of workers' wages in the treated and control
establishments by estimating

                     3                                    3
          wjfct =      1
                      k I(MINwh(f ),t-k > 0)+ fj + ct +     k2
                                                                         
                                                               %MINwh(f )t-k + jfct                                  (3)
                  k=-3                                  k=-3

on the sample of low-skill jobs (whose wages may directly respond to minimum wage changes).
    The dependent variable, wjfct, is defined as in (1) in Section 3. The independent variable
of interest, I(MINwh(f )t-k > 0), is an indicator for treatment; that is, the minimum wage in
multinational f 's home country/state increasing in year t. The coefficient    ^k1 thus represents the

difference in wages paid to workers in a specific job in treated foreign establishments and that paid
to workers in the same job in control establishment in the same city in year k. We control for the
magnitude of the corresponding change in the headquarters minimum wage in percent terms (see also
Cengiz et al. , 2019), %MINwh(f )t, and cluster the standard errors at the home country/state level.31
    We see clear evidence that the wages of workers in treated establishments increase relative to
  31 We   adopt the same fixed effects controls and the same standard error clustering procedure throughout Section
4. Because the minimum wage changes we study are used as events, we follow Cengiz et al. (2019) and specify our
independent variable of interest as the percent change in the minimum wage. Additionally, our minimum wage data
are in local currencies. Using the percent change in a country's/state's minimum wage lets us avoid the additional
complication of converting local currencies to USD, which could confound minimum wage shocks with exchange rate
fluctuations. We estimate equation (3) using the sample of multinationals that experience only one minimum wage shock
during a given five-year period so that we can cleanly identify the effect of a single wage change on establishment wages.
Later, when we focus on the impact of a minimum wage change in year t on wages in year t, we use the full sample.


                                                           16
those in control establishments after a minimum wage increase in the home country or state. In Figure
1 we plot the coefficients  1 relative to the average job-level wage paid at an establishment in the year
                           ^k
before the minimum wage shock (k = -1). Wages in treated establishments appear to break from the
trend, increasing by over USD 500/year in the year immediately after the minimum wage shock in the
home country/state relative to wages at k = -1. In control establishments, workers' wages in the same
year increase by about USD 175. Importantly, the evolution of the average wage of workers in treated
and control establishments is virtually indistinguishable before such minimum wage change events.

4.2 Average effect on foreign establishment wages
The patterns in Figure 1 suggest that changes in home country and state minimum wage laws can
be used to estimate the impact of headquarter wage changes on foreign establishment wages. To
do so, we first show results from a reduced-form regression relating the wages paid in a foreign
establishment in year t to changes in minimum wages in the home country/state in year t from year
t - 1, controlling for firm×job and city×year fixed effects as throughout our analysis and clustering
standard errors at the home-country level (or the home-state level for U.S.-headquartered firms):

                             %wjfct = 1%MINwh(f )t + fj + ct + jfct                                              (4)

We find that a 10 percent increase in the home country's or state's minimum wage is associated with
a 0.4 percent average increase in the wages of low-skill jobs at foreign establishments, as shown in
Column 3 of Panel A in Table 4. In Appendix tables A9 and A10 we show that this estimate is larger
in magnitude and remains significant if we restrict the sample to private-sector firms, and that there
is no estimated response in the wages of middle- and high-skill jobs in foreign establishments.
     Wage anchoring appears to be a headquarters effect. In particular, we find no effect of minimum
wage changes in the country where a given foreign establishment is located on wages at the head-
quarters of the parent firm, nor on wages at foreign establishments that are part of the same firm but
located in other countries, as shown in columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table A16.
     Next we instrument for headquarter wages with the home country/state minimum wage to
document a direct impact of headquarter wages on foreign establishment wages. We first regress
the change in the average wage firm f pays workers in a given job j at the headquarters in year t,
%HQwjft, on the change in the minimum wage in the country or state where the headquarters
is located, %MINwh(f )t. This first stage relationship is shown in Column 3 of Panel B in Table
4. A 10 percent increase in the home country's/state's minimum wage is associated with a roughly
1 percent increase in the wages of low-skill jobs at the headquarters.32 We then instrument for
  32 The first stage is:%HQwjft = 1%MINwh(f )t + fj + t + jft, where for headquarters (c = h(f )), city×year
fixed effects (h(f )t) are replaced with year fixed effects (t) and city fixed effects (h(f ) ), subsumed by firm×job
fixed effects fj ), so that the independent variable of interest is not subsumed.


                                                        17
the change in job-specific headquarter wages, replacing %MINwh(f )t in (4) with the first-stage
estimates %HQwjft. To include all jobs in foreign establishments and headquarters in our analysis
sample, we estimate the second stage using two-sample two-stage least squares (TS2SLS) (Angrist
& Krueger, 1992; Inoue & Solon, 2010).33
    The results, shown in Column 3 of Panel C in Table 4, imply that a 10 percent increase in the
wages of workers in a given low-skill job at a multinational's headquarters that is induced by a
minimum wage increase raises the wages of workers in the same job at the foreign establishments
of the same multinational by 4 percent.34
    The results are very similar to the full-sample (Sample 1) results in Column 3 of Table 4 if we
instead of TS2SLS use a standard one-sample two-stage least square (2SLS) approach on the sample
of jobs in foreign establishment for which we directly observe headquarter wages for the same
job in the same year (Sample 3), and in the sample for which we can impute such corresponding
headquarter wages (Sample 2). This is shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 4.35 In Section 7 we show
that, at least in Brazil, the results in Table 4 also hold within individual workers and after accounting
for induced changes in contracted work-hours.
    We interpret the results in Table 4 as indicating that externally imposed changes in multinationals'
headquarter wages directly affect their foreign establishment wages. In the next sub-sections we
show that the three most plausible alternative interpretations--endogenous timing of, or offshoring or
technology adoption in response to, minimum wage changes--are unlikely to explain these results.

4.3 Threats to identification
1. Endogenous timing of minimum wage changes Home country/state minimum wage changes
may themselves--beyond firm-wide wage-setting procedures--be endogenous to the wages of
foreign workers. It could be, for example, that policymakers are more likely to raise minimum
wages when a country or state's aggregate labor demand is high (see e.g. Baskaya & Rubinstein,
  33 As    noted above, the difference in sample size between panels A and B is coming from the fact that the number
of employer×occupations for which we have data on establishment wages but not headquarter wages in a given year
is larger than the number of those for which we have data on headquarter wages but not establishment wages in a given
year. This is simply because many multinationals in the full sample provide data on their headquarters to the Company
only periodically or never do so. Using TS2SLS thus increases power. TS2SLS provides a consistent estimate if (the
probability limit of) the correlation between the endogenous variable(s) and the instruments (conditional on controls) is the
same in the first-stage sample and the second-stage sample. Intuitively, this assumption requires that the average treatment
effect of home country/state minimum wage increases on the (unobserved) headquarters low-skill wages in the subset of
multinationals that have no such information in our data is similar to the that on the (observed) headquarter low-skill wages
of the subset of multinationals that have such information. Readers can alternatively focus on the reduced form estimates.
    34 When we restrict attention to private-sector firms, the results are similar but larger in magnitude, as shown in

Column 2 of Panel C in Appendix Table A9.
    35 In Sample 2 we impute the headquarter wages of a given occupation for unsurveyed years by linearly interpolating

occupation-specific log headquarter wages on log home country/stage minimum wages over time. The reduced form,
the first stage and the second stage estimates are similar in samples 1, 2, and 3, and the estimates in Sample 1 are more
precise as using a larger sample increases statistical power.

                                                            18
2015; Neumark, 2018), and that home country/state labor demand is highly positively correlated
with multinationals' demand for labor abroad. However, fluctuations in demand for foreign labor
that co-vary with home country/state minimum wage changes should arguably extend beyond the
particular part of the wage distribution or the particular type of firm most affected by changes in min-
imum wages themselves. We thus compare changes in the average wage of, first, workers in higher
and lower-wage low-skill jobs within a given establishment, and second, workers in establishments
whose headquarters have relatively more versus fewer low-wage workers.
    Comparing wage changes across the low-skill wage distribution within a given foreign establishment-
year enables us to "difference out" the impact of broader fluctuations in labor demand on foreign
wages. Suppose the country or state a firm is headquartered in raises its minimum wage at some
point during our data period. We then define the new minimum wage as (loosely) binding for job
j in city c (Bindingjc = 1) if one of the establishments in our sample that are located in city c paid its
workers in job j a nominal gross wage lower than the new minimum wage in the year immediately
preceding the minimum wage change.36 Binding jobs are thus a smaller subset of low-skill jobs.
When firms are headquartered in a city where Bindingjc = 1, we define the new minimum wage as
binding (Bindingjh(f ) = 1) also for job j in the firms' foreign establishments.
    The reduced form relationship between home country/state minimum wage changes and the
wages of binding versus non-binding jobs in foreign establishments is:

                     %wjfct = 2%MINwh(f )t × Bindingjh(f ) + fj + fct + jfct                                         (5)

The minimum wage change itself and any possibly correlated demand shocks that affect both binding
and non-binding jobs are absorbed by firm×establishment×year fixed effects, fct.37
    We find significantly larger effects of home country/state minimum wage changes on wages paid
to foreign workers in jobs for which the minimum wage binds at the headquarters than on the wages
  36 Given the unbalanced nature of our establishment×year panel, we a priori face a trade-off between constructing

a measure of bindingness that is specific to a given firm/headquarters, and measuring bindingness as close in time
as possible to the minimum wage change. We opt for a labor market-level measure of bindingness (akin to Card &
Krueger (1995) and subsequent industry-level studies) for power reasons: the sample of firms for which we observe
everything required to define a firm-specific, stricter measure of bindingness and still compare changes in foreign wages
after a minimum wage change within narrowly-defined binding and non-binding jobs is too small to achieve meaningful
estimates. Many jobs--especially those that are likely subject to the minimum wage--are present in many different
establishments. Our labor market-based measure of bindingness is thus a loose measure of the relevance of the minimum
wage for a given firm×job combination. This may lead us to underestimate the differential effect on wages in binding
and unbinding jobs within a given firm.
   37 In equation (5), firm×establishment×year fixed effects subsume city×year fixed effects. The corresponding

first stage estimation equation is: %HQwjft = 2%MINwh(f )t × Bindingjh(f ) + fj + ft + jft, where for
headquarters (c = h(f )), firm×year fixed effects (ft) are equivalent to firm×establishment×year fixed effects (fh(f )t ).
Since we include firm×establishment×year fixed effects fct, we thus restrict the sample to firm×establishment×years
for which we observe both binding and non-binding jobs.


                                                           19
of workers in other low-skill jobs in the same foreign establishment. The reduced form results shown
in Column 1 of Panel A in Table 5 indicate that a 10 percent increase in the home country's/state's
minimum wage results in a 0.9 percentage point larger increase in wages for binding low-skill jobs
compared to non-binding ones.38 We also leave out firm×establishment×year fixed effects so that
the effect of home country/state minimum wage increases on the wages of workers in non-binding
jobs can be identified. As seen Column 2 of Panel A in Table 5, the estimated effect of a 10 percent
minimum wage increase on the wages of workers in non-binding jobs at the foreign establishments
of a multinational is statistically insignificant and much smaller in magnitude (0.16 percent) than
that for binding jobs.39
    Home country or state labor demand that directly affects multinationals' foreign wages and
also encourages home country/state minimum wage increases may disproportionately be demand
for low-wage workers. If so, a strategy of focusing on the differential wage response in foreign
jobs for which the minimum wage binds at the headquarters will only partially difference out any
such direct effects of the underlying drivers of minimum wage changes. On the other hand, causal
effects of minimum wage changes on the wages of workers that are higher up in the low-skill wage
distribution within a given foreign establishment may arise through market-driven spillover effects
in wage-formation (Teulings, 2003; Haanwinckel, 2019) (see also Engbom & Moser (2018)), or
through firms' wage-setting procedures, in which case the approach in Panel A of Table A11 will
underestimate the true effect on the wages of low-wage workers in multinationals' foreign establish-
ments. To make progress, we next compare the wage response of employers that are headquartered
in the same country or state but differentially exposed to minimum wage changes.
    Following Lee (1999) and Autor et al. (2016) (see also Neumark (2018)), we measure firm-level
bindingness as the ratio between the ex ante minimum wage and the firm's median wage at the
headquarters (the so-called Kaitz index). Specifically, we interact the independent variables of interest
in equations (4) and (5) respectively with Kaitzft and estimate:
                    %wjfct = 3%MINwh(f )t × Kaitzft + fj + ct + h(f )t + jfct                                         (6)
  38 The corresponding differential increase for binding relative to non-binding low-skill jobs at the headquarters is 2.1

percentage points (see Column 3 of Panel A in Table 5). The second stage estimate implies that a 10 percent minimum
wage-induced increase in headquarter wages in binding jobs results in an increase in foreign establishment wages that
is 4.2 percentage points greater than any simultaneous change in the wages of other low-skill jobs in the same foreign
establishment (see Column 3 of Panel A of Apprendix Table A11).
   39 We find a (statistically insignificant) zero effect of minimum wage increase on the wages of workers in non-binding

jobs at the headquarters (see Column 4 of Panel A in Table 5). We also find that the estimated differential effects on
the wages of workers in binding jobs where firm×establishment×year fixed effects are dropped (columns 2 and 4 of
Panel A in Table 5) are of similar (if anything smaller) magnitude to those where firm×establishment×year fixed effects
are included (columns 1 and 3), suggesting that the differential effect is not driven by any possibly larger increase in
the labor demand of firms that employ more workers in binding jobs.




                                                          20
    and

          %wjfct = 4
                   B                 N
                     Bindingjh(f ) + 4 1 - Bindingjh(f )                      × Kaitzft × %MINwh(f )t                (7)
                          B
                        + 5 Bindingjh(f ) × %MINwh(f )t + fj + h(f )t + jfct

where the change in the minimum wage and any correlated macro-level demand shocks affecting
the home country/state are now absorbed by home country/state×year fixed effects h(f )t.40
    We find that the wages of foreign workers in low-skill jobs and the lowest-wage jobs (for which
the minimum wage is binding at the headquarters) are more affected by a minimum wage increase
in the home country/state in firms for which the prior minimum wage was more binding at the
headquarters. The estimates of     ^ 3 and   B are reported in Column 1 of panels B and C of Table
                                            ^4
5. They imply for example that a 10 percent increase in the home country's/state's minimum wage
results in an increase in foreign establishment wages of low-skill (binding) jobs at a firm at the 75th
percentile of bindingness that is around 0.34 (0.31) percentage points greater than at another firm
headquartered in the same country or state that is at the 25th percentile of bindingness.41
    We also find evidence of spillover effects of minimum wage changes higher up in the wage
distribution within a given foreign establishment: the estimated impact on the wages of workers in non-
binding jobs is greater in more binding firms,   N > 0. This finding has a natural interpretation insofar
                                                ^4
  40  In equation (7), firm×establishment×year fixed effects are replaced by home country/state×year fixed effects
and city×year fixed effects, as firm-level bindingness does not vary within each firm×establishment×year cell. In
the corresponding first stage estimations for headquarters (c = h(f )), home country/state×year fixed effects (h(f )t)
are equivalent to city×year fixed effects (ct).
   41 The average within-home country/state-year difference in the 75-percentile Kaitz and the 25-percentile Kaitz

is 0.025. Therefore the differential effect of the same 10 percent minimum increase on the establishment wages of
low-skill (binding) occupations is 0.025×1.373×10=0.34 (0.025×1.243×10=0.31) percentage points higher for a
75-percentile binding firm compared to a 25-percentile binding firm from the same home country or state in the same
year. The corresponding number for the differential effect on the headquarter wage of low-skill (binding) occupations is
0.025×4.705×10=1.2 (0.025×4.045×10=1.0) percentage points (see Column 3 of panels B and C of Table 5). We also
show the corresponding second stage estimates linking differential changes in headquarter wages to differential changes
in foreign stablishments directly (see Column 3 of panels B and C of Appendix Table A11). The estimates are slightly
smaller than that looking at the differential wage increases of binding jobs compared to non-binding ones within the same
establishment (Column 3 of Panels A of Appendix Table A11). Note that we also leave out home country/state×year fixed
effects so that the effect of home country/state minimum wage increases on the wages of workers in low-skill (non-binding)
occupations in multinationals with medium-level firm bindingness (Kaitz) can be identified. As seen in Column 2 of Panel
B of Table 5, the estimated effect of a 10 percent minimum wage increase on the wages of low-skill jobs at the foreign
establishments of a medium-level binding firm is 0.5 percent, which is similar to the average effect of home location
minimum wage changes on all foreign establishment low-skill jobs (0.4 percent, see Column 3 of Panel A in Table 4). As
seen in Column 2 of Panel C of Table 5, the estimated effect of a 10 percent minimum wage increase on the wages of non-
binding jobs at the foreign establishments of a medium-level binding firm is 0.14 percent and statistically insignificant,
which is similar to the average effect of home location minimum wage changes on all foreign establishment non-binding
jobs (0.16 percent, see Column 2 of Panel A of Table 5). The estimated coefficients on the interaction terms of home
country/state minimum wage change and the firm bindingness measure are robust to whether home country/state×year
fixed effects are included (comparing columns 1 and 3 with columns 2 and 4 in panels b and C in Table 5).


                                                           21
as firms have "wage cultures": the managers of firms that are highly exposed to minimum wage
changes may then choose to raise the wages of most workers in a given establishment when they are
induced to raise the wages of a high proportion of those workers by changes in minimum wage laws.
    The results in panels B and C of Table 5 suggest that potential heterogeneity in labor demand that
covaries with minimum wage changes is to a large extent firm-specific rather than occupation-specific.
This in turn implies that the concern discussed above--that home country/state labor demand that
directly affects multinationals' foreign wages and also encourages minimum wage increases at home
could disproportionately be demand for low-wage workers--is unlikely to drive our estimates.
    In combination, the evidence we have presented makes clear that endogenous timing of minimum
wage changes is not the primary explanation for the estimated transmission of headquarter wage
increases to multinationals' foreign establishments.

2. Offshoring in response to minimum wage changes A second alternative interpretation of
the results in Sub-section 4.2 focuses on within-firm offshoring of jobs or tasks. Suppose, for
example, that a range of higher-skill jobs are initially done at multinationals' headquarters, and a
range of lower-skill jobs at their foreign establishments, akin to Feenstra & Hanson (1996)'s model
of offshoring. A minimum wage-induced increase in headquarter wages could then lead firms to
shift the lowest-skill jobs previously done at the headquarters to their foreign establishments. This
could lead to a simultaneous rise in foreign establishment and headquarter wages.
    To test for this possibility, we compare the transmission of headquarter wage increases to a firm's
foreign establishments in more and less "offshorable" jobs and tasks, measuring how offshorable a
job is following Blinder & Krueger (2013) (see Appendix II for details).42 As seen in columns 1 and 4
of Panel A in Appendix Table A12, the estimated impact on the wages of workers in non-offshorable
low-skill jobs is similar to that on the wages of workers in offshorable low-skill jobs.43
    Wage transmission is also not driven by complex, multi-task jobs for which the offshoring of
tasks can more plausibly occur than in simpler, "single-task" jobs. This argument is supported both
by the absence of home country/state minimum wage impact on the wages of jobs that are middle-
or high-skill at the foreign establishment (see Column 1 of Appendix Table A10), as well as a similar
estimated impact on low-skill jobs that are multi-task versus single-task (see columns 2 and 5 of
  42 Specifically, we estimate (4) but include an interaction between %MINw
                                                                                       h(f )t and an indicator for the relevant
job having an above-mean offshorability index--being more offshorable than the average occupation.
   43 In theory it could be that the wages of workers in offshorable jobs at foreign establishments rise because of offshoring

when a headquarter wage increase is externally imposed on the firm, and the wages of workers in non-offshorable jobs
rise because of complementarity between the two groups of workers. Notice, however, that our analysis focuses on
workers in low-skill positions, for whom such offshorable/non-offshorable complementarity is presumably limited. Our
results in Section 7 on changes in employment at foreign establishments are also hard to reconcile with this possible
explanation of why we find similar impact on the wages of workers in offshorable and non-offshorable jobs.



                                                             22
Panel A in Appendix Table A12).44
     In Section 7 we show evidence suggesting that the set of jobs that are present in the foreign
establishments of firms that transmit headquarter wage increases abroad shrinks when there is a
minimum wage increase at the headquarters. An offshoring story would if anything predict an
expansion of the set jobs that are present in the foreign establishments.45
     A possibility that is conceptually distinct from offshoring--the movement of jobs across borders--
is that outsourcing of jobs from foreign establishments to outside of the firm (or job destruction)
magnifies the impact on wages abroad if, for example, the firm chooses to remove the lowest-wage
jobs when induced to increase wages. However, notice that such a dynamic can only occur if wages
in foreign establishments are directly affected by home country/state minimum wage increases in
the first place. We return to this possibility in Section 7.
     In sum the evidence discussed in this sub-section suggests that a within-firm offshoring phe-
nomenon is unlikely to explain the transmission of minimum-wage induced headquarter wage
increases to multinationals' foreign establishments that we estimated in Sub-section 4.2.

3. Technology adoption in response to minimum wage changes A third alternative interpreta-
tion of the results in Sub-section 4.2 is that firms invest in capital or upgrade their technology in
response to home country/state minimum wage increases, and these changes affect the entire firm
(see e.g. Aaronson & Phelan, 2017; Lordan & Neumark, 2018). This could increase the marginal
productivity of the firm's workers in foreign establishments, consequently raising their wages. To test
for this possibility, we check whether the impact of home country/state minimum wage increases on
the wages of a firm's foreign workers is concentrated in jobs or tasks we expect to be complementary
with computerization and automation.
     Autor & Dorn (2013) argue that computer capital substitutes for low-skill workers performing
routine tasks; complements abstract tasks; and neither directly substitutes for nor complements
manual tasks.46 As shown in Panel B of Appendix Table A12, the impact of home country/state
minimum wage increases on the wages of foreign establishment workers in abstract and non-routine
jobs is similar to, and if anything smaller than, that for non-abstract and routine jobs. This is difficult
to reconcile with technology adoption explaining the estimated impact of headquarters minimum
  44 A   description of how we measure job tasks is in Appendix II. Note that we also find a null effect of home
country/state minimum wage changes on the wages of offshorable and non-offshorable jobs of middle- and high-skill
levels in foreign establishments (see Column 2 of Appendix Table A10). In addition, recall that we observe a considerably
greater extent of anchoring-to-the-headquarters in low-skill compared to middle or high-skill jobs (see Table A3).
   45 In Column 2 of Appendix Table A9 we re-estimate the regression in Table 4, restricting the sample to the set of

occupations that were already present in the relevant foreign establishment before the minimum wage hike. The results
are similar to those in Table 4.
   46 See Appendix II for details on the construction of these measures.




                                                          23
wages on multinationals' foreign establishment wages.47
    In combination, the results we have presented in Sub-section 4.3 suggest that the estimated
impact of increases in multinationals' headquarter wages arising from minimum wage increases in
the home country/state on foreign establishment wages is at least in part due to wage anchoring.

5 Changes in Foreign Wages in Response to Externally Imposed
      Changes in Headquarter Wages: Exchange Rate Shocks
In this section we provide further evidence that, in many multinationals, headquarter wages directly
affect the wages of domestic workers in foreign establishments using another source of exogenous
variation in headquarter wages: exchange rate shocks to the home country's currency. Exchange
rate-induced variation in headquarter wages is a useful complement to the minimum wage-induced
wage changes we exploit in Section 4 for two reasons. First, unlike minimum wages, exchange rates
both increase and decrease over time, allowing us to investigate multinationals' wage responses in
both directions. Second, as we show below, exchange rate-induced changes in wages are tempo-
rary. Employers are thus unlikely to make concurrent changes in their technologies or employment
structures in response.
    If a multinational does not fully index its headquarter wages to international currencies such
as the USD, a home country currency appreciation will lead to an increase in headquarter wages
measured in terms of such currencies. Wages at the multinational's foreign establishments will also
be raised (in international currency terms) in response to such a home country currency appreciation
under the following two forms of wage anchoring:

1. USD-value wage-level anchoring A firm that pays in local currencies (that is, each establish-
ment's local currency) or in USD might compute the wages to pay at the headquarters and abroad
using up-to-date exchange rates in a way that ensures that its wages are (partially) aligned in USD
terms. The exchange rate updating and the wage adjustment may for example be automatically done
within a firm-wide HR system.

2. Home country currency anchoring If a firm pays its foreign establishment workers in, or
partially indexes their wages to, the home country currency, then home country exchange rate shocks
will be directly transmitted to the firm's foreign establishments, as long as nominal wages paid
  47 We  also find no effect of a home country/state minimum wage change on the wages of routine and non-routine,
abstract and non-abstract, manual and non-manual jobs in middle- and high-skill levels in the foreign establishments
(see columns 3-5 of Appendix Table A10).




                                                        24
abroad are not fully adjusted for changes in purchasing power because of wage rigidity.48

5.1 Average effect on foreign establishment wages
We begin by estimating the relationship between home country exchange rate shocks and wages at
a firm's foreign establishments and at its headquarters:

                                        wjfct = 6eh(f )t + fj + ct + jfct                                               (8)

Here, eh(f )t is the detrended log average nominal exchange rate of home country currency units per
unit of USD in year t.49 Standard errors are clustered at the home country (or currency zone) level.
We here follow the same sample selection rules, estimation methods, and table formatting as in the
minimum wage analysis in Sub-section 4.2, in particular, as in Table 4.
     We find that a home country currency appreciation increases the dollar value of the wages paid
to workers in multinationals' foreign establishments. As seen in Panel A of Table 6, our estimates
imply for example that a 100 percent decrease in the exchange rate of home country currency to USD
leads to a 15 percent increase in the dollar value of wages in foreign establishments. Panel B shows
that home country currency appreciation also raises the dollar value of the wages paid to workers
at the headquarters, a 100 percent appreciation for example leading to a 50-70 percent increase in
headquarter wages.50
   48 Nominal rigidity is important here: wage level anchoring is not a necessary condition for exchange rate transmission

under home country currency anchoring, as long as nominal wages paid in foreign establishments do not perfectly covary
with home country currency exchange rates. This is comparable to exchange rate pass-through of imported goods priced
in origin country currencies (see e.g. Gopinath et al. (2010) for evidence of such pass-through).
   49 Unlike in Section 4 where only low-skill jobs are included in the main minimum wage analysis, we include all

jobs here as exchange rates presumably affect the (USD value of) wages of all jobs. Only foreign establishments
located outside the home country or currency zone are included, as same-currency-zone foreign establishment wages
mechanically respond to exchange rate shocks also in the absence of anchoring. Note that our estimates in this section
are identified off of the sample of multinationals that are not headquartered in the U.S. or in countries that peg their
currency to USD, which make up 53 percent of the multinationals in full sample. As we do not observe the point-in-time
exchange rates when wages are paid out, we approximate these using annual exchange rates retrieved from the World
Bank. The resulting measurement error in the exchange rates is the main reason why we adopt the log specification in this
section instead of the percentage change specification, as taking the first difference exacerbates the measurement error
and the problem of attenuation bias (see Griliches & Hausman, 1986). The first-stage estimation equation is HQwjft =
6eh(f )t + fj + t + jft. Since we include establishment-city×year fixed effects (or year fixed effects in the first
stage), any depreciation or appreciation of the USD against other currencies is subsumed. Since we include establishment-
city×year fixed effects, which subsume establishment-country×year fixed effects, it is equivalent 1) to measure the
foreign establishment wages in either the USD (our approach) or the local currency, and 2) to use the home-country-
currency-to-USD exchange rate (our approach) or the home-to-establishment-country-currency bilateral exchange rate.
   50 The effect of home country currency appreciation on headquarter wages is smaller than 100 percent (      ^ 6>-1), which
implies that home country currency appreciation leads to an decrease in headquarter wages in terms of the domestic cur-
rency. There are several reasons why this might be the case. First, multinationals are likely to partially index headquarter
wages to the USD or to domestic-currency-depreciation-induced inflation. Second, currency appreciation raises the cost of
home country labor relative to that of foreign labor, which can decrease home country labor demand (Campa & Goldberg,
2001; Goldberg & Tracy, 2001). Third, domestic currency appreciation makes the option of working abroad less attractive


                                                            25
    We next instrument for headquarter wages, replacing eh(f )t in (8) with the first stage estimates,
HQwjft. We find that exchange rate-induced changes in headquarter wages lead to changes in the
wages firms pay workers abroad. The estimates in columns 1-3 in Panel C of Table 6 imply that a
100 percent increase in headquarter wages in response to an exchange rate shock leads to a 20-30
percent increase in foreign establishment wages.
    As the descriptive wage anchoring shown in Section 3 and the impact of minimum wage-induced
changes in headquarter wages on multinationals' foreign wages shown in Section 4, the impact
of exchange rate variation-induced changes in headquarter wages on foreign wages is seen also in
the sub-sample of private sector firms (see Column 1 of Appendix Table A13). We do not find
any evidence of exchange rate shocks to a multinational's foreign establishment country currency
affecting headquarter wages or the wages paid in the firm's establishments in other countries (see
columns 3 and 4 of Appendix Table A16).
    We also find suggestive evidence consistent with downward nominal wage rigidity combined
with wage anchoring, as one might expect (see e.g. Kaur, 2019). For multinationals that pay foreign
workers in local currency or the USD and engage in USD-value wage level anchoring (as defined
above), home country currency appreciation (depreciation) is an upward (downward) force on the
nominal wages paid abroad, and downward rigidity would imply that pass-through of appreciation
should be larger.51 Similarly, multinationals that pay foreign workers in home country currency might
raise nominal wages to adjust for lower local purchasing power when the home country currency
depreciates, while downward nominal rigidity may constrain their ability to lower nominal wages
when the home country currency appreciates. Wage anchoring combined with downward nominal
to home country workers, which can lead to a rise in home country labor supply (Mishra & Spilimbergo, 2011). Finally,
there may be attenuation bias in    ^ 6 resulting from measurement error in the exchange rate. If such measurement error
is classical, this might attenuate both our first stage and reduced form estimates but would not bias the IV estimate.
   51 Downward nominal rigidity need not always bind at foreign establishments, even under home country currency

depreciation, if foreign wages are on a positive growth path. Consider the following non-parametrized representitive
wage anchoring model with downward nominal rigidity:

                                            wc           c             c
                                                                            ¯c
                                             jfct = max wjfc,t-1 ,f HQwjft ,wjct

where the superscript c indicates that the variable is measured in log nominal terms of country c's currency. wc
                                                                                                               jfc,t-1 sets
a lower bound for the nominal wage at the foreign establishment in the next period wcjfct , and f HQwjft ,w
                                                                                                            c   ¯c
                                                                                                                 jct
is the underlying "latent" wage corresponding to wc jfct . f , which is continuously  differentiable,  is  increasing
in both its arguments. These are the headquarter nominal wage in terms of the establishment country currency,
                                 h(f )
HQwc            USD                                                                   ¯c
      jft = HQwjft + ect = HQwjft - eh(f )t + ect , and the local nominal market wage w jct . Notice that f decreases
                                    h(f )
                                        ¯c
in eh(f )t, and increases in HQwjft and wjct . If either the benchmark wages or the headquarter wages are on a positive
                         h(f )       h(f )                                              
                                         ¯c
growth trend (HQwjft > HQwjf ,t-1 and/or w      ¯c
                                          jct > wjc,t-1 ), then there might exist some e > eh(f ),t-1 such that
f|                       > wc              c                                                        (depreciation in year t).
             h(f )
                  ¯c
  e ,ect ,HQwjft ,w         jfc,t-1 , and wjfct = f decreases in eh(f )t for eh(f )t  eh(f ),t-1 ,e
                   jct




                                                              26
rigidity thus predicts a larger transmission of home country currency appreciation compared to
depreciaton under both the forms of wage anchoring that induce employers to transmit exchange
rate-induced wage changes abroad discussed above. This is indeed what we find: as seen in columns
4 and 5 of Table 6, wages in foreign establishments are 2.7 times as responsive to home country
currency appreciation as they are to depreciation, although wages in the home country are equally
responsive to exchange rate shocks in both directions, as we might expect.52
    The impact of shocks to the exchange rate of the home country currency on foreign establishment
wages is transitory. Panel B of Appendix Figure A5 shows that the impact of such shocks on head-
quarter wages (in USD terms) is itself transitory. Exchange rate fluctuations therefore do not affect
longer-run "latent" wages at foreign establishments.53 Downward nominal rigidity suggests that
current exchange rate shocks--especially appreciation shocks--might influence the future nominal
wage at the foreign establishment by affecting the current nominal wage there and thereby imposing
a (binding) lower bound in the following years. However, empirically this lower bound does not
often bind in the following years, as wages are on a positive growth path (see e.g. Figure 1). As
shown in Panel A of Appendix Figure A5 we find that the impact of home country exchange rate
shocks--including appreciation shocks--on foreign establishment wages are indeed transitory.54
    In Appendix I we again consider the three a priori most plausible alternative interpretations of
the estimated transmission of externally imposed changes in headquarter wages: endogenous timing
of, or offshoring or technology adoption in response to, the external shocks. Using similar strategies
to those in Sub-section 4.3, we show that these are unlikely to explain our exchange rate results.
The evidence thus suggests that exchange rate shock-induced changes in multinationals' headquarter
wages directly cause changes in their foreign establishment wages.
  52 The estimated impact of home country currency appreciation and depreciation on foreign establishment wages is

statistically significantly different at the 5 percent level, and the estimated effect of home country currency depreciation
on foreign establishment wages is itself negative and statistically significant. A plausible reason is that foreign wages
are on a positive growth path so that last year's nominal wage at the foreign establishment does not always bind even
if the currency of the home country depreciates this year (see e.g. Figure 1). Home country currency appreciation or
depreciation does not directly affect the nominal value or the domestic purchasing power of headquarter wages paid
in home country currency, as least compared to those of anchored wages paid in foreign establishments. Therefore,
downward nominal wage rigidity is less relevant for the wage-setting response of a wage-anchoring employer to
home country exchange rate shocks in its headquarters than in its foreign establishments, perhaps explaining the less
asymmetric response between appreciation and depreciation at headquarters.
    53 That is, the detrended home country exchange rate e
                                                                h(f ),t-1 has no impact on USD value of headquarter wages
                                       h(f )
in the next period HQwUSD
                        jft = HQwjft - eh(f )t , and therefore it does not affect the latent variable f in the formula
in footnote 51.
   54 Unlike an exchange rate shock, a minimum wage increase in a home country is in effect a permanent shock to

the nominal wage of some jobs at headquarters, and therefore enter the long-run "latent" component f of the nominal
wage-setting formula at foreign establishments (see footnote 51). We find no evidence that a minimum-wage-induced
foreign wage increase is followed by a slow-down (mean reversion) in wage growth in the following years. Minimum
wage increases thus appear to lead to a permanent increase in foreign establishment wages, as Figure 1 suggests.



                                                            27
6 Unpacking Wage Change Transmission
In sections 4 and 5 we documented that externally imposed changes in the wages multinationals
pay workers in a given job at the headquarters lead to corresponding changes in the wages they
pay workers in the same job abroad. We showed that such transmission occurs both in response
to minimum wage- and exchange rate variation-induced changes in headquarter wages. The IV
estimates of how foreign establishment wages respond to a given headquarter wage change from
the two approaches are both slightly larger than the corresponding OLS estimates. Such a global
response to externally imposed changes in headquarter wages points toward the existence of firm-
wide wage-setting procedures. We saw in Section 3 that the overall correlation between the wages a
multinational pays workers in a given job at its headquarters and foreign establishments is driven by
multinationals headquartered in inequality-averse countries as measured by sociologists. A natural
question is therefore whether such multinationals are also the ones driving the impact of externally
imposed headquarter wage changes on foreign wages we estimated in the full sample.
    This is indeed what we find in Table 7, where we repeat the regressions from Column 3 of panels
A and B in tables 4 and 6, now interacting respectively %MINwh(f )t and eh(f )t with the measure
of societal inequality-aversion we made use of also in Section 3.55 The estimated effects of home
country/state minimum wage and exchange rate shocks on (the USD value of) wages at the head-
quarters are very similar for multinationals headquartered in inequality-averse and inequality-tolerant
countries, as seen in Column 2. However, these externally imposed headquarter wage changes appear
to affect the wages of workers at foreign establishments only in multinationals headquartered in
inequality-averse countries, as shown in Column 1. Both the descriptive relationship between wages
at multinationals' headquarters and foreign establishments and their partial transmission of externally
imposed headquarter wage increases to foreign establishments we uncover in this paper are thus
driven by a particular group of employers, pointing toward the existence of wage cultures.

7 Wage Change Transmission and Foreign Establishment Em-
      ployment
We now take a first step toward understanding the consequences of across-country wage compression
for employment at multinationals' foreign establishments. Existing evidence suggests that wage
compression can lead firms to outsource low-wage jobs to avoid paying a premium for low-skill
workers (Goldschmidt & Schmieder, 2017). If so, firms that anchor their wages to headquarter
  55 The reduced form estimation equations for foreign establishments, for example, become:

%wjfct = 1
         H High Ineq. Aversion
                              h(f ) + 1 Low Ineq. Aversionh(f ) %MINwh(f )t + fj + ct + jfct ,
                                      L

            H High Ineq. Aversion
and wjfct = 6                            L
                                 h(f ) + 6 Low Ineq. Aversionh(f ) eh(f )t + fj + ct + jfct .



                                                        28
levels may face an incentive to limit the set of jobs done in their establishments outside of the
typically higher-wage home region, especially when faced with externally-imposed headquarter wage
increases that are transmitted to foreign establishments.
    We test this conjecture in two ways. We first use the global data from the Company to look at
the impact of a headquarter wage shock on the extensive margin of employment--positions that
are present in that one or more workers are employed in the relevant job--in foreign establish-
ments. Because of the Company's focus on job-level wages, information on the intensive margin of
employment--the number of workers employed in each position--is often missing in their data. To
study the intensive margin of employment, we match the data from the Company to administrative
employer-employee data from Brazil. Restricting our analysis to the set of multinationals that have
establishments in Brazil, we investigate how wage shocks in the headquarters affect the intensive
margin of employment abroad.

7.1 The extensive margin of employment
Recall from Section 6 that multinationals headquartered in inequality-averse countries transmit
minimum wage-induced headquarter wage increases to their foreign establishments, while those
based in inequality-tolerant countries do not. In the data from the Company, we observe whether
an establishment employs workers in a given position in each year. From this we define the outcome
"Job Leaves Establishment" as an indicator for a job being present in year t but not in year t + 1. To
understand how wage anchoring affects the extensive margin of employment abroad when wages
rise at the headquarters, we then estimate the following regression:

                                             L
       Job Leaves Establishmentjfc,t+1 = 7 + 7 Low Ineq. Aversionh(f ) %MINwh(f )t                                   (9)

                                               + fj + ct + jfct

We include firm×job and city×year fixed effects as in Sections 3 ­ 6.
    We find that the multinationals that anchor wages to the headquarters and transmit externally-
imposed wage changes to their foreign establishments are more likely to remove positions from their
foreign establishments when an increase in the minimum wage raises wages at the headquarters. The
estimated impact is larger for low-skill jobs, though not statistically significantly so. In contrast, the
multinationals that tend not to transmit externally-imposed changes in headquarter wages to their
foreign establishments also do not remove positions from their foreign establishments when wages
rise at the headquarters. We show these results from estimating equation (9) in Panel A of Table 8.56
    We find no evidence to suggest that home country exchange rate shocks affect the probability that
  56 The positions that are removed are no more or less likely to be offshorable ones (results available from the authors

upon request).


                                                          29
a position is removed from a firm's foreign establishments, as seen in Appendix Table A15--despite
such shocks' impact on wages at home and abroad.57 This is unsurprising, as we saw in Section
5 that changes in foreign establishment (and headquarter) wages induced by changes in the home
country's exchange rate are transitory. We thus restrict attention to the impact of long-lasting shocks
to a firm's headquarter wages that arise from minimum wage changes in the remainder of this section.

7.2 The intensive margin of employment
Anchoring to headquarter wages as measured in Brazilian administrative data
To study how wages at a firm's headquarters affect the intensive margin of employment--layoffs and
new hiring--abroad, we make use of matched employer-employee administrative data from Brazil.
As described in Sub-section 2.3, the RAIS data contain information on each individual employee
at each establishment, including his or her wage, education, race, gender, age and tenure at the
establishment. Thirty-seven of the multinationals in our data have an establishment in Brazil. These
multinationals are headquartered in 17 different countries, most commonly in Australia, France,
Germany, the US, and the UK. We match the RAIS data on these firms to the Company data on the
same firms, matching jobs by skill level.58
     We begin by reaffirming the results from sections 3-5 in the administrative data from Brazil,
starting from Panel A of Table 9. We find an almost identical descriptive estimate of the correlation
between RAIS-measured wages in Brazilian establishments and data-from-the-Company-measured
wages for workers in jobs of the same skill-level at the headquarters of the multinational as we did
in the global data used in Section 3.
     We also find that external shocks to wages in the home country or state--changes in minimum
wages and the exchange rate of the country's currency--are transmitted to multinationals' RAIS-
measured wages in Brazil. These results are shown in panels B and C of Table 9. The estimated impact
of exchange rate shocks is remarkably similar to what we found using global data from the Company
in Table 6 in Section 5. The same is true for the estimated impact of minimum wage changes, which
is slightly larger than what we found in Table 4 in Section 4.59 We also find a statistically significant
  57 This holds both for all positions in the foreign establishments and when restricting attention to low-skill positions

only (see Panel A of Appendix Table A15). We also find (statistically significant but) economically negligible estimated
intensive margin employment responses at Brazilian establishments to home country exchange rate shocks, in an analysis
that is analogous to the minimum wage/intensive margin of employment one we show in Sub-section 7.2 below (see
Panel B of Appendix Table A15).
   58 We match the RAIS data and the data from the Company by firm×year×job skill-level due the difficulty of matching

individual positions in two data sources with narrowly-defined jobs/positions in the absence of a cross-walk. Recall that
the jobs in the data from the Company belong to 16 different skill levels. Matching by skill level allows us to use much
more of the data, although the results do not qualitatively change if we instead attempt to match by individual position.
   59 The wage observations for Brazil in the data from the Company and those from RAIS are highly correlated,

at around 0.8. The main reason why the two are not perfectly correlated is likely that the Company measures total
compensation--including for example variable and in-kind pay--whereas RAIS simply measures the wage itself, but



                                                           30
but quantitatively very small impact of minimum wage shocks in the home country/state on the
wages of workers in higher-than-low-skill positions in Brazil; we return to this finding below.
    The results in panels A-C of Table 9 generally hold also when we hold constant the individual
worker in question, and both for the wage per reported and contracted hour worked. This strongly
supports our causal interpretation of the evidence in sections 3-5, as the RAIS data is constructed by
Brazilian authorities from administrative records and presumably suffers, if anything, from different
forms of measurement error than any present in the data from the Company. It also suggests that
the primary reason why wage changes at multinationals' headquarters that are transmitted to foreign
establishments are sustained is not that higher wages allow foreign establishments to hire more
productive individuals, nor corresponding changes in hours worked.
    Almost all of the firms in our sample with Brazilian establishments are headquartered in inequality-
averse countries so we unfortunately cannot compare the wage response in the Brazilian data across
the two types of firms that we showed above to have different wage-setting practices.
Impact of external shocks to headquarter wages on the intensive margin of employment in
Brazil as measured in administrative data We find a small but significant increase in the probabil-
ity that workers in low-skill jobs are laid off and a decrease in hiring of new workers in multinationals'
Brazilian establishments when the minimum wage rises in the home country or state. We show this
in Panel B of Table 8. In columns 1-4, we present the results from estimating

                 Worker Laid Offijfc,t+1 = 8%MINwh(f )t +  Xit + ct + fj +                           ijfct             (10)

where the dependent variable, Worker Laid Offijfc,t+1 is an indicator that equals one if employee
i in firm f 's Brazilian establishment is laid off in year t + 1. We control for worker characteristics
(Xit) such as education, tenure at the firm, gender, race, and age, as well as firm×job and city×year
fixed effects as throughout our analysis. Standard errors are clustered at the home-location level.
     Column 1 shows that an increase in the home country or state minimum wage has no significant
impact on the probability that a given Brazilian worker is laid off on average. Recall from Table
9 that minimum wage shocks at the headquarters significantly raise the wages of workers in low-skill
jobs in multinationals' Brazilian establishments. In Column 2 of Panel B of Table 8 we see that
individual workers in low-skill jobs are 0.16 percentage points or about two percent more likely to
be laid off after a 10 percent increase in the home country's or state's minimum wage.60 In contrast,
the point estimate suggests that workers in higher-than-low-skill jobs are 0.11 percentage points less
other differences across the two data sources may also contribute.
   60 A 0.16 percentage points change is approximately a two percent change when benchmarked against the mean layoff

rate of 0.082. The estimated effect on low-skill positions is statistically significant at 1 percent level (^ 8 = 0.016, s.e.
= 0.003).



                                                            31
likely to be laid off after such a shock, but this estimate is not statistically significant.
     In Table 9 we saw an increase in the wages of workers in higher-than-low-skill jobs in multina-
tionals' Brazilian establishments after a minimum wage shock--an increase that is very small relative
to the increase in the wages of workers in low-skill jobs, but nevertheless statistically significant. One
possibility is that both this small impact on the wages of existing employees in higher-than-low-skill
jobs and the decrease in the probability that workers in such jobs are laid off are explained by some
degree of task-shifting from workers in lower- to workers in higher-skill jobs when the former group
becomes proportionally more expensive to employ after a shock to wages at the headquarters (though
we cannot rule out other explanations). This form of within-establishment task-shifting is directionally
distinct from the offshoring-from-headquarters-to-foreign-establishment countries concern discussed
in Sub-section 4.3 in that, here, tasks shift away from the workers in low-skill jobs abroad for whom
we estimate relatively large, positive wage responses to home country/state wage shocks.61
     The final results in Table 8--and in this paper--show that new job creation at the foreign estab-
lishments of employers that tend to anchor wages to headquarter levels decreases when wages rise at
the headquarters for exogenous reasons. We again estimate equation (10), but now with the dummy
Worker Newly Hiredijfc,t+1--which is equal to one if the worker was hired in the past 12 months--
replacing Worker Laid offijfc,t+1 as the outcome of interest. We find that individual workers in multi-
nationals' Brazilian establishments overall are 0.1 percentage points or about two percent less likely
to recently have been hired after a 10 percent increase in the home country's or state's minimum wage.
This estimate is slightly larger for workers in low-skill positions, but not statistically significantly so.62
     We began Section 7 with results suggesting that wage increases at the headquarters affect the
occupational structure of the foreign establishments of firms with contrasting forms of wage-setting
differently. When wages are increased at the headquarters, multinationals that partially transmit
   61 We find no evidence of heterogeneity in these responses across jobs that are or are not categorized as offshorable

or having routine functions (and therefore being more easily replaceable by a machine). Interestingly, we also find no
response in other forms of separations than lay-offs, such as quits. We can also repeat the extensive margin of employment
analysis from columns 1 and 2 of Panel A of Table 8 using the Brazilian data. We do so in columns 3 and 4 of the same
panel, but we lack power to achieve precise estimates in such regressions using the smaller sample of multinationals
with establishments in Brazil. Consistent with the estimates from the global data in columns 1 and 2, the signs on the
(imprecisely estimated) coefficients point toward a possible increase in the probability that low-skill positions are removed
from Brazilian establishments when the minimum wage is increased in the home country or state. In contrast to the
estimates from the global data, however, the (also imprecisely estimated) coefficients point toward a possible decrease in
the probability that higher-than-low-skill positions are removed from Brazilian establishments in response to such shocks.
   62 A 0.10 percentage points change is approximately a two percent change when benchmarked against the mean

new hiring rate of 0.052. The results on layoffs and new hires are similar if we include individual worker fixed effects
(as in the wage analysis above): specific workers in low-skill jobs are 0.1 percentage point more likely to be laid off
following a 10 percent minimum wage increase at the headquarters (     ^ 8 = 0.010, s.e. = 0.010), and we see an average 0.1
percentage point decline in new hires following such a minimum wage change (       ^ 8 = -0.010, s.e. = 0.004). This suggests
that our estimated intensive margin employment responses are not driven by Brazilian establishments that experience
more and/or larger headquarters minimum wage increases tending to employ workers of higher/lower turnover frequency
(conditional on their observable characteristics).


                                                            32
headquarter wage increases to their to foreign establishments compress the occupational structure of
their foreign establishments by removing positions. In contrast, employers that do not anchor wages
to the headquarters and transmit wage changes abroad also do not change the occupational structure
of their foreign establishments when wages rise at the headquarters. Evidence from Brazil suggests
that adjustments such as these occur in parallel with changes in layoffs and new hiring.63 We can
only look at adjustments on the intensive margin of employment for the types of employers that tend
to anchor wages to the headquarters. For such firms, we find that an increase in the home country or
state minimum wage leads to an increase in layoffs of workers in low-skill positions and a decrease
in new hiring in Brazilian establishments.

8 Conclusion
In this paper we show that many large multinationals use firm-wide wage-setting procedures that
are not adjusted to local labor market conditions. Multinationals that are headquartered in inequality-
averse countries anchor the wages they pay domestic workers in a given occupation at their foreign
establishments to the wages they pay workers in the same occupation in the home country. They do
so across the occupational skill range--including for low-skill support staff--and transmit wage in-
creases externally imposed on the headquarters (via changes in the home country's minimum wage or
exchange rate) to their foreign establishments. Multinationals headquartered in less inequality-averse
countries do not anchor their wages abroad to headquarter levels.
    We take a first step toward understanding the employment consequences of across-country
wage compression in multinationals. We do so by showing how firms that anchor wages to the
headquarters adjust the extensive and intensive margin of employment at their foreign establishments
when permanent wage increases are externally imposed on the headquarters. Such firms compress the
occupational structure of their foreign establishments by removing positions, lay off more workers in
low-skill positions, and hire fewer new workers. Multinationals that that do not anchor wages abroad
to the headquarters also do not change the occupational structure of their foreign establishments
when wage increases are externally imposed on the headquarters.
    Our results point toward the existence of consequential "wage cultures", which may contribute
also to phenomena such as the acyclicality of wages and lack of delegation to establishments outside
  63 The  results in Table 8 suggest that, even in multinationals that tend to make use of firm-wide wage-setting
procedures--in particular those headquartered in inequality-averse countries, hiring decisions in foreign establishments
may primarily be made locally. This is consistent with Bloom et al. (2012b) who find a positive relationship between
home country inequality aversion as measured by Hofstede (2001) and a firm's decentralization of decision-making,
including hiring decisions. In particular, Bloom et al. (2012b) show a positive correlation between home country
inequality aversion and a composite measure of decentralization of capital investment, hiring, product introduction,
and marketing decisions. We replicate their exercise and find that the relationship also holds when we focus on the
measure of hiring decentralization. Unfortunately the World Management Survey used in Bloom et al. (2012b) does
not contain measures of decentralization of wage-setting decisions.

                                                          33
of firms' home region (see e.g. Lemieux et al. , 2012; Aghion et al. , 2017).


References
AARONSON, DANIEL, & FRENCH, ERIC. 2007. Product Market Evidence on the Employment Effects of the Minimum
  Wage. Journal of Labor economics, 25(1), 167­200.
AARONSON, DANIEL, & PHELAN, BRIAN J. 2017. Wage Shocks and the Technological Substitution of Low-wage
  Jobs. The Economic Journal, 129(617), 1­34.
ABOWD, JOHN M., KRAMARZ, FRANCIS, & MARGOLIS, DAVID. 1999. High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms.
  Econometrica, 67, 251­333.
ABOWD, JOHN M., CREECY, ROBERT H., & KRAMARZ, FRANCIS. 2002. Computing Person and Firm Effects Using
  Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data. Census Bureau Technical Paper TP-2002-06.
ADAMS, BRIAN, & WILLIAMS, KEVIN R. 2019. Zone Pricing in Retail Oligopoly. American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics, 11(1), 124­56.
AGHION, PHILIPPE, BLOOM, NICK, LUCKING, BRIAN, SADUN, RAFFAELLA, & VAN REENEN, JOHN. 2017.
  Turbulence and Decentralization in Bad Times. CEP Discussion Paper No. 1479.
AITKEN, BRIAN, HARRISON, ANN, & LIPSEY, ROBERT E. 1996. Wages and Foreign Ownership: A Comparative
  Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States. Journal of International Economics, 40(3-4), 345­371.
AKERLOF, GEORGE, & YELLEN, JANET. 1990. The Fair-wage Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 105(2), 255­283.
AKERLOF, GEORGE A., & KRANTON, RACHEL E. 2005. Identity and the Economics of Organizations. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 19(1), 9­32.
ALFARO-URENA, ALONSO, MANELICI, ISABELA, & VASQUEZ, JOSE P. 2019. The Effects of Multinationals on
  Workers: Evidence from Costa Rica. Mimeo Universidad de Costa Rica.
ANGRIST, JOSHUA D, & KRUEGER, ALAN B. 1992. The effect of age at school entry on educational attainment: an
  application of instrumental variables with moments from two samples. Journal of the American statistical Association,
  87(418), 328­336.
AUTOR, DAVID H, & DORN, DAVID. 2013. The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the US labor
  market. American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553­97.
AUTOR, DAVID H., MANNING, ALAN, & SMITH, CHRISTOPHER L. 2016. The Contribution of the Minimum Wage
  to US Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A Reassessment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  8(1), 58­99.
BANDIERA, ORIANA, DAHLSTRAND-RUDIN, AMANDA, & FISCHER, GREG. 2019. Culture and Incentives. Mimeo
  LSE.
BARTH, ERLING, BRYSON, ALEX, DAVIS, JAMES C, & FREEMAN, RICHARD. 2016. It's Where You Work: Increases
  in Earnings Dispersion Across Establishments and Individuals in the U.S. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S2),
  S67­S97.
BASKAYA, YUSUF SONER, & RUBINSTEIN, YONA. 2015. Using federal minimum wages to identify the impact of
  minimum wages on employment and earnings across the US states. mimeo LSE.
BLADER, STEVE, GARTENBERG, CLAUDINE, & PRAT, ANDREA. forthcoming. The Contingent Effect of Management
  Practices. Review of Economic Studies.
BLINDER, ALAN S, & KRUEGER, ALAN B. 2013. Alternative measures of offshorability: a survey approach. Journal
  of Labor Economics, 31(S1), S97­S128.
BLOOM, N., SADUN, R., & REENEN, J. VAN. 2012a. Americans Do IT Better: U.S. Multinationals and the Productivity
  Miracle. American Economic Review, 102(1), 167­201.
BLOOM, NICHOLAS, & VAN REENEN, JOHN. 2007. Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms
  and Countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1351­1408.
BLOOM, NICHOLAS, SADUN, RAFFAELLA, & VAN REENEN, JOHN. 2012b. The organization of firms across countries.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4), 1663­1705.
BLOOM, NICHOLAS, SONG, JAE, PRICE, DAVID, GUVENEN, FATIH, & VON WACHTER, TILL. 2018. Firming up
  inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1), 1­50.
BOEHM, CHRISTOPH E., FLAAEN, AARON, & PANDALAI-NAYAR, NITYA. 2019. Input Linkages and the Transmission
  of Shocks: Firm Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake. Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(1),
  60­75.
BOERI, TITO, ICHINO, ANDREA, MORETTI, ENRICO, & POSCH, JOHANNA. 2018. National Wage Equalization and
  Regional Misallocation: Evidence from Italian and German Provinces. Mimeo Universita Bocconi.


                                                         34
BREZA, EMILY, KAUR, SUPREET, & SHAMDASANI, YOGITA. 2017. The Morale Effects of Pay Inequality. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2), 611­663.
BROWN, DRUSILLA K., DEARDORFF, ALAN, & STERN, ROBERT. 2004. The Effects of Multinational Production on
  Wages and Working Conditions in Developing Countries. In: BALDWIN, ROBERT E., & WINTERS, L. ALAN (eds),
  Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics. University of Chicago Press.
BUDD, JOHN W., KONINGS, JOZEF, & SLAUGHTER, MATTHEW J. 2005. Wages and International Rent Sharing in
  Multinational Firms. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(1), 73­84.
CAMPA, JOSE MANUEL, & GOLDBERG, LINDA S. 2001. Employment versus wage adjustment and the US dollar.
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3), 477­489.
CAPPELLI, PETER, & CHAUVIN, KEITH. 1991. An Interplant Test of the Efficiency Wage Hypothesis. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 106(3), 769­797.
CARD, D., MAS, A., MORETTI, E., & SAEZ, E. 2012. Inequality at work: The effect of peer salaries on job satisfaction.
  American Economic Review, 102(6), 2981­3003.
CARD, DAVID, & KRUEGER, ALAN B. 1995. Myth and measurement: the new economics of the minimum wage. New
  Jersey: Princeton University Press.
CARD, DAVID, HEINING, JÖRG, & KLINE, PATRICK. 2013. Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German
  Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 967­1015.
CARD, DAVID, CARDOSO, ANA RUTE, & KLINE, PATRICK. 2015. Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap:
  Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 633­686.
CARD, DAVID, CARDOSO, ANA RUTE, HEINING, JOERG, & KLINE, PATRICK. 2018. Firms and Labor Market
  Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory. Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1), S13­S70.
CENGIZ, DORUK, DUBE, ARINDRAJIT, LINDNER, ATTILA, & ZIPPERER, BEN. 2019. The effect of minimum wages
  on low-wage jobs: Evidence from the United States using a bunching estimator. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  134(3), 1405­1454.
CLEMENS, JEFFREY, & GOTTLIEB, JOSHUA D. 2017. In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare's Influence on Private
  Physician Payment. Journal of Political Economy, 125(1), 1­39.
CLEMENS, MICHAEL A., MONTENEGRO, CLAUDIO, & PRITCHETT, LANT. 2019. The Place Premium: Bounding the
  Price Equivalent of Migration Barriers. Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(2), 201­2013.
CONYON, MARTIN J., GIRMA, SOURAFEL, THOMPSON, STEVE, & WRIGHT, PETER W. 2002. The Productivity and
  Wage Effects of Foreign Acquisition in the United Kingdom. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 50(1), 85­102.
CULLEN, Z., & PEREZ-TRUGLIA, R. 2018. How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects of Salary Comparisons.
  NBER Working Paper No. 24841.
CULPEPPER AND ASSOCIATES INC. 2011. Geographic Pay Differentials: Practices in Managing Pay Between
  Locations.
DE ROCHAMBEAU , G OLVINE. 2019. Monitoring and Intrinsic Motivation: Evidence from Liberia's Trucking Firms.
  Mimeo Sciences Po.
DELLAVIGNA, STEFANO, & GENTZKOW, MATTHEW. 2019. Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 134(4), 2011­2084.
DICKENS, WT, & KATZ, LF. 1987. Interindustry Wage Differences and Industry Characteristics. In: K, LANG, & J,
  LEONARD (eds), Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets. Blackwell.
DRACA, MIRKO, MACHIN, STEPHEN, & VAN REENEN, JOHN. 2011. Minimum Wages and Profitability. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1), 129­51.
DUBE, ARINDRAJIT, & KAPLAN, ETHAN. 2010. Does Outsourcing Reduce Wages in the Low-Wage Service
  Occupations? Evidence from Janitors and Guards. ILR Review, 63(2), 287­306.
DUBE, ARINDRAJIT, GIULIANO, LAURA, & LEONARD, JONATHAN. 2019. Fairness and Frictions: Impact of Unequal
  Raises on Quit Behavior. American Economic Review, 109(2), 620­63.
EARLE, JOHN S., TELEGDY, ALMOS, & ANTAL, GABOR. 2018. Foreign Ownership and Wages: Evidence from
  Hungary, 1986-2008. ILR Review, 71(2), 458­491.
EGGER, HARTMUT, & KREICKEMEIER, UDO. 2013. Why Foreign Ownership May Be Good For You. International
  Economic Review, 54(2), 693­716.
ENGBOM, NIKLAS, & MOSER, CHRISTIAN. 2018. Earnings inequality and the minimum wage: Evidence from Brazil.
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis-Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Working Paper.
FALK, A., & KOSFELD, M. 2006. The Hidden Cost of Control. American Economic Review, 96(5), 1611­1630.
FALK, A., BECKER, A., DOHMEN, T., ENKE, B., HUFFMAN, D., & SUNDE, U. 2018. Global Evidence on Economic
  Preferences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(4), 1645­1692.
FEENSTRA, ROBERT C., & HANSON, GORDON H. 1996. Foreign Investment, outsourcing and relative wages. Chap.
  6, pages 89­128 of: GROSSMAN, GENE M., & IRWIN, DOUGLAS A. (eds), The Political economy of trade policy:


                                                        35
  essays in honor of Jagdish Bhagwati. MIT Press.
FEHR, ERNST, & SCHMIDT, KLAUS M. 1999. A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(3), 817­868.
GARTENBERG, CLAUDINE, & WULF, JULIE. forthcoming. Competition and Pay Inequality Within and Across Firms.
  Management Science.
GIROUD, X., & MUELLER, H. 2019. Firms' Internal Networks and Local Economic Shocks. American Economic
  Review, 109(10), 3617­49.
GIROUD, X., & RAUH, J. 2019. State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from Establishment-
  Level Data. Journal of Political Economy, 127(3), 1262­1316.
GOLDBERG, LINDA, & TRACY, JOSEPH. 2001. Exchange rates and wages. NBER Working Paper No. 8137.
GOLDSCHMIDT, DEBORAH, & SCHMIEDER, JOHANNES F. 2017. The rise of domestic outsourcing and the evolution
  of the German wage structure. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3), 1165­1217.
GOPINATH, GITA, ITSKHOKI, OLEG, & RIGOBON, ROBERTO. 2010. Currency choice and exchange rate pass-through.
  American Economic Review, 100(1), 304­36.
GORODNICHENKO, Y., & ROLAND, G. 2011. Which Dimensions of Culture Matter for Long-Run Growth? American
  Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 101(3), 492­98.
GRILICHES, ZVI, & HAUSMAN, JERRY A. 1986. Errors in variables in panel data. Journal of econometrics, 31(1),
  93­118.
GROSSMAN, GENE M., & HELPMAN, ELHANAN. 2007. Fair wages and foreign sourcing. Mimeo Princeton University.
GUISO, LUIGI, SAPIENZA, PAOLA, & ZINGALES, LUIGI. 2015. The Value of Corporate Culture. Journal of Financial
  Economics, 117(1), 60­76.
HAANWINCKEL, DANIEL. 2019. Supply, Demand, Institutions, and Firms: A Theory of Labor Market Sorting and the
  Wage Distribution. Mimeo U.C. Berkeley.
HARASZTOSI, PÉTER, & LINDNER, ATTILA. 2019. Who Pays for the Minimum Wage? American Economic Review,
  109(8), 2693­2727.
HARRISON, A, & SCORSE, J. 2010. Multinationals and anti-sweatshop activism. American Economic Review, 100(1),
  247­73.
HEAD, KEITH, & MAYER, THIERRY. 2014. Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook. Pages 131­195 of:
  Handbook of international economics, vol. 4. Elsevier.
HELPMAN, ELHANAN, ITSKHOKI, OLEG, & REDDING, STEPHEN. 2013. Trade and Labor Market Outcomes.
  Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth World Congress, Volume II, Applied Economic, 459­504.
HERMALIN, BENJAMIN E. 2013. Leadership and Corporate Culture. Pages 432­476 of: GIBBONS, R., & ROBERTS, J.
  (eds), Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton University Press.
HIJZEN, ALEXANDER, S.MARTINS, PEDRO, SCHANK, THORSTEN, & UPWARD, RICHARD. 2013. Foreign-owned
  firms around the world: A comparative analysis of wages and employment at the micro-level. European Economic
  Review, 60, 170­188.
HJORT, JONAS, MALMBERG, HANNES, & SCHOELLMAN, TODD. 2019. The Missing Middle Managers: Labor Costs,
  Firm Structure, and Development. Mimeo Columbia University.
HOFSTEDE, GEERT. 1991. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind. McGraw-Hill.
HOFSTEDE, GEERT. 2001. Culture's Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, and Organizations
  across Nations. 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, Inc.
HORTON, JOHN J. 2018. Price Floors and Employer Preferences: Evidence from a Minimum Wage Experiment. Mimeo
  MIT.
INOUE, ATSUSHI, & SOLON, GARY. 2010. Two-sample instrumental variables estimators. The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 92(3), 557­561.
KAHNEMAN, D., KNETSCH, J. L., & THALER, R. 1986. Fairness as a constraint on profit seeking: Entitlements in the
  market. American Economic Review, 76(4), 728­741.
KAUR, SUPREET. 2019. Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets. American Economic Review, 109(10),
  3585­3616.
KRUEGER, ALAN, & SUMMERS, LAWRENCE. 1988. Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage Structure.
  Econometrica, 56(2), 259­293.
LEE, DAVID S. 1999. Wage Inequality in The United States During The 1980s: Rising Dispersion Or Falling Minimum
  Wage? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), 977­1023.
LEMIEUX, THOMAS, MACLEOD, W. BENTLEY, & PARENT, DANIEL. 2009. Performance Pay And Wage Inequality.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 1­49.
LEMIEUX, THOMAS, MACLEOD, W. BENTLEY, & PARENT, DANIEL. 2012. Contract Form, Wage Flexibility, and


                                                       36
   Employment. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102(3), 526­31.
LEVIN, JONATHAN. 2002. Multilateral Contracting and the Employment Relationship. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  117(3), 1075­1103.
LIPSEY, RE, & SJOHOLM, F. 2006. Foreign firms and Indonesian manufacturing wages: An analysis with panel data.
  Economic Development and Cultural Change, 55(1), 201­221.
LIPSEY, ROBERT E. 2004. Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics. University of Chicago Press.
LORDAN, GRACE, & NEUMARK, DAVID. 2018. People versus machines: The impact of minimum wages on
   automatable jobs. Labour Economics, 52, 40­53.
MARTINEZ, ELIZABETH A, BEAULIEU, NANCY, GIBBONS, ROBERT, PRONOVOST, PETER, & WANG, THOMAS.
   2015. Organizational culture and performance. American Economic Review, 105(5), 331­35.
MARTINS, PEDRO S, & ESTEVES, LUIZ A. 2015. Foreign Ownership, Employment and Wages in Brazil: Evidence
   from Acquisitions, Divestments and Job Movers. Technology and Investment, 6(01), 22­45.
MARTINS, PEDRO S., & YANG, YONG. 2015. Globalised labour markets? International rent sharing across 47 countries.
  British Journal of Industrial Relations, 53(4), 664­691.
MAS, ALEXANDRE. 2017. Does Transparency Lead to Pay Compression? Journal of Political Economy, 125(5),
  1683­1721.
MISHRA, PRACHI, & SPILIMBERGO, ANTONIO. 2011. Exchange rates and wages in an integrated world. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(4), 53­84.
MORETTI, ENRICO. 2011. Local Labor Markets. In: ASHENFELTER, ORLEY, & CARD, DAVID (eds), Handbook of
  Labor Economics. Elsevier.
MUENDLER, MARC-ANDREAS, POOLE, JENNIFER, RAMEY, GAREY, & WAJNBERG, TAMARA. 2004. Job Con-
   cordances for Brazil: Mapping the Classificação Brasileira de Ocupações (CBO) to the International Standard
   Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88 ). 01.
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT LAW PROJECT. 2016. Fight for $15: Four Years, $62 Billion. "https://www.nelp.org/
  wp-content/uploads/Fight-for-15-Four-Years-62-Billion-in-Raises.pdf".
NEUMARK, DAVID. 2018. The Employment Effects Of Minimum Wages: Some Questions We Need To Answer. In:
   HAMILTON, JONATHAN, DIXIT, AVINASH, EDWARDS, SEBASTIAN, & JUDD, KENNETH (eds), Oxford Research
  Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
NEUMARK, DAVID, & WASCHER, WILLIAM. 1992. Employment effects of minimum and subminimum wages: panel
   data on state minimum wage laws. ILR Review, 46(1), 55­81.
OREFICE, GIANLUCA, SLY, NICHOLAS, & TOUBAL, FARID. 2016. The Multinational Wage Premium and Wage
  Dynamics. The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Research Working Paper 16.10.
PACINI, DAVID, & WINDMEIJER, FRANK. 2016. Robust inference for the Two-Sample 2SLS estimator. Economics
   letters, 146, 50­54.
PROPPER, CAROL, & REENEN, JOHN VAN. 2010. Can Pay Regulation Kill? Panel Data Evidence on the Effect of
   Labor Markets on Hospital Performance. Journal of Political Economy, 118(2), 222­273.
RABIN, MATTHEW. 1998. Psychology and Economics. Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1), 11­46.
REES, ALBERT, & SCHULTZ, GEORGE. 1970. Workers in an Urban Labor Market. University of Chicago Press.
SETZLER, BRADLEY, & TINTELNOT, FELIX. 2019. The Effects of Foreign Multinationals on Workers and Firms in the
  United States. NBER Working Paper No. 26149.
SLICHTER, SUMNER. 1950. Notes on the Structure of Wages. Review of Economics and Statistics, 32(1), 80­91.
SUN, CHANG. 2018. Multinational Production with Non-neutral Technologies. Mimeo University of Hong Kong.
TABELLINI, G. 2010. Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 8(4), 677­716.
TEULINGS, C. N. 2003. The Contribution Of Minimum Wages To Increasing Wage Inequality. Economic Journal,
  113(490), 801­833.
TIMMER, MARCEL P, DIETZENBACHER, ERIK, LOS, BART, STEHRER, ROBERT, & DE VRIES, GAAITZEN J. 2015.
  An illustrated user guide to the world input­output database: the case of global automotive production. Review of
  International Economics, 23(3), 575­605.
VAGHUL, KAVYA, & ZIPPERER, BEN. 2016. Historical state and sub-state minimum wage data. Washington Center
   for Equitable Growth.
VAN REENEN, JOHN. 1996. The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel of U.K. Companies.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 195­226.
YOO, B N, DONTHU, Y, & LENARTOWICZ, T. 2011. Measuring Hofstede's five dimensions of cultural values at the
   individual level: Development and validation of cvscale. Journal of International Consumer Marketing, 23(3-4),
  193­210.


                                                       37
   FIGURES

              FIGURE 1: IMPACT OF HQ MIN WAGE ON FOREIGN ESTAB. WAGES




Note: This event study plots the coefficients from a regression in which occupation-specific establishment wages are regressed on year dummies.
A minimum wage shock in the HQ occurs in t = 0. All coefficients are plotted relative to the average wage in the establishment in t = -1
(the year before the shock). A treated establishment is an establishment in country c whose HQ experienced a minimum wage shock. Control
establishments are other firms' establishments in city c in the same sector s for which the HQ did not experience a minimum wage shock. The
average wage in k = -1 is 9,982.68 in the treated establishments and 11,164.20 in the control establishments.




                                                                     38
TABLES

                      TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS OF MULTINATIONALS
                                          Panel A: Summary of Multinational Samples
    Unit of Observation                  # Obs               Analysis
                               Sample 1 Sample 2 Sample 3 i) Estab.-HQ wage correlation (Section 3)
    Employer                    1,060      91          74    ii) Impacts at foreign establishments of external HQ
    Employer×year               3,823     456         156         wage shifters (minimum wage increases & ex. rate shocks):
    Establishment               5,783    1,184        618         ii.a) wage (sections 4 - 6); ii.b) employment (Section 7)
    Estab.×year                 19,172   5,006       1,178   Sample 3 (panel) in i) [robust]
    Estab.×skill-level×year     159,602      40,792      9,315      Sample 3 (panel) in i) [robust]
    Estab.×occupation           136,160      18,065      10,797     Sample 2 (cross-sectional) in i) [robust]
    Estab.×occ.×year            398,224      79,130      20,739     Sample 3 (panel) in i) [main], ii.a) [robust]
                                                                    Sample 2 (imputed estab./HQ panel) in i) [robust], ii.a) [robust]
                                                                    Sample 1 (panel) in ii.a) [main], ii.b)
                            Panel B: Multinationals' Foreign Establishments' Wages & Occupation Structure
                                                             Sample 1                    Sample 2                  Sample 3
                                                       Mean            SD          Mean           SD         Mean           SD
                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
    Net Wage (2005 USD)                              18,511.65     12,889.23       18,615     12,459.49    23,927.01 15,227.02
    # Foreign Establishments (per MNC×year)               5          13.72          11.17         24.1       7.54          18.22
    # Foreign Estab Occupations (per MNC×year)         24.91         15.44         31.08         17.25        27.4         12.99
    # Foreign Estab Skill Levels (per MNC×year)         8.63          2.48           9.8          2.25       9.46           2.15
                                                          Panel C: Distribution & Compression of Wages (Sample 3)
                                                    HQ-Quart1 HQ-Quart2 HQ-Quart3 HQ-Quart4 HQ-All Occ
                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)
                                                                Headquarter Wage Distribution
       Mean Net Wage (2005 USD)                      12,942.99     21,176.66     33,562.59    51,182.83    27,734.54
                                                            Establishment Wage as % of HQ Wage
    All Establishments                                 0.867         0.859        0.901        0.886          0.877
    Estab.s in Poorer-than-HQ-Country Countries        0.735         0.748        0.792        0.809          0.767
    # Obs (Employer×Occ.×Year)                          812           636          624          535           2,607
                                                                     Panel D: Decomposition of Log Wage Variation
                                                      Sample 1      Sample 2    Sample 3     Sample 1       Sample 2       Sample 3
    Total Variation                                     Raw estab.×occ×year log wage         Adjusted for sector, city and occ. FEs
                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)
    Total Variance                                     0.771         0.833        0.764        0.205          0.243          0.224
    Across employers (%)                               21.6%         24.8%       19.0%         42.7%         52.5%          43.5%
    W/in employer, across estab.s (%)                  23.7%         20.8%         16.5%         25.7%          23.1%        23.2%
    W/in estab., across occupations (%)                51.7%         51.9%         60.2%         20.1%          15.8%        21.4%
    W/in estab.×occ, across years (%)                   2.9%          2.5%          4.3%         11.5%          8.6%         11.9%
  Panel A summarizes the 3 main samples of multinationals and how they are used in the empirical analysis. Sample 1 consists
  of the full sample of multinationals for which we have wage data from at least one foreign establishment; Sample 2 consists of
  employers for which we observe at least one job in the headquarters and at least one foreign establishment; Sample 3 consists of
  employers for which we observe at least one job in the headquarters and at least one foreign establishment in the same year. The
  sample sizes include only foreign establishments. Occupations refer to the job titles recorded by the Company (298 job titles in
  total); skill levels are defined globally by the Company (16 levels in total). In Panel B, the numbers are calculated over all foreign
  establishments of a given multinational in a given year. Wages are measured in 2005 USD. Outlier observations with average
  establishment×year annual net wage below 1,000 USD or above 500,000 USD are dropped. Panel C focuses on Sample 3,
  and only occupations that are observed in both the headquarters and at least one foreign establishment within the same year are
  included. We first show the average net wages within each quartile at an employer's headquarters in a given year. We then show
  the average wage in the firm's establishments as a share of headquarter wages for each quartile."Establishments in poorer-than-
  HQ-country countries" means we only include establishments which are located in countries with lower GDP per capita than
  the home country. Panel D presents the variance decomposition results of (log) employment-establishment-occupation-year
  specific wages for the 3 samples of multinationals. Observations of the headquarters (when available) are included.




                                                                  39
    TABLE 2: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HQ AND FOREIGN ESTABLISHMENT WAGES
                                                            Sample 3                                          Sample 2
  Sample
                                             MNEs w/ estab.-HQ match w/in occ×year                 MNEs w/ estab.-HQ match w/in occ
  Unit of Observation                     estab×occ×yr estab×skill-lev×yr estab×yr                 estab×occ             estab×occ×yr
                                                                                                                            Panel
  Data Structure                              Panel                 Panel             Panel      Cross-sectional
                                                                                                                    (Imputed Estab. Panel)
  Dep. Var.                                                               Log Wage at Foreign Establishment

                                                                     Panel A: Local Benchmark Wage Control
                                               (1)                   (2)             (3)          (4)                          (5)
  Log HQ Wage                                0.153                 0.121          0.372        0.324                        0.480
                                             (0.048)               (0.062)         (0.065)      (0.072)                      (0.109)
  Log Local Benchmark Wage                   0.137                0.212                             0.307                    0.008
                                              (0.040)              (0.034)                           (0.046)                 (0.004)
  Employer×Occ FE                                Y
  Employer×Skill-level FE                                             Y
  Employer FE                                                                           Y               Y                       Y
  Estab.-City×Year FE                           Y                     Y                 Y                                       Y
  Occ FE                                                                                               Y                        Y
  Estab.-City FE                                                                                       Y
  Observations                                19,520                9,241             1,274          17,850                  31,751

                                                              Panel B: Estab.-city×Occupation×Year Fixed Effects
                                                (1)                 (2)              (3)         (4)                           (5)
  Log HQ Wage                                0.157               0.266            0.372       0.280                         0.482
                                              (0.048)             (0.090)          (0.065)     (0.068)                       (0.041)
  Employer×Occ FE                                Y
  Employer×Skill-level FE                                             Y
  Employer FE                                                                           Y               Y                       Y
  Estab.-City×Year FE                                                                   Y
  Estab.-City×Occ×Year FE                       Y                                                                               Y
  Estab.-City×Skill-level×Year FE                                     Y
  Estab.-City×Occ FE                                                                                   Y
  Observations                                19,520                9,246             1,274          17,850                  38,268
Note: This table shows the correlation between a firm's wage levels at its headquarters and its foreign establishments. The outcome variables
are the occupation-specific log wage at an establishment in a given year (column 1 & 5), the skill-level-specific log wage at an establishment
in a given year (Column 2), the average log wage at an establishment in a given year (Column 3), and the time-adjusted cross-sectional
average occupation-specific log wage at an establishment (Column 4). In Column 5, the missing values in panel of the dependent variable
(the occupation-specific log wage at the foreign stablishments) are imputed as the sum of an establishment×occupation component and an
establishment-city×occupation×year component, which are estimated from a two-way fixed effect model on the unbalanced panel of observable
occupation-specific foreign establishment wages. In Column 2 of Table 2 where the outcome variable is skill-level-specific establishment wages
in a given year, the corresponding local benchmark control becomes the average wage of workers in skill level l employed by all the other firms
in our sample in foreign city c in year t (Panel A), and city×skill-level×year fixed effects (Panel B). In column 3 of Table 2 where the outome
variable is average establishment wage in a given year, the corresponding controls are subsumed by city×year fixed effects ct . Standard errors
are reported in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                     40
TABLE 3: HETERO. HQ-ESTAB. WAGE CORRELATION                                                BY      HQ COUNTRY INEQUALITY
AVERSION
                                                                               Panel A: Wage Level Anchoring
                                                                       Log Occ-Specific Wage at Foreign Establishment
                                                                 (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)
     Log HQ Wage                                              0.160 0.321 0.315 0.142 0.168 0.159
                                                               (0.057)   (0.072)     (0.070)   (0.055)     (0.032)    (0.032)

     Log HQ Wage                                                           -0.414       -0.416                    -0.172       -0.165
      × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                      (0.253)      (0.253)                  (0.137)      (0.137)

     Log HQ Wage                                                                         0.007                               0.010
      × Estab.-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                               (0.016)                               (0.001)

     Log Local Benchmark Wage                                 0.151      0.152 0.152
                                                               (0.037)    (0.037)     (0.037)
     Employer×Occ FE                                              Y          Y           Y          Y          Y           Y
     Estab.-City×Year FE                                          Y          Y           Y          N          N           N
     Estab.-City×Occ×Year FE                                      N          N           N          Y          Y           Y
     Observations                                              17,753     17,753      17,751     17,757     17,757      17,755
                                                                                Panel B: Wage Slope Anchoring
                                                                  Occ. Category-Specific Wage Slope at Foreign Establishment
                                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
     HQ Wage Slope                                              0.110    0.292 0.236             0.109     0.273 0.298
                                                               (0.075)    (0.083)     (0.094)    (0.063)    (0.056)     (0.059)

     HQ Wage Slope                                                        -0.344       -0.346                   -0.317       -0.315
      × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                      (0.100)      (0.100)                  (0.077)      (0.077)

     HQ Wage Slope                                                                       0.061                                 -0.027
      × Estab.-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                               (0.048)                               (0.018)

     Local Benchmark Wage Slope                    0.032                   0.034        0.033
                                                    (0.012)                 (0.012)      (0.012)
     Employer×Occ-Type×Skill Level-Pair FE             Y                       Y            Y          Y           Y            Y
     Estab.-City×Year FE                               Y                       Y            Y          N           N            N
     Estab.-City×Occ-Type×Skill Level-Pair×Year FE     N                       N            N          Y           Y            Y
     Observations                                   11,968                  11,968       11,968      11,982      11,982       11,982
   Note: Panel A shows the heterogeneous correlations between a firm's wage levels at its headquarters and its foreign establishments
   by the home country's inequality aversion. The outcome variables are the occupation-specific log wage at an establishment in a given
   year. In columns (2) and (5), we interact the main independent variable, the average wage at headquarters, with a binary variable
   indicating whether the home country is classified as having low inequality aversion according to the Hofstede measures of culture.
   If the variable "HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion" ("Estab.-Country Low Ineq. Aversion") equals one, it indicates that the home
   country (foreign establishment country) is more accepting of inequality than the average country in the sample. In columns (1)-
   (3), establishment city local occupation-specific benchmark wage controls are included; in columns (4) - (6), the local benchmark
   wage controls and the establishment-city×occupation×year fixed effects are replaced by establishment-city×occupation×year fixed
   effects. Panel B replicates Panel A, changing the outcome variable to a firm's within-occupation-type-between-skill-level wage
   slopes ­ the difference between the average log wage of jobs within each occupational category in consecutive skill levels at a foreign
   establishment. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                    41
                 TABLE 4: IMPACT OF HQ MIN. WAGE CHANGE ON FIRM WAGES

                                                               Low-Skill Occupations Only
   Sample                                      Sample 3                      Sample 2                                          Sample 1
                                    (HQ-estab. match w/in occ×year) (HQ-estab. match w/in occ)                                (All MNCs)

                                             Same-sample 2SLS                     Same-sample 2SLS                        Two-sample 2SLS
   Estimation Method
                                                                                  (Imputed HQ Panel)
                                                       (1)                                  (2)                                    (3)
   Panel A: Reduced form                                                        % Estab. Wage
   % HQ Min Wage                                     0.058                              0.058                                   0.040
                                                    (0.042)                              (0.011)                                (0.016)
   Panel B: First stage                                                          % HQ Wage
   % HQ Min Wage                                   0.127                                 0.162                                  0.095
                                                    (0.019)                              (0.081)                                (0.044)
   Panel C: IV (2SLS)                                                           % Estab. Wage
   % HQ Wage (IVed)                                  0.457                               0.360                                0.426
                                                    (0.345)                              (0.196)                              (0.246)
   Employer×Occ FE                                     Y                                     Y                                   Y
   Estab.-City×Year FE                                 Y                                     Y                                   Y
                                                                                                                        57,026 (Panels A, C)
   Observations                                      1,872                                     14,743
                                                                                                                          5,215 (Panel B)
Note: This table shows (1) the impact that a 100% minimum wage increase in a firm's home country has on gross wages paid to low-skill jobs in its
foreign establishments (Panel A) and its headquarters (Panel B), and (2) the impact of minimum-wage-induced wage changes of a low-skill job in
the headquarters on the wage changes of the same-occupation job in a foreign establishment of the same employer (Panel C). An occupation is low-
skill if its skill level (defined globally by the Company, 16 skill levels in total) is between 1 and 5. In column 1, we perform standard same-sample
2SLS estimation. In column 2, we first impute the headquarter wages of a given job for missing years by linearly interpolating job-specific log
headquarter wages on log home country minimum wages, and then perform standard same-sample 2SLS estimation. In column 3, we perform two-
sample 2SLS by estimating the first stage using all low-skill jobs in all headquarters (including those for which we do not observe the same job in a
foreign establishment in the same year), and the second stage & reduced form using low-skill jobs in all foreign establishments (including those for
which we do not observe their headquarter counterparts in the same year). In the first stage estimation of column 3, we impose the restriction that
the establishment-city×year fixed effects are the same for the same year, as there is no unique establishment city attached to each observation used
in the first stage estimation. Outliers with wage changes larger than 50% are excluded. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at
the home-country(state) level. TS2SLS standard errors are computed following Pacini & Windmeijer (2016). (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                        42
TABLE 5: MIN. WAGE IMPACT ON BINDING VS NON-BINDING OCCUPATIONS/FIRMS

    Panel A: Binding Occupations (v. Others)                                   % Estab. Wage                   % HQ Wage
      w/in Establishment×Year                                                  (1)        (2)                 (3)       (4)
    % HQ Min Wage                                                                        0.016                        -0.006
                                                                                        (0.074)                      (0.057)
    % HQ Min Wage × Occ. Binding                                            0.088          0.082          0.209             0.263
                                                                             (0.029)        (0.032)        (0.096)         (0.166)
    Employer×Occ FE                                                             Y              Y              Y               Y
    Year FE                                                                     N              N              N               Y
    Estab.-City×Year FE                                                         N              Y              N               N
    Employer×Estab.×Year FE                                                     Y              N              Y               N
    Observations                                                              7,803          7,803          2,447           2,327
    R-squared                                                                 0.721          0.707          0.717           0.356
    Panel B: Heterogeneity by Firm Bindingness                                 % Estab. Wage                   % HQ Wage
      on Low-Skill Occ'n.s w/in HQ-Country×Year                                (1)        (2)                 (3)      (4)
    % HQ Min Wage                                                                        0.055                        0.149
                                                                                        (0.070)                      (0.403)
    % HQ Min Wage ×Firm Bindingness                                         1.373           1.118         4.705           4.172
    (sample median deviation of Kaitz)                                       (0.527)        (0.529)        (0.048)         (1.421)
    Employer×Occ FE                                                             Y               Y             Y               Y
    Year FE                                                                     N               N             N               Y
    Estab.-City×Year FE                                                         Y               Y             N               N
    HQ-City×Year FE                                                             Y               N             Y               N
    Observations                                                             34,634          34,634          994             994
    R-squared                                                                 0.472           0.447         0.825           0.825
    Panel C: Heterogeneity by Firm Bindingness                                 % Estab. Wage                   % HQ Wage
      on Binding Occ'n.s (v. Others) w/in HQ-Country×Year                      (1)        (2)                 (3)      (4)
    % HQ Min Wage                                                                        0.014                        0.023
                                                                                        (0.041)                      (0.018)
    % HQ Min Wage×Occ. Binding                                                0.086          0.086        0.126           0.147
                                                                             (0.058)        (0.060)        (0.043)         (0.047)
    % HQ Min Wage×Occ. Binding                                              1.243           1.190          4.045           4.306
    ×Firm Bindingness (sample median deviation)                              (0.404)        (0.403)        (1.929)         (2.333)
    % HQ Min Wage×Occ. Non-binding                                          0.896           0.813          3.864           3.681
    ×Firm Bindingness (sample median deviation)                             (0.375)         (0.375)        (1.924)         (2.177)
    Employer×Occ FE                                                            Y               Y              Y               Y
    Year FE                                                                    N               N              N               Y
    Estab.-City×Year FE                                                        Y               Y              N               N
    HQ-City×Year FE                                                            N               Y              N               Y
    Observations                                                             6,505           6,505          3,384           3,384
    R-squared                                                                0.712           0.711          0.801           0.355
 Note: The outcome variable is the percent change in occupation-specific wages at the foreign establishments (cols 1 and 2) and
 the HQ (columns 3-4) of a multinational employer. Panel A shows the impact that a 100% minimum wage increase in a firm's
 HQ country has on gross wages for "binding" and "non-binding" occupations. The outcome variable is the percent change in
 occupation-specific establishment/HQ wages. An occupation is binding in a country if there exists a HQ or foreign establishment that,
 in the preceding year, paid a wage to that occupation that was below the new minimum wage. Only establishment-years in which
 at least one HQ-minimum-wage-binding occupation existed are included, as they are relevant in within-establishment-year analysis.
 Panel B shows the differential impact that a 100% minimum wage increase in a country has on gross wages paid to low-skill jobs of
 firms HQed in this country depending on how binding the minimum wage is for the HQs of these firms. An occupation is low-skill if
 its skill level (defined globally by the Company, 16 skill levels in total) is between 1 and 5. Firm-level minimum-wage-bindingness is
 measured by the ratio between the prevailing minimum wage and the median wage of the HQ (Kaitz index). For years in which the HQ
 was not surveyed, we impute the firm-level average Kaitz index. Only the firms of which the HQ and at least one foreign establishment
 are observed are included, as the Kaitz index is only available for these firms.Panel C shows the heterogeity by firm-level bindingness
 in the differential impact that a 100% minimum wage increase in a firm's HQ country has on gross wages paid to minimum-wage-
 binding occupations compared to unbinding ones within the same HQ country. Only establishment-years in which at least one
 HQ-minimum-wage-binding occupation existed are included. Outliers with percentage wage changes larger than 50% are excluded.
 Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the HQ-country(state) level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)
                                                                  43
                                                      TABLE 6: IMPACT OF HQ EX. RATE SHOCKS ON FIRM WAGES

                                                    Sample 3                                    Sample 2                               Sample 1                    Sample 1                   Sample 1
        Sample
                                         (HQ-estab. match w/in occ×year)                (HQ-estab. match w/in occ)                     All MNCs                    All MNCs                   All MNCs
                                                                                                                                                                  Appreciation               Depreciation
                                                  Same-sample 2SLS                           Same-sample 2SLS          Two-sample 2SLS                          Two-sample 2SLS            Two-sample 2SLS
        Estimation Method
                                                                                             (Imputed HQ Panel)
                                                             (1)                                     (2)                       (3)                                       (4)                         (5)
        Panel A: Reduced form                                                                               Log Estab. Wage
        Log HQ Ex. Rate                                    -0.148                                 -0.165                   -0.156                                    -0.276                      -0.102
                                                          (0.372)                                  (0.100)                  (0.040)                                   (0.070)                     (0.051)
        Panel B: First stage                                                                                 Log HQ Wage
        Log HQ Ex. Rate                                  -0.558                                   -0.523                   -0.705                                    -0.665                     -0.700
                                                          (0.100)                                  (0.313)                  (0.100)                                   (0.133)                    (0.125)
        Panel C: IV (2SLS)                                                                                  Log Estab. Wage




44
        Log HQ Wage (IVed)                                 0.265                                    0.316                   0.222                                     0.415                       0.146
                                                          (0.668)                                  (0.273)                  (0.065)                                    (0.134)                   (0.077)
        Employer×Occ FE                                      Y                                        Y                         Y                                         Y                          Y
        Estab.-City×Year FE                                  Y                                        Y                         Y                                         Y                          Y
                                                                                                                     (Panels A, C) 267,301                            156,274                    171,990
        Observations                                       18,054                                  46,727
                                                                                                                        (Panel B) 28,451                                9,502                    18,608
     Note: This table shows (1) the impact that a 100% local currency depreciation (relative to USD) in a firm's home country has on gross wages (USD) in its foreign establishments (Panel A) and its
     headquarters (Panel B), and (2) the impact of exchange-rate-shock-induced wage changes (USD) of a job in the headquarters on the wage changes (USD) of the same-occupation job in a foreign
     establishment of the same employer (Panel C). In column 1, we perform standard same-sample 2SLS estimation. In column 2, we first impute the headquarter wages of a given job for missing years by
     linearly interpolating job-specific log headquarter wages on log home country exchange rate, and then perform standard same-sample 2SLS estimation. In columns 3-5, we perform two-sample 2SLS by
     estimating the first stage using all jobs in all headquarters (including those for which we do not observe the same job in a foreign establishment in the same year), and the second stage & reduced form
     using all jobs in all foreign establishments (including those for which we do not observe their headquarter counterparts in the same year). The results in column 3 are estimated using all exchange rate
     changes; those in column 4 are estimated using appreciation shocks; those in column 5 are estimated using depreciation shocks. In the first stage estimation of columns 3-5, we impose the restriction that
     the establishment-city×year fixed effects are the same for the same year, as there is no unique establishment city attached to each observation used in the first stage estimation. Exchange rates are detrended
     from home-country-specific time trends. All foreign establishments located in the same currency zone as the headquarters are excluded. Outliers with wage changes larger than 50% are excluded. Standard
     errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the home-country-currency-zone level. TS2SLS standard errors are computed following Pacini & Windmeijer (2016). (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)
TABLE 7: TRANSMISSION OF HQ COUNTRY SHOCKS AND HQ INEQUALITY-AVERSION

                    Panel A: HQ Country Minimum Wage Hikes
        Low-Skill Occupations             % Estab. Wage % HQ Wage
                                                (1)           (2)
       % HQ Min Wage                          0.085        0.093
        × HQ-Country High Ineq. Aversion      (0.040)       (0.036)
       % HQ Min Wage                             0.008         0.095
         × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion        (0.012)        (0.059)
       Employer×Occ FE                             Y              Y
       Year FE                                     N              Y
       Estab.-City×Year FE                         Y              N
       Observations                             57,012          5,215
                     Panel B: HQ Country Exchange Rate Shocks
                                            Log Estab. Wage Log HQ Wage
                                                  (1)            (2)
       Log HQ Ex. Rate                         -0.196         -0.743
         × HQ-Country High Ineq. Aversion       (0.054)        (0.152)
       Log HQ Ex. Rate                                                      -0.089                   -0.691
         × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                   (0.055)                    (0.172)
       Employer×Occ FE                                                        Y                          Y
       Year FE                                                                N                          Y
       Estab.-City×Year FE                                                    Y                          N
       Observations                                                        267,047                    10,842
       Note: Panel A shows the heterogeneity in the impact that a 100%minimum wage increase in a firm's home country
      has on gross wages paid to low-skill jobs in its foreign establishments (column 1) and its headquarters (column 2),
      depending on the home country's inequality aversion level.
      Panel B shows the heterogeneity in the impact that a 100% local currency depreciation (relative to USD) in a
      firm's home country has on gross wages (USD) in its foreign establishments (column 1) and its headquarters
      (column 2), depending on the home country's inequality aversion level. Exchange rates are detrended from
      home-country-currency-zone-specific time trends.
      All jobs in all foreign establishments and all headquarters are used in the estimation. Outliers with wage changes
      larger than 50% are excluded. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. In Panel A, standard errors are clustered
      at the home-country(state) level. In Panel B, standard errors are clustered at the home-country-currency-zone level.
      (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                             45
TABLE 8: IMPACT                OF     HQ MIN.               WAGE CHANGE                  ON      FOREIGN ESTABLISHMENT
EMPLOYMENT

                                                                              Panel A: Extensive Margin
      Data Source                                               the Company                                RAIS (Brazil)
      Unit of Observation                                                            estab×occ×year
      Dep. Var.                                                       Occupation Leaves Foreign Establishment
      Sample                                        All Occ.          Low-Skill Occ.                          All Occ.
                                                      (1)                  (2)                     (3)                (4)             .
      % HQ Min Wage                                 0.018                0.026                   -0.050              -0.056
                                                    (0.009)              (0.012)                 (0.056)            (0.056)

      % HQ Min Wage                                  -0.022                 -0.019
       × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion               (0.012)               (0.015)

      % Min Wage at HQ                                                                                              0.108
         × Low Skill Occ.                                                                                          (0.079)
      Employer×Occ FE                                   Y                     Y                     Y                  Y
      Estab.-City×Year FE                               Y                     Y                     Y                  Y
                                                                                                             Low-Skill: 0.068
      Mean Dep. Var.                                  0.042                 0.086                 0.058
                                                                                                             Med/High-Skill: 0.006
      Observations                                   169,841              105,545             35,059               35,059
                                                                             Panel B: Intensive Margin
      Data Source                                                                     RAIS (Brazil)
      Unit of Observation                                                           estab×worker×yr
      Dep. Var.                                              Worker Laid Off                          Worker Newly Hired
                                                       (1)                (2)                     (3)              (4)
      % HQ Min Wage                                   0.008             -0.011                 -0.010           -0.010
                                                     (0.011)           (0.008)                  (0.004)          (0.003)
      % HQ Min Wage                                                        0.027                                      -0.004
       × Low-Skill Occ.                                                    (0.010)                                    (0.006)
      Employer×Occ FE                                   Y              Y                Y               Y
      Employer FE                                       N              N                N               N
      Estab.-City×Year FE                               Y              Y                Y               Y
      Worker Controls                                   Y              Y                Y               Y
                                                             Low-Skill: 0.082                 Low-Skill: 0.118
      Mean Dep. Var.                                 0.077                            0.052
                                                             Med/High-Skill: 0.0662           Med/High-Skill: 0.072
      Observations                                 1,320,842      1,320,842         1,320,842      1,320,842
   Note: This table shows impact that a 100% minimum wage increase in a firm's home country has on the existence of occupations
   (Panel A) and the employment of workers (Panel B) at the firm's foreign establishments. In Panel A, the outcome variable is a dummy
   variable indicating that an occupation disappears from a given establishment in the following year. In columns 1 & 2, an occupation
   is a job title defined by the Company (298 in total); in columns 3 & 4, the coding of occupations follows the Brazilian Classification
   of Occupations (CBO2002). In Panel B, the outcome variable in columns 1 & 2 (3 & 4) is a dummy variable indicating that a worker
   is laid off (hired) in a given foreign establishment located in Brazil during the year following the minimum wage change. In columns
   1-2 of Panel A, inequality aversion is defined according to the Hofstede measures of culture. If the variable "HQ-Country Low Ineq.
   Aversion" equals one, it indicates that the home country is more accepting of inequality than the average country in the sample of our
   main dataset. In Panel B and columns 3-4 of Panel A, almost all foreign establishments in Brazil in our sample are from multinationals
   headquartered in high inequality averse home countries. An occupation is low-skill if its skill level is between 1-5 (out of 16 skill
   levels). Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the home-country(state) level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                   46
       TABLE 9: ESTABLISHMENT-HQ WAGE ANCHORING: BRAZIL

                   Panel A: Relationship bet. HQ and Establishment Wages
  Log Estab. Wage                          Annual Contracted        Annual  Contracted
    (Worker-Specific)                         (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)
  Log HQ Wage                             0.142       0.146        0.091     0.121
    (Skill-Level Specific)                 (0.010)     (0.007)      (0.007)   (0.006)
  Employer×Occ FE                              Y          Y            N         N
  Employer×Estab.×Occ.×Worker FE               N          N            Y         Y
  Estab.-City×Year FE                          Y          Y            Y         Y
  Worker Controls                              Y          Y            Y         Y
  Observations                             57,062      44,763       15,873    20,785
             Panel B: Impact of HQ Min. Wage Change on Establishment Wages
  % Estab. Wage                            Annual Contracted        Annual  Contracted
    (w/in Estab.×Occ.×Worker)                 (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)
  % HQ Min Wage                           0.082       0.077        0.078     0.074
    ×Low-Skill Occ.                        (0.013)     (0.005)      (0.022)   (0.007)
  % HQ Min Wage                         0.010        0.009        0.015       0.004
    ×Med/High-Skill Occ.                 (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.008)    (0.005)
  Employer×Occ FE                           Y            Y           N          N
  Employer×Estab.×Occ.×Worker FE            N            N           Y          Y
  Estab.-City×Year FE                       Y            Y           Y          Y
  Worker Controls                           Y            Y           Y          Y
  Observations                          225,922      373,226     157,981    331,617
               Panel C: Impact of HQ Ex.Rate Shocks on Establishment Wages
  Log Estab. Wage                        Annual Contracted        Annual   Contracted
    (Worker-Specific)                      (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)
  Log HQ Ex. Rate                       -0.200 -0.211 -0.193                -0.051
                                         (0.027)      (0.059)     (0.057)    (0.025)
  Employer×Occ FE                           Y            Y           N          N
  Employer×Estab.×Occ.×Worker FE            N            N           Y          Y
  Estab.-City×Year FE                       Y            Y           Y          Y
  Worker Controls                           Y            Y           Y          Y
  Observations                          938,437      947,714     869,440    878,608
 Note: In all specifications we also control for both time-varying and time-invariant worker characteristics including
age, tenure, education, gender, race, disability status, etc. The coding of occupations follows the Brazilian
Classification of Occupations (CBO2002). In RAIS, an occupation's skill level is defined using the average education
of workers employed in the occupation, and the coding of skill levels is designed so that the skill level distribution
in RAIS is matched to the skill level distribution in the main data set. In Panel A, headquarter wages are measured
at skill-level level. An occupation is low-skill (middle-/high-skill) if its skill level (defined in RAIS) is between 1-5
(above 5). In columns 1 & 3, the outcome variables are log (or percentage change in) annual average monthly wage
of a worker. In columns 2 & 4, the outcome variables are log (or percentage change in) contracted hourly wage
of a worker. In columns 1 & 2, we control for employer×occupation fixed effects and establishment-city×year
fixed effects, the same as the analysis conduced on the main data set. In columns 3 & 4, we in addition control for
employer×establishment×occupation×worker fixed effects (i.e. workers' occupation-specific employment spell
fixed effects). Standard errors are reported in parentheses. In Panel A, standard errors are clustered at the employer
level. In Panel B, standard errors are clustered at the home-country(state) level. In Panel C, standard errors are
clustered at the home-country-currency-zone level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                          47
Appendix I Threats to identification: transmission of exchange
           rate shocks
1. Endogenous timing of exchange rate fluctuations A currency appreciation may take place
when a country's economy is doing well and aggregate demand for labor is relatively high. If home
country labor demand and multinationals' demand for labor abroad are correlated, a home country
currency appreciation could then coincide with a rise in wages paid in foreign establishments absent
any wage anchoring.
    To investigate this concern, we first break down the estimated impact of home country exchange
rate shocks by sectors' export and import shares. If the positive foreign wage response to an increase
in the USD value of a home country's currency is driven by underlying labor demand shocks, the
impact should be small among output-exporting firms--which are likely to directly suffer from an
increase in the relative price of domestically-produced goods--and large among input-importing
firms, which conversely are likely to directly benefit from an decrease in the relative price of their
inputs. As seen in columns 1-3 of Panel A in Appendix Table A14, we find no evidence that wage
impacts of home country exchange rate shocks in foreign establishments are driven by firms in
high-import-share and low-export-share home country sectors.64
    It is worth noting that a story in which labor demand covaries with exchange fluctuations and
this explains the estimated impact of exchange rate shocks on multinationals' foreign wages is hard
to reconcile also with the asymmetric response of foreign establishment wages to home country
appreciation and depreciation shown in columns 4 & 5 of Table 6.65
    The evidence thus suggests that that endogenous timing of exchange rate fluctuations is not the
primary explanation for the estimated transmission of externally imposed headquarter wage increases
to multinationals' foreign establishments.

2. Offshoring in response to home country currency appreciation A home country currency
appreciation can make some multinationals' headquarter workers more expensive to employ relative
to the firm's foreign establishment workers. This could induce the employer to shift jobs to foreign
establishments from the headquarters--Feenstra & Hanson (1996) -offshoring--which could in turn
raise wages both at home and abroad, contributing to the estimated impact of exchange rate shocks
on multinationals' foreign wages.
    For task reallocation within jobs to explain the results in Sub-section 5.1, the effect of home coun-
try exchange rate shocks on wages in foreign establishments would need to be concentrated in firms
that engage in international trade (see e.g. Campa & Goldberg, 2001; Goldberg & Tracy, 2001).66
Intuitively, if a firm's headquarters and foreign establishments buy from and sell to the domestic mar-
ket of the country in which the relevant establishment is located, home country currency depreciation
  64 The country×sector specific input/output shares are calculated using data from the World Input-Output Database

(WIOD) in year 2004 (Timmer et al. , 2015). We use a pre-sample-period measure to avoid potentially confounding
changes in the share of imported inputs/exported outputs, which might be endogenous to exchange rate changes. Note that
we do not show heterogeneity in the estimated effect by input/output tradability in the minimum wage analysis in Section
4 because a home country/state minimum wage increase presumably leads to a similar increase in the relative price of
headquarter labor compared to foreign labor in firms that sell in the international versus domestic markets. Nonetheless,
we find no evidence of such heterogeneity in the minimum wage impact (results available from the authors upon request).
   65 Endogenous labor demand could explain this asymmetry only if labor demand shocks at the headquarter are equally

correlated with home country exchange rate changes under appreciation and depreciation, while the shocks that coincide
with appreciation are 2.7 times as correlated with multinationals' demand for labor abroad than those associated with
depreciation. This is rather improbable, especially compared to the natural downward-nominal-wage-rigidity/wage
anchoring explanation for the asymmetry discussed in Sub-section 5.1.
   66 The within-employer labor in-sourcing explanation has the same prediction as the endogenous labor demand

explanation in terms of the wage impact difference between input-importing firms and non-input-importing firms, and the
opposite prediction in terms of the wage impact difference between output-exporting firms and non-output-exporting firms.


                                                          48
will lead to a similar decrease in the dollar value of the firm's revenue, cost of labor and cost of other
inputs, resulting in little or no change in the relevant price of labor at the headquarter relative to that at
the firm's foreign establishments. However, recall that we showed in Panel A of Appendix Table A14
that a home country currency appreciation leads to a similar, if anything larger, increase in the foreign
establishment wages of firms purchasing and/or producing less tradable goods and services. We also
find a similar impact on headquarter wages of home country exchange rate shocks in firms purchas-
ing and/or producing more/less tradable goods and services, and little heterogeneity in the impact on
foreign establishment wages by job offshorability and multi-task content (see Panel B of Appendix
Table A14). These three findings are all hard to reconcile with an across-country task-shifting story.67
    The evidence thus suggests that a within-firm offshoring phenomenon is not the primary explana-
tion for the transmission of exchange rate variation-induced headquarter wage changes to multination-
als' foreign establishments. Such transmission appears to be due, at least in part, to wage anchoring.

3. Technology adoption in response to home country exchange rate shocks In contrast to
minimum wage increases--which tend to be permanent--transitory exchange rate shocks are a
priori unlikely to induce technology adoption. Nonetheless, analogous to the analysis of minimum
wage increases in Panel B of Appendix Table A12, we also show in Panel C of Appendix Table A14
that the estimated wage impact of home country/state exchange rate shocks do not vary by job task
content that is likely related to the complementarity between labor and computer capital (information
technology). This is hard to reconcile with technology adoption explaining the estimated impact of
home country exchange rate shocks on multinationals' foreign establishment wages.




  67 Several additional tests parallel to those in Point 2, Sub-section 4.3 do not support the job/task offshoring explanation

either. Results in Appendix Table A15 show that the sets of occupations that are present at the foreign establishments
neither shrink nor expand in response to exchange rate shocks, and that the employment of workers does not respond
to exchange rate shocks either. In Column 2 of Appendix Table A13 we re-estimate the regression in Column 3 of
Table 6, restricting the sample to the set of occupations that were already present in the relevant foreign establishment
before the exchange rate shock. The results are similar to those in Table 6.


                                                            49
Appendix II Data Appendix
1. Additional Data Sources
1.1 Minimum Wage Data
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) includes a database on nominal gross monthly min-
imum wage (local currency) for 118 of the 170 countries observed in our primary dataset. The
minimum wage is recorded as of December 31st of each year.68 Monthly numbers are multiplied
by 12 to calculate the annual nominal minimum wage. For the United States, we use the annual state
minimum wage database in Vaghul & Zipperer (2016).

1.2 Exchange Rate Data
The yearly exchange rate dataset is downloaded from the World Bank, which records the official
exchange rate (in currency units per current USD).69 The yearly exchange rate is calculated as an
annual average based on monthly averages.

1.3 Measures of Occupational Characteristics
Occupation crosswalks
     i Crosswalk between the detailed job titles in our primary dataset and the 3-digit 2000 Standard
       Occupational Classification (SOC-00) codes is constructed using O-NET's code connector.
       We record the SOC code(s) of the first two entries.
    ii Crosswalk between the (6-digit) 2000 Standard Occupational Classification (SOC-00) codes
       and the 2000 US Census Codes is available on the United States Census Bureau website.
   iii The crosswalk between the 2000 US Census Codes and the occ1990dd occupation classifi-
       cation codes is available on David Dorn's website.70
    iv Crosswalk between the 2000 Standard Occupational Classification (SOC-00) codes and the
       1988 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88) codes is available on
       the Institute for Structural Research (IBS) website.
    v Crosswalk between the 1988 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88)
      codes and the 1994 Brazilian Classification of Occupations (CBO-94) is available in Muendler
      et al. (2004).
  68 According to ILO,   minimum wages are not reported for countries for which collective bargaining is in place for
minimum wages. In cases where a national minimum wage is not mandated, the minimum wage in place in the capital
or major city is used. In some cases, an average of multiple regional minimum wages is used. In countries where the
minimum wage is set at the sectoral level or occupational level, the minimum wage for manufacturing or unskilled
workers is generally applied.
   69 Official exchange rate refers to the exchange rate determined by national authorities or to the rate determined in

the legally sanctioned exchange market.
   70 "The occ1990dd occupation classification aggregates U.S. Census occupation codes to a balanced panel of

occupations for the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census, as well as the 2005-2008 ACS."




                                                          50
Offshorability The offshorability index comes from Blinder & Krueger (2013)'s externally coded
survey measure of job offshorability (the ability to perform the job's work duties from abroad).
Micro-level survey data is available on Princeton Data Improvement Initiative (PDII).71

Task Complexity Occupations that are categorized as "single-task" include Cleaner, Guard, Mes-
senger, Driver, Administrative Clerk, Shipping & Receiving Clerk, and Data Entry Clerk. All these
occupations are low-skill occupations (skill levels 1-5 out of 16 levels in total). Non-single-task
low-skill occupations include, for example, Reproductive Machine Operator, Mechanical/Operations
Assistant, Accounting Clerk, etc.

Task content Measures for abstract, routine, and manual tasks come from Autor & Dorn (2013)
(see their Appendix D for a detailed description). The data is available from the authors' website.72

1.4 Measures of Sectoral Characteristics
Skill share and labor share The sector-specific labor share is calculated using data from the BEA
Input-Output Accounts, concorded to nails 6 digit and reduced to 2 digit NAICS using gross output
values as weights. The sector-level skill share is the share of payroll going to occupations with skill
level requirement 3 or 4 according to the ILO. The data is from the occupational employment survey
in the US, collected on the NAICS 4-digit level and reduced to the 2-digit level using gross output
as weights.73

Input and output tradability The country-sector specific tradability measures are constructed
using data from the 2004 World Input-Output Tables in the World Input Out Database (WIOD)
(Timmer et al. , 2015). Input (output) tradability is the share of the value of imported input (exported
output) of the value of total input (out) in a given sector in a given country in 2004.74

1.5 Measures of Country-Level Characteristics
Hofstede's cultural measures The measures of Hofstede's national cultural dimensions are down-
loaded from Hofstede's website. These include Power distance index (PDI, our primary culture
measure), Individualism vs. collectivism (IDV), Uncertainty avoidance index (UAI), Masculinity
vs. femininity (MAS), Long-term orientation vs. short-term orientation (LTO), and Indulgence vs.
restraint (IND).

Global Preferences Survey measures The country-level measures of preferences in the Global
Preferences Survey (see Falk et al. , 2018) are downloaded here. Thesec include patience, risk taking,
positive reciprocity, negative reciprocity, altruism and trust.
  71  The offshorability measure is first constructed at the level of 3-digit Standard Occupational Classification (SOC)
codes and then mapped to the job titles in our primary dataset using Crosswalk i. When more than one SOC code is
recorded for a given job title, the average offshorability measure is taken.
   72 The task content measures are mapped to the job titles in our primary dataset using crosswalks iii - ii - i.
   73 The measures are mapped to the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC)

sector categories used in our primary dataset according to the definition here.
   74 The sector definition in WIOD follows the Crosswalk between the International Standard Industrial Classification

of All Economic Activities (ISIC), the same as our primary dataset.




                                                          51
Other measures GDP per capita, Gini index, regulatory index, adult educational attainment, urban
population shares are drawn from the World Bank and measured yearly.75 The measure of collective
bargaining (union coverage) in the public or private sector of a given country in a given year is
defined as the proportion of all wage earners in this sector covered by collective bargaining agreement
or statutory regulations and retrieved from the ICTWSS database.76 For all these measures, we take
the country-level average of these variables during 2005-2015 (our sample period).

1.6 Measures of Country-Pair Bilateral Characteristics
The country-pair-specific bilateral gravity measures, including a common language index, a dummy
for common religion, a dummy for common legal origin, a dummy for a historical colonial relation-
ship, the distance between capital cities, a dummy for sharing a border, a dummy for sharing a time
zone, a dummy for regional trade agreements, are downloaded from the CEPII datasets. Measures
of the bilateral migrant stocks are drawn from the World Bank.

1.7 Brazilian RAIS Data
The RAIS data is employer-employee administrative data collected through a mandatory survey by
the Brazilian Ministry of Labor and Employment. We use data from the years 2005-2013 (the years
covered in the multinational data). The dataset is at the individual worker level and contains individual
identifiers, and firm and establishment identifiers. The firm identifiers are CNPJ numbers (Cadastro
Nacional de Pessoa Juridica), identification numbers issued to all firms operating in Brazil (including
non-profits). We use this identifiers to match firms in the multinational data to establishments in
Brazil. We find identify 37 firms with establishments in Brazil.
    Because the Company does not use standard occupation codes, we are unable to match individ-
uals in Brazil (for whom we have CBO codes of occupations) to their direct job counterpart in the
multinational data. We therefore instead match by skill level of the job. We do this by taking the
average education level of individuals in a particular CBO in Brazil, as well as the average "level"
people are at in the firm (manager, assistant manager), and match into the respective skill level in
the Company's data. These multinationals are headquartered in the United States (61%), Germany
(13%), Switzerland (12%), the UK (6%), France (5%), Finland (1.5%) and the remainder are spread
equally across Australia, Canadaa, Ireland, and New Zealand.
    We have information in individual's wages, hiring date, date of job termination and reason for
termination, as well as various demographic characteristics including age, gender, race, and education.
Summary statistics are provided in Appendix Table A1. The wages in the Company's data have an
roughly 80% correlation with wages in the Brazilian data.

2. Data Processing
The dataset from the Company is an unbalanced panel at establishment×year level, and contains
a few large wage changes within the same establishment in neighboring years that are very likely
due to data entry errors. We process the wage data in the following two ways to address the potential
estimation issues associated with these two features.
  75   A country's regulatory index is meant to capture the country's regulatory environment that affects growth of the
private sector. The index is based on surveys and legal analysis conducted by the World Bank. A higher regulatory
index means that a country's government is better able to create and implement regulations that promote private sector
development. Adult education is the share of adults over the age of 25 who have received higher education.
   76 If sector-specific union coverage measure is missing, we use the average measure pooling the public and the private

sectors.




                                                          52
Trimming Outliers We drop observations with a wage change between two consecutive surveyed
years larger than 100%. This trimming procedure drops less than 2% of the total observations.77

Adjusting for Panel Unbalancedness There are instances in which a firm experiences more than
one home country minimum wage change between two consecutive survey years. For example, we
see some cases in which if a firm is surveyed in 2005 and 2007 but its home country's minimum
wage increases both in 2005 and 2006. In such instances, we use the most recent minimum wage
increase as the independent variable and re-scale the associated gross wages by the ratio of the most
recent minimum wage increase and the cumulative minimum wage increase. Because the cumulative
minimum wage increase and the growth in job-specific wages are both likely to be larger when there
is a longer time gap between two consecutive survey years, failing to re-scale the correlation between
the two might spuriously capture the unbalanced panel feature of the dataset. The procedure also
applies to any other regression in which the un-interacted home country minimum wage changes
is the main independent variable of interest.




  77 If data entry errors were more likely to occur when there was a longer time gap between two consecutive surveys

on the same establishment, and home country minimum wage changes were also larger when the time gap was longer,
including possibly erroneous outliers with very large wage growth could lead to a spurious positive correlation between
the firm wage change and home country minimum wage change.


                                                         53
Appendix III Figure Appendix

   FIGURE A1: SECTOR DISTRIBUTION OF PRIVATE-SECTOR FIRMS IN THE SAMPLE




Note: This figure displays the sectoral distribution of the private-sector firms in the full sample.




                                                                         54
                   FIGURE A2: FOREIGN ESTABLISHMENT AND HQ LOCATIONS




Note: This figure displays the geographical distribution of the establishments (top panel) in the full sample of multinationals and their
headquarters (bottom panel). The bubble size weight is the number of establishment (headquarters)×year observations in each city.




                                                                  55
FIGURE A3: HOFSTEDE POWER DISTANCE INDEX (PDI)




                      56
          FIGURE A4: CORRELATION BETWEEN HQ AND FOREIGN ESTAB. WAGES




                                      (A)                                                                    (B)




                                      (C)                                                                    (D)
Note: These binned scatterplots show the relationship between headquarter and establishment wages by skill level (Panels A and B) and occupa-
tion level (Panels C and D). The y-variable in Panels A and B is the skill-level log wage at an establishment. The y-variable in Panels C and D is the
occupation-specific log wage at an establishment. In Panels B and D, we split the sample into countries that have a high or low tolerance to inequal-
ity, as defined in Section 3. To construct each plot, establishment wages are first residualized with respect to the following controls: the average
skill level-level or job-level wage for other employers' establishments operating in the same city, city×year fixed effects, and firm×skill level (or
firm×job) fixed effects. The x-variable, log wage at the headquarters, is then divided into twenty equal-sized groups. Wages at headquarters are
also measured at either the skill level (A and B) or the occupation level (C and D). Within each of these groups, we plot the mean of the y-variable
residuals against the mean of the x-variable. We then add back the unconditional mean of the y-variable (establishment wages), to help with the
interpretation of the line of best fit. The lines of best fit for each scatter plot are as follows. Panel A: ^ = 0.130 (s.e.=0.030). Panel B: ^ L = 0.239
(s.e.=0.044) and   ^ H = 0.010 (s.e.=0.047). Panel C:      ^ = 0.126 (s.e.=0.027). Panel D:     ^ L = 0.205 (s.e.=0.036) and ^ H = 0.017 (s.e.=0.056).




                                                                          57
                                                                         FIGURE A5: IMPACT OF HQ EX. RATE ON FIRM WAGES

                                                                         Panel A: Impact in Estab. Wages                                                                                          Panel B: Impact on HQ Wages
                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                                                                                                          Impact of 100% Ex Rate Increase on Log HQ Wages
   Impact of 100% Ex Rate Inc. on Log Estab. Wages
                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                 -.2            0




                                                                                                                                                       -.5
     -.4




                                                     -4                -2                    0               2                  4
                                                                              Year Relative to Ex Rate Shock
                                                                                                                                                                   -1




                                                          All Ex Rate Shock      Negative (Appreciation)   Positive (Depreciation)
                                                                                                                                                                                            -4   -2                  0               2   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Year Relative to Ex Rate Shock


Note: This impulse response study plots the coefficients from a regression in which occupation-specific log gross wages (in current USD terms)
at the foreign establishments (Panel A) and the headquarters (Panel B) of a firm in year t - 3 to t + 3 are regressed on the detrended log exchange
rate in year t in the firm's home country. Employer×year and establishment-city×year fixed effects are included. Exchange rates are detrended
from home-country-specific time trends. All foreign establishments located in the same currency zone as the headquarters are excluded. The
blue dots show the estimates where the full sample is included; in Panel A, the red (green) dots show the estimates where only appreciation
(depreciation) in year t (compared to year t - 1) in the firm's home country is included.




                                                                                                                                     58
Appendix IV Table Appendix

                TABLE A1: RAIS DATA SUMMARY STATISTICS

                                        Mean          Min          Max            SD
          Occupations                   17.8           1           149            20.8
          Workers                       995.4           1        178,225        4730.4
          % Brazilian                    99.4           0            1             2.9
          % no High School               10.5           0          86.0           16.4
          Tenure (months)                55.3          0.5         469.3          50.0
          Yearly Wages (USD)           33,896.2      7007.5     642,216.6      36,507.4
       Note: This table reports the mean, minimum, and maximum values, as well as
       the standard deviations of the listed variables in the RAIS data. Variables are
       measured at the firm establishment-by-year level so that an observation is a firm
       establishment-year. Occupations is the average number of occupations present in
       a firm's establishment in a given year. Workers is the number of full-time workers
       at a firm's establishment in a given year. % no High School is the percent of workers
       within a firm's establishment who did not finish high school. % Brazilian is the
       percent of workers who are Brazilian nationals. Tenure is the number of months
       a worker is at a specific establishment. Wages are measured in US dollars.




                                                59
TABLE A2: RELATIONSHIP                          BETWEEN           HQ        AND    FOREIGN ESTABLISHMENT WAGES
(PRIVATE SECTOR)
                                                           Sample 3                                          Sample 2
  Sample
                                            MNEs w/ estab.-HQ match w/in occ×year                 MNEs w/ estab.-HQ match w/in occ
  Unit of Observation                    estab×occ×yr estab×skill-lev×yr estab×yr                 estab×occ            estab×occ×yr
                                                                                                                           Panel
  Data Structure                              Panel                Panel             Panel     Cross-sectional
                                                                                                                   (Imputed Estab. Panel)
  Dep. Var.                                                              Log Wage at Foreign Establishment

                                                                    Panel A: Local Benchmark Wage Control
                                               (1)                  (2)             (3)          (4)                         (5)
  Log HQ Wage                                0.254                 0.147         0.849**      0.151                        0.245
                                             (0.147)              (0.129)         (0.254)      (0.058)                     (0.119)
  Log Benchmark Wage                        0.215                 0.227                            0.528                  0.013
                                             (0.025)              (0.071)                           (0.061)                (0.004)
  Employer×Occ FE                               Y
  Employer×Skill-level FE                                            Y
  Employer FE                                                                          Y               Y                      Y
  Estab.-City×Year FE                           Y                    Y                 Y                                      Y
  Occ FE                                                                                              Y                       Y
  Estab.-City FE                                                                                      Y
  Observations                                5,982                2,562              102           1,835                  10,571

                                                             Panel B: Estab.-city×Occupation×Year Fixed Effects
                                               (1)                 (2)              (3)        (4)                           (5)
  Log HQ Wage                               0.163               0.286            0.849**     0.151                        0.422
                                             (0.045)             (0.084)          (0.254)    (0.064)                       (0.016)
  Employer×Occ FE                               Y
  Employer×Skill-level FE                                            Y
  Employer FE                                                                          Y               Y                      Y
  Estab.-City×Year FE                                                                  Y
  Estab.-City×Occ×Year FE                       Y                                                                             Y
  Estab.-City×Skill-level×Year FE                                    Y
  Estab.-City×Occ FE                                                                                  Y
  Observations                                5,990                2,570              102           1,846                  12,508
Note: This table replicates the analysis in Table 2, restricting the sample to private-sector multinationals. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                    60
TABLE A3: HETERO. HQ-ESTABLISHMENT WAGE CORRELATION BY SKILL LEVELS

                                                     Log Occ-Specific Wage at Foreign Establishment
                                                        (1)      (2)         (3)           (4)
          Log HQ Wage                                0.153 0.276 0.157                  0.245
                                                      (0.048)  (0.129)    (0.049)        (0.050)
          Log HQ Wage                                               -0.173                              -0.140
           × Middle Skill Occ.                                       (0.025)                             (0.046)
          Log HQ Wage                                                -0.157                                -0.106
           × High Skill Occ.                                          (0.063)                             (0.102)
          Log Local Benchmark Wage 0.137                             0.138
                                    (0.040)                           (0.040)
          Employer×Occ FE              Y                                 Y              Y                   Y
          Estab.-City×Year FE          Y                                 Y              N                   N
          Estab.-City×Occ×Year FE      N                                 N              Y                   Y
          Observations              19,520                            19,520          19,525              19,525
       Note: This table shows the correlations between a firm's wage levels at its headquarters and its establishments at
       different skill levels. The outcome variables are the occupation-specific log wage at an establishment in a given
       year. An occupation is middle- (high-) skill if its skill level (defined globally by the Company, 16 skill levels in
       total) is between 6 and 10 (higher than 10). In columns (1) & (2), establishment city local occupation-specific
       benchmark wage controls are included; in columns (3) & (4), the local benchmark wage controls and the
       establishment-city×occupation×year fixed effects are replaced by establishment-city×occupation×year fixed
       effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05
       ,***=p<0.01)




                                                               61
TABLE A4: HETERO. HQ-ESTABLISHMENT WAGE CORRELATION                                                   BY    SKILL LEVELS
(PRIVATE SECTOR)

                                                  Log Occ-Specific Wage at Foreign Establishment
                                                     (1)      (2)         (3)           (4)
           Log HQ Wage                             0.254    0.506 0.161              0.241
                                                  (0.147)   (0.181)    (0.048)        (0.040)
           Log HQ Wage                                           -0.208                          -0.128
            × Middle Skill Occ.                                   (0.015)                         (0.043)
           Log HQ Wage                                           -0.210                             -0.065
            × High Skill Occ.                                     (0.021)                          (0.077)
           Log Local Benchmark Wage 0.215                        0.216
                                     (0.025)                      (0.024)
           Employer×Occ FE              Y                            Y              Y                 Y
           Estab.-City×Year FE          Y                            Y              N                 N
           Estab.-City×Occ×Year FE      N                            N              Y                 Y
           Observations               5,982                        5,982          5,990             5,990
        Note: This table replicates the analysis in Appendix Table A3, restricting the sample to private-sector
        multinationals. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10,
        **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                           62
TABLE A5: HETERO. HQ-ESTAB. WAGE CORRELATION                                                            BY      HQ COUNTRY INEQ.
AVERSION (PRIVATE SECTOR)
                                                                                  Panel A: Wage Level Anchoring
                                                                         Log Occ-Specific Wage at Foreign Establishment
                                                                    (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)
     Log HQ Wage                                                  0.225     0.323       0.279 0.163 0 .184 0.171
                                                                  (0.133) (0.170) (0.170) (0.049)           (0.035)     (0.035)

     Log HQ Wage                                                               -0.322       -0.335                   -0.325        -0.286
      × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                         (0.249)      (0.247)                  (0.214)       (0.223)

     Log HQ Wage                                                                          0.048                                  0.017
      × Estab.-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                                  (0.010)                                (0.001)

     Log Local Benchmark Wage                                    0.228      0.228 0.152
                                                                  (0.034)    (0.034) (0.037)
     Employer×Occ FE                                                 Y          Y          Y          Y         Y           Y
     Estab.-City×Year FE                                             Y          Y          Y          N         N           N
     Estab.-City×Occ×Year FE                                         N          N          N          Y         Y           Y
     Observations                                                  5,773      5,773      5,771      5,780     5,780       5,778
                                                                                   Panel B: Wage Slope Anchoring
                                                                    Occ. Category-Specific Wage Slope at Foreign Establishment
                                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
     HQ Wage Slope                                               0.317 0.332 0.243 0.298 0.313 0.344
                                                                  (0.084) (0.085) (0.097) (0.051)            (0.050)     (0.060)

     HQ Wage Slope                                                            -0.425      -0.431                    -0.431      -0.428
      × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                          (0.205)     (0.205)                   (0.187)     (0.187)

     HQ Wage Slope                                                                         0.095                                  -0.033
      × Estab.-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                                                  (0.049)                                (0.038)

     Local Benchmark Wage Slope                                    0.026       0.025      0.033
                                                                  (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.012)
     Employer×Occ-Type×Skill Level-Pair FE                           Y           Y            Y           Y            Y             Y
     Estab.-City×Year FE                                             Y           Y            Y           N            N             N
     Estab.-City×Occ-Type×Skill Level-Pair×Year FE                   N           N            N           Y            Y             Y
     Observations                                                  3,846       3,846        3,846       3,852        3,852         3,852
   Note: This table replicates the analysis in Table 3, restricting the sample to private-sector multinationals. Standard errors are reported
   in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                      63
TABLE A6: ANCHORING AND CORRELATES OF INEQUALITY AVERSION (HQ COUNTRY
CHARACTERISTICS)

                                                                            Occupation-Specific Log Wage at Establishment
                                                                    (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
     Log HQ Wage                                                 0.254       0.261 0.269 0.375                  0.362     0.262
                                                                  (0.041)     (0.045)   (0.053)     (0.140)     (0.100)    (0.043)
     Log HQ Wage × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                 -0.225      -0.308     -0.301      -0.303*** -0.383         -0.316
                                                                  (0.092)     (0.139)    (0.050)      (0.045)  (0.091)        (0.126)
     Log HQ Wage × High Gini Index                              -0.085
                                                                 (0.029)
     Log HQ Wage × High GDP per capita                                         0.014
                                                                              (0.116)
     Log HQ Wage × High Bargaining (or Union) Coverage                                    0.067
                                                                                         (0.142)
     Log HQ Wage × High Regulation                                                                     -0.104
                                                                                                      (0.108)
     Log HQ Wage × High Adult Edu. Attainment                                                                    -0.007
                                                                                                                  (0.014)
     Log HQ Wage × High Urban Pop. Share                                                                                         0.022
                                                                                                                                (0.107)
      Employer×Occ FE                                                 Y          Y           Y           Y            Y            Y
      Estab.-City×Year FE                                             Y          Y           Y           Y            Y            Y
      Observations                                                 18,587     18,587      18,587      18,587       18,587       18,587
      R-squared                                                     0.960      0.960       0.960       0.960        0.960        0.960
   Note: This table tests whether home country characteristics, which potentially correlate with the Hofstede measure of inequality
   aversion, account for the relationship between headquarter and establishment wages. "High Gini Index" is a dummy indicating
   that the home country has above-sample-mean average Gini in 2005-2015. "High GDP per capita" is a a dummy indicating that
   the home country has above-sample-mean average GDP per capita in 2005-2015. "High Bargaining (or Union) Coverage" is a
   dummy indicating that the home country×sector (public or private) has above-sample-mean share of employees covered by collective
   bargaining or union. If sector-specific unionization information is missing, we use the home country averages pooling public and
   private sectors. "High Regulation" is a dummy for the home country having above-sample-mean degree of regulation. "High Adult
   Education Attainment" is a dummy indicating that the home country's average share of adults with higher education in 2005-2015
   is above the sample mean. "High Urban Population Share" is a dummy indicating that the home country's average urban population
   share in 2005-2015 is above the sample mean. In all columns, we also interact the headquarter wage with a binary variable indicating
   whether a country is classified as having low inequality aversion according to the Hofstede measures of culture. If the variable "Low
   Ineq. Aversion" equals one, it indicates that the home country is more accepting of inequality than the average country in the sample.
   The outcome variable is always the occupation-specific wage at an establishment. All wages are in logs. Standard errors are reported
   in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                   64
TABLE A7: ANCHORING                     AND      CORRELATES              OF   INEQUALITY AVERSION (HQ-ESTAB.
RELATIONSHIP)

                                                                 Occupation-Specific Log Wage at Establishment
     Panel A: Cultural & Historical Bonds
                                                         (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
     Log HQ Wage                                      0.282       0.249 0.254 0.249 0.248 0.232
                                                       (0.063)     (0.057)    (0.059)    (0.058)     (0.059)   (0.050)
     Log HQ Wage                                      -0.281       -0.283       -0.275       -0.276        -0.278       -0.294
      × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                  (0.059)      (0.062)      (0.059)      (0.059)       (0.060)      (0.056)
     Log HQ Wage                                        -0.038
      × Common Language Index                          (0.032)
     Log HQ Wage                                                     0.009
      × Common Religion                                             (0.015)
     Log HQ Wage                                                                  -0.006
      × Common Legal Origin                                                      (0.005)
     Log HQ Wage                                                                              0.048
      × Ever in Colonial Relationship                                                          (0.012)
     Log HQ Wage                                                                                             0.000
      × Log HQ-to-Estab. Migrant Stock                                                                      (0.001)
     Log HQ Wage                                                                                                         0.003
      × Log Estab.-to-HQ Migrant Stock                                                                                    (0.001)
     Employer×Occ FE                                      Y         Y          Y           Y          Y                      Y
     Estab.-City×Year FE                                  Y         Y          Y           Y          Y                      Y
     Observations                                      13,723    14,638     14,638      14,638     14,725                 14,725
     R-squared                                          0.959     0.960      0.960       0.960      0.959                  0.959
     Panel B: Geographical Proximity, Trade                    Occupation-Specific Log Wage at Establishment
       Connections, Wealth Diff.                         (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
     Log HQ Wage                                      0.301 0.244 0.251 0.251 0.251 0.260
                                                       (0.057)   (0.058)    (0.058)    (0.059)     (0.062)   (0.059)
     Log HQ Wage                                      -0.295       -0.279       -0.277       -0.279        -0.278       -0.286
      × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion                  (0.058)      (0.059)      (0.059)      (0.060)       (0.062)      (0.059)
     Log HQ Wage                                      -0.004
      × Log Distance                                   (0.002)
     Log HQ Wage                                                   0.023
      × Common Border                                               (0.010)
     Log HQ WageQ                                                                 0.000
      × Time Zone Difference                                                     (0.001)
     Log HQ Wage                                                                                -0.009
      × Common Currency Zone                                                                   (0.015)
     Log HQ WageQ                                                                                            -0.000
      × Regional Trade Agreements                                                                           (0.001)
     Log HQ Wage                                                                                                          -0.007
      × Estab. Country Richer                                                                                            (0.004)
     Employer×Occ FE                                      Y            Y             Y            Y           Y
     Estab.-City×Year FE                                  Y            Y             Y            Y           Y
     Observations                                      14,814       14,638        14,638       14,638       14,638        14,814
     R-squared                                          0.959        0.960         0.960        0.960       0.960         0.096
   Note: This table tests whether the relationship (proximity/gravity measures) between home country and establishment countries,
   which potentially correlate with the Hofstede measure of inequality aversion, account for the relationship between headquarter and
   establishment wages. The outcome variable is always the occupation-specific wage at an establishment. All wages are in logs.
   Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)



                                                                 65
TABLE A8: ANCHORING                       AND      CORRELATES               OF    INEQUALITY AVERSION (SECTOR
CHARACTERISTICS)

                                                                       Occupation-Specific Log Wage at Establishment
                                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)
     Log HQ Wage                                                    0.384       0.478      0.253 0.253 0.311
                                                                    (0.167)    (0.247)      (0.067)   (0.067) (0.183)
     Log HQ Wage × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion -0.250                          -0.247       -0.287        -0.287        -0.343
                                                  (0.069)                         (0.070)      (0.064)       (0.064)      (0.179)
     Log HQ Wage × High Labor Intensity                             -0.176
                                                                    (0.193)
     Log HQ Wage × High Skill Intensity                                           -0.273
                                                                                  (0.263)
     Log HQ Wage × High Output Tradability                                                       0.214
                                                                                                (0.251)
     Log HQ Wage × High Input Tradability                                                                      0.215
                                                                                                              (0.251)
     Log HQ Wage × High Job Offshorability                                                                                -0.045
                                                                                                                          (0.146)
     Employer×Occ FE                                                   Y            Y             Y             Y            Y
     Estab.-City×Year FE                                               Y            Y             Y             Y            Y
     Observations                                                   17,169        17,169        18,587        18,587      18,587
     R-squared                                                       0.959        0.959         0.960         0.960        0.960
  Note: This table tests whether characteristics of the sector an employer operates in, which potentially correlate with the Hofstede
  measure of inequality aversion, account for the relationship between headquarter and establishment wages. "High Labor Intensity"
  ("High Skill Intensity") is a dummy indicating that the sector's labor share (skill share) is above the sample mean (see detailed
  definitions in the Appendix). "High Output Tradability" ("High Input Tradability") is a dummy indicating the sector's share of
  exported output (imported input) is above sample mean. The input/output shares are calculated using year-2004 data from the
  World Input-Output Database (WIOD) (Timmer et al. , 2015). "High Job Offshorability" is a dummy indicating that the average
  offshorablilty index of occupations employed in this sector is above the sample mean. The offshorability index is constructed
  according to Blinder & Krueger (2013). The outcome variable is always the occupation-specific wage at an establishment. All wages
  are in logs. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the employer level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                 66
TABLE A9: IMPACT        OF     HQ MIN.               WAGE CHANGES                    ON     FIRM WAGES (SAMPLE
ROBUSTNESS)

                                     Low-skill Occupations Only
            Sample                       Sample 1 (All MNCs)
                                  Private Sectors Pre-existing Jobs
            Estimation Method             Two-sample 2SLS
                                        (1)               (2)
            Panel A: Reduced form          % Estab. Wage
            % HQ Min Wage            0.075              0.041
                                      (0.019)           (0.016)
            Panel B: First stage            % HQ Wage
            % HQ Min Wage             0.107             0.092
                                      (0.060)           (0.045)
            Panel C: IV (2SLS)             % Estab. Wage
            % HQ Wage (IVed)          0.706              0.442
                                      (0.415)           (0.279)
            Employer×Occ FE              Y                 Y
            Estab.-City×Year FE          Y                 Y
            Obs (Panels A, C)          6,994            56,586
                 (Panel B)             3,304             5,189
            Note: This table shows results replicating Table 4, restricting the sample to multinationals in
           private sectors (column 1) and to jobs that already existed in the relevant foreign establishment
           in the immediately preceding year surveyed (column 2). We perform two-sample 2SLS by
           estimating the first stage using all jobs in all headquarters, and the second stage & reduced
           form using all jobs in all foreign establishments. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
           and clustered at the home-country(state) level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                         67
TABLE A10: IMPACT OF HQ MIN. WAGE CHANGES ON NON-LOW-SKILL OCC. WAGES

                                                                                % Estab. Wage
           Panel A: Middle- & High-Skill Occ in Estab.
                                                                     (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)
           % HQ Min Wage                                            0.009   0.013   0.012   0.007   0.011
                                                                   (0.016) (0.012) (0.020) (0.013) (0.014)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                        -0.006
            ×High Occ. Offshorability                                          (0.009)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                                   -0.004
            ×Abstract Task                                                                (0.009)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                                               0.007
            ×Routine Task                                                                             (0.011)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                                                           -0.003
             ×Manual Task                                                                                         (0.012)
           Employer×Occ FE                                           Y        Y       Y       Y                      Y
           Estab.-City×Year FE                                       Y        Y       Y       Y                      Y
           Observations                                            70,406  70,406 70,406 70,406                   70,406
           R-squared                                               0.472    0.472   0.472   0.472                  0.472
                                                                                 % HQ Wage
           Panel B: Middle- & High-Skill Occ in HQ
                                                                     (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)
           % HQ Min Wage                                            0.018   0.006   0.019   0.019   0.017
                                                                   (0.024) (0.028) (0.022) (0.033) (0.023)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                        0.016
            ×High Occ. Offshorability                                          (0.016)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                                   -0.003
            ×Abstract Task                                                                (0.016)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                                               -0.003
            ×Routine Task                                                                             (0.020)
           % HQ Min Wage                                                                                           0.001
             ×Manual Task                                                                                         (0.014)
           Employer×Occ FE                                             Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
           Year FE                                                     Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
           Observations                                              6,250      6,250      6,250       6,250       6,250
           R-squared                                                 0.411      0.411      0.411       0.411       0.411
        Note: This table shows the impact of minimum wage increase in a firm's home country has on gross wages paid
        to non-low-skill jobs in its foreign establishments (Panel A) and its headquarters (Panel B). An occupation is
        non-low-skill if its skill level (defined globally by the Company, 16 skill levels in total) is higher than 5. An oc-
        cupation is defined as highly offshorable if its offshorablilty index is above the sample mean. The offshorability
        index is constructed according to Blinder & Krueger (2013). An occupation is defined as abstract-task (routine-
        task, manual task) if its abstractness (routineness, manualness) index is above the sample mean. The abstractness,
        routineness, manualness indices are from Autor & Dorn (2013). All foreign establishments and all headquar-
        ters are used in the estimation. Outliers with wage changes larger than 50% are excluded. Standard errors are
        reported in parentheses and clustered at the home-country(state) level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                68
TABLE A11: IMPACT OF HQ MIN. WAGE ON BINDING OCCUPATIONS/FIRMS

   Panel A: Binding Occupations (v. Others)                 % Estab. Wage       % HQ Wage          % Estab. Wage
     w/in Establishment×Year                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)
   % HQ Min Wage × Occ. Binding                              0.088               0.209
   (Binary: below New Min Wage)                               (0.029)            (0.096)
   % HQ Wage (IVed)                                                                                    0.423
                                                                                                       (0.180)
   Employer×Occ FE                                                 Y                   Y                  Y
   Employer×Estab.×Year FE                                         Y                   Y                  Y
   Observations                                                  7,803               2,447              7,803
   R-squared                                                     0.721               0.717              0.721
   Panel B: Heterogeneity by Firm Bindingness               % Estab. Wage       % HQ Wage          % Estab. Wage
     on Low-Skill Occ'n.s w/in HQ-City×Year                     (1)                 (2)                (3)
   % HQ Min Wage ×Firm Bindingness                           1.373               4.705
   (Kaitz: Min Wage-Median Wage Ratio)                        (0.527)             (0.048)
   % HQ Wage (IVed)                                                                                    0.292
                                                                                                        (0.112)
   Employer×Occ FE                                                 Y                   Y                   Y
   Estab.-City×Year FE                                             Y                   N                   Y
   HQ-City×Year FE                                                 Y                   Y                   Y
   Observations                                                  34,634               994               34,634
   R-squared                                                     0.472               0.825               0.472
   Panel C: Heterogeneity by Firm Bindingness               % Estab. Wage       % HQ Wage          % Estab. Wage
     on Binding Occ'n.s (v. Others) w/in HQ-City×Year           (1)                 (2)                (3)
   % HQ Min Wage×Occ. Binding                                  0.086             0.126
                                                              (0.058)             (0.043)
   % HQ Min Wage×Occ. Binding                                   1.243               4.045
    ×Firm Bindingness (sample median deviation)                  (0.404)            (1.929)
   % HQ Min Wage×Occ. Non-binding                               0.896               3.864
    ×Firm Bindingness (sample median deviation)                 (0.375)             (1.924)
   % HQ Wage (IVed)                                                                                      0.241
                                                                                                        (0.152)
   Employer×Occ FE                                                 Y                   Y                   Y
   Estab.-City×Year FE                                             Y                   N                   Y
   HQ-City×Year FE                                                 Y                   Y                   Y
   Observations                                                  6,505               3,884               6,505
   R-squared                                                     0.712               0.801               0.712
   Note: This table shows the impact of home-minimum-wage-induced changes in the headquarter wages of a firm on
  the same-occupation wages at its foreign establishments. Columns 1 and 2 show the same results as in columns 1 and 3
  of Table 5. Column 3 shows the two-sample 2STS second stage results linking headquarter and foreign establishment
  wages, using column 1 as the reduced form and column 2 as the first stage. Outliers with wage changes larger than
  50% are excluded. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the home-country(state) level. TS2SLS
  standard errors are computed following Pacini & Windmeijer (2016). (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                          69
TABLE A12: ROBUSTNESS                   OF    IMPACT           OF   HQ COUNTRY MIN. WAGE CHANGE                                  ON
WAGES

                                                           % Estab. Wage                         % HQ Wage
         Panel A: w/in Employer Offshoring
                                                       (1)     (2)       (3)                (4)     (5)     (6)
         % Min Wage                                  0.042 0.043 0.044                    0.072 0.099 0.077
                                                     (0.018) (0.018) (0.020)              (0.037) (0.042) (0.036)
         % HQ Min Wage                                -0.003                   -0.002      0.051                   0.052
          × High Occ. Offshorability                 (0.011)                  (0.010)     (0.046)                 (0.047)
         % HQ Min Wage                                        -0.008   -0.008                      -0.010  -0.012
           × Single-task Occ.                                (0.019) (0.018)                      (0.025) (0.024)
         Employer×Occ FE                                Y        Y        Y                  Y        Y       Y
         Year FE                                        N        N        N                  Y        Y       Y
         Estab.-City×Year FE                            Y        Y        Y                  N        N       N
         Observations                                57,026 57,026 57,026                  5,215   5,215   5,215
         R-squared                                    0.503   0.503    0.503               0.276   0.275   0.276
                                                           % Estab. Wage                         % HQ Wage
         Panel B: Technology Adoption
                                                       (1)      (2)      (3)                (4)      (5)     (6)
         % Min Wage                                  0.044 0.033 0.036                    0.095 0.050 0.115
                                                     (0.018) (0.014) (0.018)              (0.042) (0.047) (0.045)
         % HQ Min Wage                               -0.025                                -0.000
          × Abstract Task                            (0.015)                              (0.043)
         % HQ Min Wage                                            0.011                               0.067
          × Routine Task                                         (0.008)                              (0.038)
         % HQ Min Wage                                                         0.021                               -0.097
           × Manual Task                                                      (0.017)                             (0.060)
         Employer×Occ FE                                Y            Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
         Year FE                                        N            N           N           Y           Y           Y
         Estab.-City×Year FE                            Y            Y           Y           N           N           N
         Observations                                57,026       57,026      57,026       5,215       5,215       5,215
         R-squared                                    0.503        0.503       0.503       0.275       0.276       0.276
      Note: Panel A compares the differential impact of minimum wage increase in a home country on the gross wages
      paid to low-skill occupations of high and low offshorability and of different task complexity, both in the foreign
      establishments (columns 1, 2 & 3) as well as the headquarters (columns 4, 5, & 6) of multinationals headquartered
      in that country. An occupation is defined as highly offshorable if its offshorablilty index is above the sample mean.
      The offshorability index is constructed according to Blinder & Krueger (2013). Occupations defined as single-task
      include: cleaner, messenger, guard, driver, data entry clerk, administrative clerk and shipping & receiving clerk. Panel
      B compares the differential impact of minimum wage increase in a home country on the gross wages paid to low-skill
      occupations of high and low abstractness, routineness and manualness, both in the foreign establishments (columns 1,
      2 & 3) as well as the headquarters (columns 4, 5, & 6) of multinationals headquartered in that country. An occupation
      is defined as abstract-task (routine-task, manual task) if its abstractness (routineness, manualness) index is above
      the sample mean. The abstractness, routineness, manualness indices are from Autor & Dorn (2013). Outliers with
      percentage wage changes larger than 50% are excluded. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at
      the home-country(state) level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                               70
TABLE A13: IMPACT       OF    HQ EX. RATE SHOCKS                         ON    FIRM WAGES (SAMPLE ROBUST-
NESS )


                                          Sample 1 (All MNCs)
             Sample
                                   Private Sectors Pre-existing Jobs
             Estimation Method                  TS2SLS
                                         (1)               (2)
             Panel A: Reduced form          Log Estab. Wage
             Log HQ Ex. Rate          -0.359            -0.149
                                       (0.118)           (0.042)
             Panel B: First stage            Log HQ Wage
             Log HQ Ex. Rate          -0.896            -0.682
                                       (0.205)           (0.123)
             Panel C: IV (2SLS)             Log Estab. Wage
             Log HQ Wage (IVed)        0.400            0.219
                                       (0.160)           (0.073)
             Employer×Occ FE              Y                 Y
             Estab.-City×Year FE          Y                 Y
             Obs (Panels A, C)         68,704            229,556
                  (Panel B)             7,665             9,668
             Note: This table shows results replicating Table 6, restricting the sample to multinationals in
            private sectors (column 1) and to jobs that already existed in the relevant foreign establishment
            in the immediately preceding year surveyed (column 2). We perform two-sample 2SLS
            by estimating the first stage using all jobs in all headquarters, and the second stage &
            reduced form using all jobs in all foreign establishments. Exchange rates are detrended from
            home-country-specific time trends. All foreign establishments located in the same currency
            zone as the headquarters are excluded. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and
            clustered at the home-country-currency-zone level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                          71
TABLE A14: ROBUSTNESS OF IMPACT OF HQ COUNTRY EX. RATE SHOCKS ON WAGES
                                                           Log Estab. Wage                         Log HQ Wage
          Panel A: Exporting/Importing Sectors
                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)      (6)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                         -0.157 -0.218 -0.214                 -0.668        -0.671 -0.669
                                                   (0.055)     (0.068)     (0.071)      (0.118)       (0.128)  (0.128)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                           0.002                   -0.079       -0.109                   -0.180
           × High Output Exporting                 (0.155)                  (0.146)     (0.203)                  (0.210)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                                        0.154       0.175                    -0.178      0.002
           × High Input Importing                               (0.104)     (0.102)                  (0.441)     (0.120)
          Employer×Occ FE                             Y           Y           Y             Y         Y        Y
          Year FE                                     N           N           N             Y         Y        Y
          Estab.-City×Year FE                         Y           Y           Y             N         N        N
          Observations                             267,301     267,301     267,301       28,451    28,451   28,451
          R-squared                                 0.888       0.888       0.888         0.988     0.988    0.988
                                                           Log Estab. Wage                      Log HQ Wage
          Panel B: w/in Employer Offshoring
                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)      (6)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                         -0.148 -0.151 -0.141                 -0.706 -0.723 -0.737
                                                   (0.043)     (0.038)     (0.041)      (0.101)    (0.100)  (0.102)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                          -0.015                    0.018       0.002                    0.023
           × High Occ. Offshorability              (0.022)                  (0.022)     (0.027)                  (0.026)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                                       -0.026      0.029                 0.114          0.121
            × Single-task Occ.                                 (0.038)     (0.038)                 (0.057)       (0.058)
          Employer×Occ FE                              Y           Y          Y             Y         Y             Y
          Year FE                                      N           N          N             Y         Y             Y
          Estab.-City×Year FE                          Y           Y          Y             N         N             N
          Observations                             267,301     267,301     267,301       28,451    28,451        28,451
          R-squared                                 0.888        0.888      0.888         0.988     0.988         0.988
                                                           Log Estab. Wage                      Log HQ Wage
          Panel C: Technology Adoption
                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                         -0.136 -0.183 -0.142                 -0.669 0.701             0.724
                                                   (0.045)     (0.049)     (0.047)      (0.102)    (0.100)       (0.103)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                           -0.048                              -0.078
           × Abstract Task                         (0.030)                               (0.036)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                                        0.045                                -0.007
           × Routine Task                                       (0.051)                              (0.033)
          Log HQ Ex. Rate                                                    -0.045                              0.058
            × Manual Task                                                   (0.035)                              (0.032)
          Employer×Occ FE                             Y           Y             Y           Y           Y           Y
          Year FE                                     N           N             N           Y           Y           Y
          Estab.-City×Year FE                         Y           Y             Y           N           N           N
          Observations                             267,301     267,301      267,301      28,451      28,451      28,451
          R-squared                                 0.888       0.888         0.888       0.988       0.988       0.988
        Note: Panel A compares the differential impact of exchange rate shock in a home country on the firm
        wages based on the home-country×sector-specific exported output as a share of total output and the home-
        country×sector-specific imported input (intermediate goods) as a share of total input (intermediate goods), both
        in the foreign establishments (columns 1, 2 & 3) as well as the headquarters (columns 4, 5 & 6) of multinationals
        headquartered in that country. A home-country×sector is defined as highly output exporting (input importing) if
        its share of exported output (imported input) is above sample mean. The input/output shares are calculated using
        year-2004 data from the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) (Timmer et al. , 2015). For countries without
        country-specific information in WIOD, we take the worldly sector-specific averages.
        Panel B compares the differential impact of exchange rate shock in a home country on the gross wages paid to
        occupations of high and low offshorability and of different task complexity, both in the foreign establishments
        (columns 1, 2 & 3) as well as the headquarters (columns 4, 5& 6) of multinationals headquartered in that coun-
        try. . An occupation is defined as highly offshorable if its offshorablilty index is above the sample mean. The
        offshorability index is constructed according to Blinder & Krueger (2013). Occupations defined as single-task
        include: cleaner, messenger, guard, driver, data entry clerk, administrative clerk and shipping & receiving clerk.
        Panel C compares the differential impact of exchange rate shock in a home country on the gross wages paid to oc-
        cupations of high and low abstractness, routineness and manualness, both in the foreign establishments (columns
        1, 2 & 3) as well as the headquarters (columns 3 4, & 5) of multinationals headquartered in that country.. An oc-
        cupation is defined as abstract-task (routine-task, manual task) if its abstractness (routineness, manualness) index
        is above the sample mean. The abstractness, routineness, manualness indices are from Autor & Dorn (2013).
        Exchange rates are detrended from home-country-specific time trends. All foreign establishments located in the
        same currency zone as the headquarters are excluded. Outliers with percentage wage changes larger than 50%
        are excluded. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the home-country-currency-zone level.
        (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)
                                                               72
TABLE A15: IMPACT                 OF     HQ EX.               RATE SHOCKS                ON      FOREIGN ESTABLISHMENT
EMPLOYMENT

                                                                            Panel A: Extensive Margin
        Data Source                                             the Company                            RAIS (Brazil)
        Unit of Observation                                                        estab×occ×year
        Dep. Var.                                                 Occupation Present at Foreign Establishment
        Sample                                      All Occ.         Low-Skill Occ.                       All Occ.
                                                       (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)
        Log HQ Ex. Rate                              -0.054              -0.091               -0.077            -0.071
                                                    (0.081)             (0.058)              (0.042)           (0.047)
        Log HQ Ex. Rate                               -0.016               0.103
         × HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion             (0.099)              (0.070)
        Log HQ Ex. Rate                                                                                        -0.138
         × Low-Skill Occ.                                                                                     (0.143)
        Employer×Estab.×Occ FE                          Y                    Y                  Y                 Y
        Estab.-City×Year FE                             Y                    Y                  Y                 Y
                                                                                                        Low-Skill: 0.917
        Mean Dep. Var.                                0.715                0.740              0.929
                                                                                                        Med/High-Skill: 0.930
        Observations                                 399,932           159,376               21,990           21,990
                                                        Panel B: Intensive Margin
        Data Source                                             RAIS (Brazil)
        Unit of Observation                                 estab×worker×year
        Dep. Var.                                            Worker Employed
                                                       (1)               (2)
        Log HQ Ex. Rate                             0.003             0.002
                                                     (0.001)           (0.001)
        Log HQ Ex. Rate                                                     0.002
         × Low-Skill Occ.                                                  (0.002)
        Employer×Estab.×Worker FE                        Y                    Y
        Estab.-City×Year FE                              Y                    Y
        Worker Controls                                  Y                    Y
                                                                 Low-Skill: 0.432
         Mean Dep. Var.                                0.394
                                                                 Med/High-Skill: 0.389
         Observations                               1,676,924            1,676,924
      Note: This table shows impact that a 100% local currency depreciation (to USD) in an employer's home country has has
      on the existence of occupations (Panel A) and the employment of workers (Panel B) at the firm's foreign establishments.
      In Panel A, the outcome variable is a dummy variable indicating that an occupation is present in an establishment in the
      following year. In columns 1 & 2, an occupation is a job title defined by the Company (298 in total); in columns 3 &
      4, the coding of occupations follows the Brazilian Classification of Occupations (CBO2002). In Panel B, the outcome
      variable in columns 1 & 2 is a dummy variable indicating that a worker is employed in an Brazilian establishment at the
      beginning of the following year. In columns 1-2 of Panel A, inequality aversion is defined according to the Hofstede mea-
      sures of culture. If the variable "HQ-Country Low Ineq. Aversion" equals one, it indicates that the home country is more
      accepting of inequality than the average country in the sample of our main dataset. In Panel B and columns 3-4 of Panel
      A, almost all foreign establishments in Brazil in our sample are from multinationals headquartered in high inequality
      averse home countries. An occupation is low-skill if its skill level is between 1-5 (out of 16 skill levels). Standard errors
      are reported in parentheses and clustered at the home-country-currency-zone level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                  73
TABLE A16: IMPACT OF ESTAB. COUNTRY MIN. WAGE/ EX. RATE SHOCKS ON WAGES

                                              Estab.-Country Min. Wage Hikes Estab.-Country Ex. Rate Shocks
                                             % HQ Wage % Estab. j Wage Log HQ Wage Log Estab. j Wage
                                                  (1)              (2)          (3)                (4)
      % Min Wage at any Estab.                  -0.005
                                                (0.019)
      % Min Wage at Estab. (= j )                                        0.000
                                                                        (0.000)
      Log Ex. Rate at any Estab.                                                                0.001
                                                                                               (0.001)
      Log Ex. Rate at Estab. (= j )                                                                                    0.001
                                                                                                                      (0.002)
      Employer×Occ FE                               Y                      Y                      Y                      Y
      HQ-City×Year FE                               Y                      -                      Y                      -
      Estab. j -City×Year FE                        -                      Y                      -                      Y
      Observations                                 846                  52,377                  5,273                 350,011
      R-squared                                   0.993                  0.092                  0.999                  0.999
   Note: This table shows the impact of a 100% minimum wage increase (columns 1 & 2) and a 100% currency depreciation (columns
   3 & 4) in a firm's establishment country on the wages at the firm's headquarters (columns 1 & 3) and other establishments (columns
   2 & 4). Exchange rates are detrended from home-country-specific time trends. Only low-skill jobs are included in columns 1 & 2.
   An occupation is low-skill if its skill level (defined globally by the Company, 16 skill levels in total) is between 1 and 5. Standard
   errors are reported in parentheses. In columns 1 & 2, standard errors are clustered at the home-country(state) level. In columns 3 &
   4, standard errors are clustered at the home-country-currency-zone level. (*=p<0.10, **=p<0.05 ,***=p<0.01)




                                                                   74
