                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           VOTES FOR WOMEN:
          AN ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE ON WOMEN'S ENFRANCHISEMENT

                                     Carolyn Moehling
                                    Melissa A. Thomasson

                                      Working Paper 26781
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26781


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




Melissa Thomasson gratefully acknowledges the support of the Julian Lange Professorship. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Carolyn Moehling and Melissa A. Thomasson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Votes For Women: An Economic Perspective on Women's Enfranchisement
Carolyn Moehling and Melissa A. Thomasson
NBER Working Paper No. 26781
February 2020
JEL No. N11,N12

                                         ABSTRACT

The ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920 officially granted voting rights to women
across the United States. However, many states extended full or partial suffrage to women before
the federal amendment. In this paper, we discuss the history of women's enfranchisement using
an economic lens. We examine the demand-side, discussing the rise of the women's movement
and its alliances with other social movements, and describe how suffragists put pressure on
legislators. On the supply side, we draw from theoretical models of suffrage extension to explain
why men shared the right to vote with women. Finally, we review empirical studies that attempt
to distinguish between competing explanations. We find that no single theory can explain
women's suffrage in the US, and note that while the Nineteenth Amendment extended the
franchise to women, state-level barriers to voting limited the ability of black women to exercise
that right until the Voting Rights Act of 1965.


Carolyn Moehling
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
cmoehling@econ.rutgers.edu

Melissa A. Thomasson
Miami University/FSB
Department of Economics MSC 1035
800 E. High Street, Rm. #2054
Oxford, OH 45056
and NBER
thomasma@miamioh.edu
On August 18, 1920, the United States granted women suffrage when the Tennessee House of

Representatives voted to ratify the Nineteenth Amendment to the US Constitution--by a margin

of one vote. The ratification of the "Susan B. Anthony" amendment marked the end of a nearly

80-year struggle on the part of women to gain the right to vote. Along the way, there had been

some successes. The territory of Wyoming gave full suffrage to women in 1869, followed by

territory of Utah in 1870. By the time the US Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment, 15

states had granted women full suffrage, with 13 of these in the West. Many more had given

women partial suffrage, allowing them to vote in municipal or school elections and, in some

cases, US presidential elections.

       Economists, sociologists, political scientists, and others have long sought to explain the

factors underlying the timing and the success of the women's suffrage movement. An extension

of voting rights can fundamentally affect the distribution of resources in a society. Theories of

suffrage extension seek to explain why groups in power would choose to share this power with

the disenfranchised. All of these theories predict that men extend the franchise to women when

the benefits of doing so outweigh the costs, but they differ in the benefits and costs they consider.

In the next section, we discuss the history of women's suffrage in the United States, emphasizing

the ways in which the movement for women's suffrage was intertwined with other historical

episodes, movements, and shifting political and social landscapes. For example, we recount the

rise of the women's rights movement and its relationship to the anti-slavery movement in the

first half of the 19th century, and discuss the impact of the decision to grant voting rights to black

men, but not to women, after the US Civil War. We also examine the development of economic

rights for women and explain why these rights evolved differently than voting rights. We

describe the efforts of women's suffrage organizations to build support for the movement and put


                                                  2
pressure on state and federal legislators to enact suffrage legislation. Finally, we discuss the

forces leading to the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment.

        Throughout this narrative, we review the various theories that seek to explain why men in

power chose to enfranchise women. Some of these models are based on competition among

political elites and the desire to promote a particular policy agenda; others emphasize patterns of

coalition-building; while still others stress how suffragists worked to create a greater demand for

change. In the final section, we examine the empirical studies that use variation in the timing of

suffrage across the states to distinguish between these theories. Perhaps unsurprisingly, no single

factor or model can universally explain women's enfranchisement.



An Historical Overview of Women's Suffrage in the United States

Voting Rights in the Early Republic

        The US Constitution as originally ratified in 1787 made no mention of gender, and left the

determination of voting rights to the states. However, the Constitution linked voter eligibility for

the US House of Representatives to the qualifications required to vote for the "most numerous

branch" of a state's legislature. Voting for presidential elections was even less well-defined:

Article II, Section 1 specifies only that each state is allowed "to appoint, in such manner as the

legislature thereof may direct, a number of electors." 1

        Early on, most states had statutes or constitutional provisions restricting suffrage to

males, and states tied the right to vote to property ownership or payment of taxes. Southern states



1
 Under the original provisions of the Constitution, state legislatures selected members of the US Senate. This
changed in 1913 with the ratification of the Seventeenth Amendment that specified that senators be selected by
popular vote.

                                                         3
further restricted suffrage to white males. Only New Jersey allowed women to vote; however,

because married women were not allowed to own property, the state's property ownership

restriction essentially limited voting to wealthy single women and widows. Nonetheless, women

did participate in early elections, and political parties even recruited women voters to swing the

vote in contested districts (Klinghoffer and Elkis 1992, 176).

       In 1807, women in New Jersey lost the vote when the state legislature enacted a statute

that restricted voting to white, male taxpaying citizens. The political dynamic within the

Republican Party, divided between liberals in the North and moderates in the South, drove this

change. Although the liberal Northerners had the upper hand, they knew they needed a united

party to face the Federalists in the next presidential election. Moderate Republicans wanted to

exclude non-taxpayers from voting, and growing nationalism within the party led to the

exclusion of non-citizens. These two groups, however, traditionally voted Republican, so to

balance the scales, single women and blacks, who traditionally voted for the Federalists, lost the

franchise as well (Klinghoffer and Elkis 1992, 188).

       New Jersey was not unique in narrowing voting rights in this period. Over the nineteenth

century, states contracted as well as extended voting rights. These changes were politically

motivated and reflected competition between parties and changing voter sentiments. As new

states entered the Union without property ownership restrictions, some older states dropped such

restrictions, too. However, states tended to establish or retain requirements that voters must be

taxpayers (McConnaughy 2013, 21), and many states enacted restrictions that took voting rights




                                                 4
away from racial minorities, immigrants, and individuals who were illiterate or had criminal

histories. 2

Abolition, Seneca Falls, and the Women's Rights Movement before the Civil War

           The women's rights movement grew out of the broader reform movements of the 1830s.

As women activists fought for the rights of others, they began to recognize and elucidate the

constraints placed on them because of their sex (DuBois 1987, 837). Female abolitionists, in

particular, were criticized for intruding on men's affairs and not following social conventions. As

the antislavery movement debated whether women should be allowed leadership positions,

women activists began to articulate some parallels between their situation and that of enslaved

persons. In an 1837 piece published in the weekly abolitionist newspaper, The Liberator, Sarah

Grimké wrote that women also experienced the "irrepressible desire for mental and spiritual

freedom which glows in the breast of many who hardly dare speak the sentiments..." (as quoted

in Buhle and Buhle 2005, 6). Such statements were met with rebukes from men and women

alike. Catharine Beecher, sister of Harriet Beecher Stowe, sharply criticized "those who are

bewailing themselves over the fancied wrongs and injuries of women in this nation." She argued

that women and men occupied "separate spheres" and women's role was to care for the home

and children (DuBois 1987, 838). By the end of the 1840s, many women abolitionists recognized

they needed to use the political system to secure equal rights for women as well.

           In July 1848, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott called a convention in Seneca

Falls, New York, "to discuss the social, civil, and religious condition and rights of woman."

Almost 300 people attended the convention, many of whom were men (Keyssar 2009, 240).



2
    For a history of voting rights in the United States, see Keyssar (2009).

                                                              5
Stanton drafted the Declaration of Sentiments to summarize the resolutions coming out of the

convention, framing it to mirror the Declaration of Independence. The Declaration of Sentiments

asserts that "all men and women are created equal," and then goes on to enumerate the "repeated

injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman," with the first grievance listed as,

"He has never permitted her to exercise her inalienable right to the elective franchise," followed

by, "He has compelled her to submit to laws, in the formation of which she had no voice." The

list of further complaints includes the restrictions on women's economic activities and the

imbalance of power in marriage (Buhle and Buhle 2005, 95­96).

       Of the rights demanded for women, suffrage was the most radical. In their History of

Woman Suffrage, Anthony and Stanton noted that the resolution encouraging women to fight for

suffrage was the only one not unanimously adopted at Seneca Falls. Some convention-goers

feared that including suffrage would lead to more opposition to their other demands for equality

in marriage and economic pursuits "and make the whole movement ridiculous" (Buhle and

Buhle 2005, 97). Stanton and the prominent abolitionist, Frederick Douglass, won the day by

countering that "the power to choose ruler and make law, was the right by which all others could

be secured" (97).

       While the Seneca Falls Convention is often identified as the start of the women's suffrage

movement, there were actually many meetings organized during the late 1840s and early 1850s to

promote the rights of women. Seneca Falls looms large in popular memory in part because

Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony wrote the first history of the movement (Keyssar

2009, 142), in which they asserted the primacy of the Seneca Falls convention and preserved a




                                                 6
record of its proceedings for future generations. 3 By the early 1850s, suffrage had become the

centerpiece of the women's rights agenda. At the Second National Woman's Rights Convention

held in Worcester, Massachusetts in 1851, the first resolution made explicit why suffrage was the

primary goal: "Resolved, That while we would not undervalue other methods, the Right of

Suffrage for Women is, in our opinion, the corner-stone of this enterprise, since we do not seek to

protect woman, but rather to place her in a position to protect herself" (Buhle and Buhle 2005,

112). The justification for women's suffrage was based on the republican notion of equal rights

for all. Activists argued that women were entitled to the same political rights as men; women,

like men, were subject to the decisions made by the government so they too should have a direct

voice in who governed (DuBois 1987, 841).

The Advancement of Economic Rights for Women

        Despite the focus on gaining the vote, the early legislative successes of the women's

movement were in eliminating coverture and securing the rights of married women to own

property, to control their earnings, and to enter into contracts. Figure 1 presents data on the

timing of laws that granted married women control over property. In most states, these property

laws preceded, or were enacted in conjunction with, laws granting married women control over

their earnings and laws allowing women to engage in contracts or business without their

husbands' consent, often referred to as "sole trader" laws (Khan 1996, 362-4). Maine,



3
  In 1876, Stanton and Anthony decided to write a history of the movement. They planned to spend four months and
produce a pamphlet of a few hundred pages. By 1886, they had produced three volumes, each about 1,000 pages,
under the title History of Woman Suffrage. These volumes contained a mix of written accounts of events and primary
documents like speeches, letters, newspaper articles, and reports. Anthony worked with Ida Husted Harper to edit a
fourth volume published in 1902 that documented the history from 1883 to 1900. Harper edited two more volumes,
both published in 1922, that documented the movement from 1900 to 1920. As Buhle and Buhle (2005, xix) argue, the
History of Woman Suffrage "presents a defensive and highly partisan portrait of their own National Woman
Association (NWSA)." They gave little space to their rival organization, the American Woman Suffrage Association,
and other reform organizations involved in the women's suffrage cause.

                                                        7
Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island granted married women property

rights in the 1840s, and other states in the Northeast and the Midwest followed in the 1850s and

early 1860s. Most of the states in the West and South enacted these laws in the 1870s. The

successful reforms in economic rights occurred in part because the increased focus on political

equality broadened, rather than narrowed, the scope of the women's movement to include these

areas. DuBois (1987, 842-843) notes that the idea that women deserved greater political voice

naturally connected to the idea that women should have greater independence in other spheres,

particularly in marriage.

       Changes to property rights altered the relationship between men and women within

marriage. Therefore, these changes must be discussed in terms of how the allocation of property

rights within marriage affects household decisions. One theoretical approach asserts that women

place a higher value on children's welfare than men, and men recognize that giving women more

economic power will increase investments in children's education (Doepke and Tertilt 2009).

When the returns to human capital are low, as they were in the pre-industrial, mostly agricultural

economy in the early nineteenth century, the benefits to men of being able to control their wives'

property outweigh any benefits from investing more in children's education. As the returns to

human capital increase, the scale tips toward more education for children, and men are more

likely to grant women greater economic power.

       An alternative, yet complementary, approach emphasizes how coverture reduces married

women's incentives to pursue economic opportunities, and hence, reduces household earnings

and wealth (Geddes and Lueck 2002). The costs to households of these disincentives grow as the

economy develops and women have more opportunities in the formal labor market. Eventually,

these costs lead men to grant women property rights. An empirical examination of the timing of

                                                8
the enactment of married women's property laws across states finds that the early movers were

states with larger urban populations, higher female school enrollment, and higher wealth per

capita, results that are consistent with both models (Geddes and Lueck 2002). Women's

economic opportunities and the returns to human capital would have been greater in urban than

rural areas, and the higher rates of female school enrollment indicate increased investments in

expectation of these returns. Further supporting these theories, the enactment of married

women's property laws also led to increases in women's patenting of inventions. Once women

had the legal right to control their property and earnings in marriage, they were more willing to

engage in commercial activities (Khan 1996).

        What is striking about the geographic diffusion displayed in Figure 1 is how different it is

from that of women's suffrage. As we will discuss below, the early movers in granting married

women property rights were slow to grant women the vote; many early movers did not grant

women access to the ballot until the Nineteenth Amendment, demonstrating that the politics of

these two dimensions of women's empowerment were quite different. While changes to property

rights altered the relationship between men and women within marriage, they did not change

political institutions directly.

Reconstruction and the Defeat of Universal Suffrage

        The aftermath of the Civil War generated a broad discussion of political rights. Women's

groups played a key role in organizing popular support for the Thirteenth Amendment, which

abolished slavery. As the discussion turned to Constitutional remedies to ensure the rights of the

former enslaved population, women's rights advocates believed that such remedies should also

extend to them. They argued that women, like the former enslaved, deserved the vote not

because of their special status, but because they were human beings endowed with natural rights.

                                                 9
As one activist put it, race and sex were just "two accidents of the body" unworthy of

constitutional recognition (DuBois 1987, 845-6).

       However, even radicals and abolitionists who had previously advocated for universal

suffrage retreated when it became clear that opposition to women's enfranchisement could lead

to the defeat of suffrage for black men (Keyssar 2009, 144). The Republican Party leadership

sought to separate black men's suffrage from women's enfranchisement, and prioritized gaining

voting rights for black men. Prior to the ratification of the Fourteenth amendment, abolitionists

Wendell Phillips and Theodore Tilton, suggested they focus on enfranchising blacks first and

women later. At this, Susan B. Anthony became angry and declared that "she would sooner cut

off her right hand than ask for the ballot for the black man and not for woman"(as quoted in

Harper 2005, 261). Anthony and other prominent suffragists such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton

vocally denounced the wording of the Fourteenth Amendment. In contrast, Frederick Douglass, a

supporter of women's suffrage since the convention in Seneca Falls, famously stated in a debate

at the American Equal Rights Association Meeting in 1869 that when women "are dragged from

their houses and hung upon lamp-posts... then they will have an urgency to obtain the ballot

equal to our own" (Buhle and Buhle 2005, 258).

       Republicans also anticipated political gains from giving black men the vote: it would give

them a solid base of support in the South, as well as help their political strength in the North.

McConnaughy (2013, pp. 34-37) calls this "strategic enfranchisement" ­ when political actors

seek new supporters from the disenfranchised. As Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner asked

his fellow Republicans (as quoted in Keyssar 2009, 74):

       You need votes in Connecticut, do you not? There are three thousand fellow-citizens in
       that state ready at the call of Congress to take their place at the ballot box. You need them
       also in Pennsylvania, do you not? There are at least fifteen thousand in that great state

                                                 10
       waiting for your summons...be assured they will all vote for those who stand by them in
       the assertion of Equal Rights.
In contrast, giving women access to the ballot was not expected to yield the same returns.

Politicians viewed women as encompassing too much variation for their votes to be viewed as a

bloc; many believed they would vote as their husbands, so the vote would just be doubled

(McConnaughy 2013, 252).

       The ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment dealt another serious blow to the

movement to advance women's rights by specifying that the basis for a state's Congressional

representation was its number of male citizens. This was the first Constitutional provision to

discriminate explicitly based on sex, and it undermined women's claims to suffrage. The

Fifteenth Amendment, ratified in 1870, delivered a second setback when it prohibited limiting a

citizen's right to vote "on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude," but notably

not on account of sex.

Changing Directions for the Women's Suffrage Movement

       The defeat of universal suffrage during Reconstruction led to profound changes in the

women's suffrage movement. Disagreement over strategy split the leadership of the movement

into two separate organizations in 1869: the National Woman's Suffrage Association (NWSA),

led by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, and the American Woman's Suffrage

Association (AWSA) led by Lucy Stone and her husband, Henry Blackwell. Stanton and

Anthony, embittered by the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment, sought a federal

amendment and focused on lobbying Congress. In contrast, Stone and Blackwell had supported

the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment. Although disappointed by the exclusion of women,

Stone noted: "I will be thankful in my soul if any body can get out of the terrible pit" (Stanton et


                                                 11
al. 1881, 2: 384). She and Blackwell believed the most productive strategy would to work state by

state to secure women the vote (Keyssar 2009, 149).

       The arguments used to advance women's suffrage also began to shift. Although

advocates continued to argue for women's enfranchisement in terms of women deserving the

same rights as men, some began to argue women should be given the vote because of the ways in

which they differed from men. These arguments built on the theory of "separate spheres."

Previously, separate spheres had been used to oppose the expansion of rights for women by

claiming that their focus on matters of the home made them unfit for political life. But now,

suffrage supporters used these arguments to claim instead that women's distinct experiences and

perspectives would bring morality and virtue to politics and promote reform (DuBois 1987, 848-

9; McCammon, Hewitt, and Smith 2004).

       A few arguments for women's suffrage also appealed to the deeply-seated racism of

American society; proponents for women's suffrage criticized the Fifteenth Amendment for

giving the vote to the "lowest classes of manhood" over "the higher classes of women" (DuBois

1987, 850). Stanton, Anthony, and other leaders of the women's movement are on record making

explicitly racist arguments for women's suffrage. Some supporters of women's suffrage in the

South argued that giving women the vote would counter the influence of black male voters

(Buhle and Buhle 2005, xxv). Others drew on racist arguments to oppose women's suffrage,

arguing that giving black women the vote would pose a threat to white supremacy

(McConnaughy 2013, 171­72).

       Led by Stanton and Cady, the National Woman's Suffrage Association tried to leverage

the reform sentiment that generated the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to secure a federal

amendment granting women the vote. In 1869, Radical Republican George Julian of Indiana

                                                12
proposed a Constitutional amendment linking the right to vote to citizenship. This provision

would have taken away the power of states to define voting rights, and hence it met with strong

opposition. Susan B. Anthony drafted an amendment with a narrower scope: prohibiting

discrimination in voting rights "on account of sex." In 1878, Senator Aaron A. Sargent of

California introduced this amendment to Congress, and in 1882, committees from both houses

recommended passage of the amendment. In 1887, the proposal was brought forward for a floor

vote in the Senate, but the outcome devastated women's suffrage supporters: 16 yeas, 34 nays,

and 26 abstentions. In every subsequent session of Congress, supporters reintroduced the

amendment, but it did not again come to a floor vote until 1914 (Keyssar 2009, 150).

Partial Suffrage

       The women's suffrage movement did make some gains at the state-level in the 1800s;

many states granted voting rights to women in some, but not all elections. For instance, as early

as 1838, Kentucky legislators granted widows and single women with property the right to vote

in elections involving school taxes. As shown in Figure 2, many states granted women partial

suffrage by giving them the right to vote in school elections. The real push for school suffrage

came in the decades after the Civil War. Legislators justified this type of partial extension of

suffrage using a version of the separate spheres argument: Women, as mothers, should be able to

vote in elections that affected the welfare of children (Keyssar 2009, 150).

       The extension of school suffrage to women, however, was also a legislative tactic to

promote particular policy agendas for public education systems. In most states, changes in school

suffrage were enacted as part of legislation defining the public provision of education (Nicholas

2018, 461-8). This connection between bringing in new voters and enacting new policy fits well

with economic models that explain the expansion of voting rights as the outcome of political

                                                 13
competition between the groups in power (Llavador and Oxoby 2005; Lizzeri and Persico 2004).

These models suggest that if women have different policy preferences than men ­ or at least a

different distribution of policy preferences than men ­ then political actors may extend the vote

to women in order to promote their policy agenda. State political leaders believed that allowing

women to vote in school elections would help to advance their goals for public education.

       In addition to limiting women's political influence to particular policy issues, school

suffrage and other forms of partial suffrage, such as giving women rights to vote in municipal

elections, preceded the full enfranchisement of women in part because of the greater legislative

costs associated with broader voting rights. Partial suffrage was procedurally easier to enact than

changes to voting laws that affected offices named in state constitutions (Keyssar 2009, 150).

Only in Delaware could a simple legislative vote change full voting rights. All other states

required at least a referendum, and others even more action. For example, in Illinois, full voting

rights could only be changed with a positive legislative vote, followed by a favorable vote at a

constitutional convention (which occurred only every 20 years), and a subsequent referendum.

       However, US territories could enact suffrage with only a single legislative vote. This

relative procedural ease may explain why a number of territories fully enfranchised women

before states: when pro-suffrage groups managed to bring bills to the floor, they had a higher

chance of being enacted (McCammon and Campbell 2001, 65). The territory of Wyoming gave

women full suffrage in 1869, followed by the territory of Utah in 1870. Despite these early

victories, the push for full suffrage stalled. In the 1880s, only the territories of Washington and

Montana extended women full suffrage. But then, Utah repealed suffrage under the Edmunds-




                                                  14
Tucker Act in 1887, and did not restore it until 1895. Washington enacted and revoked suffrage

several times from 1887 to 1910. 4

        These limited and sometimes temporary victories mask the enormous efforts made by

pro-suffrage organizations during this period. Pro-suffrage groups launched numerous campaigns

and a number of states held referenda in the 1870s and 1880s. Although most of these initiatives

met with defeat, many men voted for them. And, as Keyssar (2009, 151) notes, in states where the

question of women's suffrage did not come to a referendum, "suffrage organizations were active,

state legislators were obligated to vote on suffrage bills year after year, and support...often cut

across party lines."

Increased Efforts for State-level Change, 1890-1912

        In 1890, frustrated by the lack of progress on broader suffrage for women, the National

Woman's Suffrage Association and the American Woman's Suffrage Association merged to form

the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA). The new organization stepped

up the pressure on the states to enact women's suffrage. Between 1890 and 1920, the NAWSA

engaged in hundreds of campaigns to promote women's suffrage (McDonagh and Price 1985,

416).

        Women's suffrage organizations pursued the usual channels to effect policy change; they

set up political lobbies and campaigned for political candidates who supported women's

suffrage. These efforts forced state legislatures to take notice; in the states in which the

organizations engaged in these political activities, more suffrage bills were introduced in


4
  In 1887, the Washington Territorial Supreme Court revoked suffrage for women. The legislature then passed a new
law granting women suffrage in 1888, which became nullified when the court ruled on a second suffrage suit later
that same year. After achieving statehood in 1889, supporters worked to amend the Washington Constitution to give
women the right to vote in 1898, and 1906 before finally succeeding in 1910.

                                                       15
legislative sessions and more of these bills were put to roll call votes, even if they were never

passed into law (King, Cornwall, and Dahlin 2005).

       Women's suffrage organizations also worked to broaden support for their cause by

forming coalitions with other social movements. These coalitions generated more support for

women's suffrage not only among women but also among men, who could use their votes to

make policymakers pay attention. Unlike the post-Civil War extension of suffrage to black males

that promised to add new voters to the Republican Party, the extension of the vote to women did

not offer clear benefits to either of the major political parties. By forming alliances with other

social movements, women's suffrage organizations were able to create greater electoral pressure

for enfranchising women. This strategy was particularly effective when political contests were

close and when a third party threatened to upset the balance of power between the two major

parties (McConnaughy 2013, 34-7). Of course, these alliances could also generate more

opposition as well.

       The women's suffrage movement found powerful allies in labor and farm organizations.

In 1870, just under 13 million women, or 14.8 percent of females aged 10 or older, were in the

labor force. By 1900, these numbers had increased to 29 million women, or 18.3 percent of

females aged 10 or older (Hooks 1947, 34). As their workforce participation increased, women

became increasingly involved in the labor movement. Some independent unions admitted women

before 1870, and the Knights of Labor allowed women to be members beginning in 1881. By the

1890s, the larger labor unions began to endorse women's suffrage (McConnaughy 2013, 140). The

Women's Trade Union League was founded in 1903, and the first significant strike of women

workers occurred in 1909-1910 among the shirtwaist makers in New York and Philadelphia

(Flexner and Fitzpatrick 1996, 234).

                                                 16
       The alliance of women's suffrage organizations with labor and farming interests played

particularly important roles in some state battles. For instance, in Illinois, the Farmers' Alliance

paved the way for women's access to school ballots in 1891 ­ the first successful suffrage reform

in the state. As described by McConnaughy (2013, 146-148), the Alliance won three seats in the

Illinois General Assembly, which gave them the legislative leverage to swing votes for or against

the two major parties. This political power was key to winning women the right to vote in school

elections.

       The women's suffrage movement also found allies in the prohibition movement. The

connection between women's suffrage and temperance was long-standing and preceded the

movement's link to prohibition. A lack of economic rights placed married women at the mercy of

their husbands. If husbands were heavy drinkers, their wives and children could be reduced to

destitution with no redress. Many suffrage leaders were temperance workers before they became

suffragists, including Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and Lucy Stone.

The leadership between the two movements often overlapped, although not all suffragists and

supporters were in favor of the temperance and prohibition movements (Flexner and Fitzpatrick

1996, 174; McDonagh and Price 1985, 432).

       Many of the women in the prohibition movement were conservative and embraced

women's traditional roles in the household and society. However, over time, these women came

to realize that they could not effect change without the vote. In this way, they also were drawn to

the separate spheres argument for women's suffrage. This argument, rather than challenging

women's traditional roles, made those roles the justification for giving women the vote

(McCammon and Campbell 2002, 232)




                                                 17
       An important conduit for the alliances of the two movements was the Woman's Christian

Temperance Union. The WCTU spearheaded the fight for prohibition and had extensive reach;

by the end of the nineteenth century, it had branch organizations in every state and was the

largest women's organization in the United States (McCammon and Campbell 2002, 232).

Between 1874 and 1919, the WCTU formed coalitions with suffrage organizations in all but four

states. In many instances, these coalitions formed shortly after the defeat of a prohibition

measure, and in almost all cases, the collaboration took the form of the WCTU mobilizing its

resources to promote women's suffrage rather than the women's suffrage organization working

to promote prohibition. The women of the WCTU recognized that to achieve their objectives,

they needed to have the vote (McCammon and Campbell 2002).

       The link to the prohibition movement brought greater attention and support to the

women's suffrage movement. But, this link proved to be a liability at times because it mobilized

the opposition of well-funded liquor interests. A case in point is the defeat of a referendum on

women's suffrage in California in 1896. Both the Populist and Republican parties supported the

referendum, but ten days before the vote, representatives from the Liquor Dealer's League met in

San Francisco and "resolved `to take such steps as were necessary to protect their interests'"

(Flexner and Fitzpatrick 1996, 216). The League sent letters to barkeepers, hotel owners, grocery

proprietors and others, urging them to vote against the amendment. When the vote was tallied,

women's suffrage was carried in all counties except San Francisco and Alameda, where the

opposition was strong enough to defeat the amendment.

       On balance, it is not clear whether the alliance with prohibition interests was a net benefit

or liability for the suffrage movement. The alliance clearly motivated "wet" interests to mobilize

their resources to fight women's suffrage. However, it also expanded the base of support for

                                                 18
women's suffrage, and expanding the base of support was key to propelling the movement

forward.

       After a flurry of successes in the early 1890s, the legislative progress of the suffrage

movement had stalled, leading to a period often referred to as the "the doldrums." Suffrage

leaders adopted new strategies to strengthen the movement's organizational structure and extend

its outreach. They followed the model of successful political machines, setting up operations in

towns across the country and at the ward-level in major cities, and going door-to-door to

distribute pamphlets and broadcast their message (Keyssar 2009, 162). Their most attention

grabbing tactics involved taking the movement's message to the streets ­ literally. One tactic was

"street speaking" in which suffrage advocates stood on soapboxes on street corners or on the

backs of automobiles and argued their case to whoever was walking by. Suffrage parades proved

even more effective, though, for getting the suffrage message to the broader public. Suffragists,

all dressed in white, marched in formation carrying banners and signs calling for "votes for

women!" In 1908, between 200 and 300 women marched in the first suffrage parade in Oakland,

California. The women marched down the streets to the convention of the California's

Republican Party to demand support for women's suffrage. Other suffrage organizations built

from this model, staging even larger suffrage parades. The suffrage parade in New York City in

1915 involved an estimated 20,000 to 25,000 women, including 74 women on horseback; 57

marching bands; and 145 decorated automobiles (McCammon 2003, 791). These parades brought

together suffrage supporters from across the political and economic spectrum, and put this

diversity on display to the public. The scale and spectacle of the parades led to coverage by the

press, greatly expanding public awareness of the movement.




                                                 19
       The doldrums of the suffrage movement ended in 1910 when Washington State granted

women full suffrage. California followed in 1911, and Arizona, Kansas, and Oregon followed in

1912. The victory in California reflected in part the improved organizational structure of the

movement. Suffrage supporters focused on organizing in small towns and rural areas, where they

knew they had stronger support. They also hired detectives and guards to prevent liquor interests

from sabotaging ballot boxes. While they were strongly defeated in urban areas, the referendum

won by 3,587 votes, "an average majority of one vote in every voting precinct in the state"

(Flexner and Fitzpatrick 1996, 249).

The Move to a Federal Amendment

       With the exception of New Mexico, all of the states west of the Rocky Mountains

extended full voting rights to women by 1914. In contrast, east of the Rockies, only Kansas

enacted full women's suffrage before 1914. Yet, the national political landscape began to change

in 1912, when divisions in the Republican Party led to the birth of the Progressive "Bull Moose"

Party, led by the former president, Theodore Roosevelt. Endorsing women's suffrage fit well

with the reform platform of the Progressive Party, and also helped the party appeal to labor

interests. Roosevelt even presented the party's case for women's suffrage in terms of the need of

workingwomen to have the ballot just like workingmen. By supporting women's suffrage, the

Progressive Party was also able to tap into the organizational structure of the suffrage movement

as it hurriedly staged its campaign for the November 1912 presidential election (McConnaughy

2013, 238-9).

       Roosevelt won 27 percent of the vote in that election, forcing the two major parties to

take note and creating an opening for a renewed drive for a federal women's suffrage

amendment. Progressive Party candidates also won seats in state legislatures, giving the

                                                20
women's suffrage movement renewed leverage for state-level legislative change. In Illinois, for

example, the Progressives won 26 seats in the state House and two in the state Senate. The

defection from the Republican Party had also led to the Democratic candidate winning the

gubernatorial race in Illinois (McConnaughy 2013, 157). The challenges of pursuing an

amendment to the state constitution led the Progressives to develop an ingenious plan: granting

women presidential suffrage. The US Constitution only specified that states were "to appoint, in

such manner as the legislature thereof may direct" electors for presidential elections. This meant

that unlike voting for the US Congress, there were no links between who could vote in

presidential elections and state-level elections. Presidential suffrage, therefore, could be granted

by an act of the state legislature alone (McDonagh and Price 1985, 417). In 1913, Illinois became

the first state to grant women presidential suffrage. Sixteen states followed before 1920,

including Texas and Tennessee (Keyssar 2009, 367).

       The federal amendment came to a floor vote in the Senate in 1914 and the House of

Representatives in 1915. Although the tallies of both votes went against the amendment, support

did not split along party lines. In both the Senate and the House, legislators from states where

women had the vote were much more likely to support the amendment than legislators from

other states (Jones 1991; McConnaughy 2013, 243). In the House, support was also positively

correlated with the share of the Progressive Party in the 1912 presidential election and the ratio of

men to women in a legislator's state, and negatively correlated with the size of the liquor

industry (Jones 1991, 430).

       World War I created another shift in the political landscape. Under the leadership of

Carrie Chapman Catt, the National American Woman Suffrage Association suspended its

lobbying for women's suffrage in order to support the war effort. However, a splinter group, the

                                                 21
National Woman's Party, led by Alice Paul, intensified its campaign for a federal amendment by

picketing the White House. Paul and many of her fellow Woman's Party activists were arrested

and imprisoned. They responded by conducting hunger strikes and were force-fed, much to the

shock of the American public. The differing approaches during the war of the two major wings of

the women's suffrage movement served to keep women's suffrage in the public attention, while

also reinforcing the ways women contributed to the nation's defense (Keyssar 2009, 172-3).

        The roles women played during World War I served to shift sentiment for women's

suffrage in their favor. As the House of Representatives debated the resolution that would

ultimately become the Nineteenth Amendment, Congressman John MacCrate (R, NY) stated:

        ...whether you consider the franchise a right or a privilege, the women of America
        deserve the right, or they have earned the privilege. Everywhere you went during the past
        two years you saw women in uniform... in the Salvation Army, the Red Cross, the
        Knights of Columbus, the Young Men's Christian Association, Young Men's Hebrew
        Association, and other allied war activities...I submit to your judgement that the women
        of America have been as potential soldiers during the past war as have been the men of
        America (58 Cong. Rec. 84, May 21, 1919).



        The fact that many other countries had already granted suffrage to women may have also

played a role in convincing lawmakers to vote for the Nineteenth Amendment. On the eve of the

US vote in 1918 and 1919, several European countries, including Austria, Germany, Belgium, the

Netherlands, and Sweden enfranchised women, while many others had granted women suffrage

much earlier (Bertocchi 2011). 5 Just prior to the vote in which the Nineteenth Amendment passed




5
 New Zealand granted full suffrage to women in 1893, followed by Australia, Finland, Norway, Denmark and
Canada. England granted suffrage to select women over the age of 30 in 1918, but did not give all women suffrage
until 1930 (Bertocchi 2011).

                                                        22
the House of Representatives on May 21, 1919, Congressman John Raker (D, CA) asked his

colleagues:

       ...should we be the last of the civilized countries of the world to extend this right ­ we
       who boast that we stand for giving men the opportunity to express their voice in our
       Government, that we might have a Government of the people, not by heredity, but that
       the people might express their will and desire as to what their Government should be? Is
       it right that we should be the last? (58 Cong. Rec. 82, May 21, 1919).
       Once again, legislators from states with some full or presidential of women's suffrage

were more likely to support the amendment in the House, which passed the amendment on May

21, 1919. Given the success of the state-level legislative initiatives between 1915 and 1919, this

amounted to many more votes in 1919 than it had in 1915. Support was also still higher from

states with a greater ratio of men to women. But, with the ratification of the Eighteenth

Amendment prohibiting the sale and consumption of alcohol, the size of the liquor industry no

longer had an effect on voting patterns. In the Senate, which passed the measure on June 4, 1919,

the key predictors of votes were the share of Progressive Party voters in 1912 and the ratio of men

to women in the state (Jones 1991, 430-433).

       To take effect, 36 states had to ratify the Nineteenth Amendment. The last state to ratify

the amendment was Tennessee. Despite Tennessee having just enacted a presidential suffrage law

in 1919, the fight for ratification was fierce. Weiss (2018) provides a very engaging account of the

battle for ratification in Tennessee. Some state legislators who had voted in favor of presidential

suffrage in 1919 opposed the amendment, claiming it violated states' rights. In the end, the

Tennessee legislature voted to ratify the amendment by a single vote on August 18, 1920.




Empirical Analyses of the Diffusion of Women's Suffrage



                                                  23
       As the narrative above highlights, many factors were at play in the struggle to extend the

vote to women. Some of these factors, like competition between political parties and the

opposition of liquor interests, could be classified as "supply side" in that they influenced the

willingness of male legislators and male voters to grant women suffrage. On the "demand side"

were the actions taken by women's suffrage organizations to generate support for their cause. A

number of studies have leveraged the geographic variation in the timing of women's suffrage to

identify empirically the relative importance of these different factors. Figure 3 presents a map

showing the dates that women were granted full or presidential suffrage prior to the ratification

of the Nineteenth Amendment. The Western states were the leaders in giving women the vote.

All of the states that had granted full suffrage to women before World War I were east of the

Mississippi River. This geographic pattern is very different than that displayed in the map in

Figure 1 that shows the timing of laws granting married women property rights. Many of the

urban, industrialized states of the Northeast that had moved early to extend women's economic

rights did not extend voting rights to women prior to the Nineteenth Amendment.

       Scholars have long debated why the Western states moved first to give women full

suffrage. In 1967, the historian Alan Grimes argued that Western politicians, believing women

could counter "frontier rowdiness," granted them access to the ballot in order to promote a

respect for law and order and impose the "Puritan ethic" as the norm for community behavior

(Grimes 1967, 76­77). Grimes' hypothesis anticipated the economic models described above that

attribute the expansion of suffrage to the desire of one group in the political elite to promote a

particular policy agenda (Llavador and Oxoby 2005; Lizzeri and Persico 2004).

       McCammon and Campbell (2001) propose that it was the strength and strategies of

women's suffrage organizations that led to the leadership of the West in women's suffrage. In an

                                                 24
event-history analysis of the timing of full suffrage, they find no relationship between suffrage

and the number of saloon-keepers per capita, which they interpret as evidence against Grimes'

Puritan ethic hypothesis. However, the number of saloon-keepers per capita could also be

interpreted as a measure of the opposition to prohibition, which as discussed above, was strongly

linked to women's suffrage. McCammon and Campbell do find that suffrage passed earlier in

states where suffrage organizations presented what they call "expediency" arguments for

women's suffrage. These arguments, built on the philosophy of separate spheres, claimed that

women would bring "special `womanly' skills to politics to address public issues related to

morality" (p.69). This finding does not refute the Puritan ethic hypothesis; rather, it suggests that

women's suffrage organizations were key in the promoting this justification for women's

suffrage in the Western frontier states.

       Braun and Kvasnicka (2013) offer a complementary political explanation for the

leadership of the West: the relative scarcity of females in the West simply made it less costly for

Western politicians to extend the franchise to women. Giving women the vote posed little risk to

political stability since men greatly outnumbered women. Further, politicians may have viewed

granting women suffrage as a means to attract more women to their states. Braun and Kvasnicka

do find, consistent with their hypothesis, that the strongest predictor of the timing of full or

presidential suffrage for women is the male-to-female ratio. They also find that states with higher

percentages of females in the labor force enacted suffrage earlier, and states with higher fractions

of non-whites enfranchised women later. Unlike McCammon and Campbell, Braun and

Kvasnicka do not include controls for the strength and strategies of suffrage organizations across

states, nor do they control for state-level prohibition laws. Braun and Kvasnicka discount the




                                                  25
possible role for women's suffrage organizations by arguing that West was "far less than [other

regions] organized in terms of coordinated activities for securing the ballot" (408).

        McCammon et al. (2001) expand on McCammon and Campbell (2001) to look at

presidential as well as full suffrage, and to consider a more extensive set of political and societal

variables. McCammon et al. focus on how the strength and strategies of women's suffrage

organizations varied across states, but they also point out that the success of these organizations'

efforts depended on the willingness of political decision-makers to support the change in voting

rights. This willingness was influenced by the potential political gains from extending suffrage to

women, as well as attitudes about women in society. They find that states where women's

suffrage organizations used separate spheres arguments, asserting that women would bring

greater morality and reform to the political process, enacted suffrage earlier. States with a greater

share of women in professions and attending college, both of which may indicate more

progressive attitudes towards women, also enfranchised women sooner. Finally, states that had

nullified liquor interest opposition by passing early prohibition laws were also more likely to

enact suffrage earlier.

        McConnaughy (2013) focuses on the role of political competition in the enactment of

women's suffrage by the states. She finds that the extension of women's suffrage was more

likely when there was a threat of third party competition, as measured by the share of the vote

received by third party gubernatorial candidates and the share of third party legislators in the

state house (pp. 223-4).

        Like Braun and Kvasnicka, McConnaughy finds that states with higher fractions of

nonwhites were less likely to extend suffrage to women, perhaps because legislators in states

with large percentages of nonwhites feared that enfranchising black women would erode white

                                                 26
power. This race-based fear was evident during political debate about the Nineteenth

Amendment. On June 4, 1919, the day the Senate voted to extend the right of suffrage to women,

Senator Ellison D. Smith (D, SC) stated:

       Those of us from the South, where the preponderance of the Negro vote jeopardized our
       civilization, have maintained that the fifteenth amendment was a crime against our
       civilization. Now, when a southern man votes for the Susan B. Anthony amendment he
       votes to enfranchise the other half of that race, and ratifies, not in a moment of heat and
       passion, what we have claimed was a crime, but in a moment of profound calmness and
       sectional amity he votes to ratify the fifteenth amendment and give the lie to every
       protestation that we have heretofore have made that the enfranchisement of the Negro
       men, unlimited, was a crime against white civilization (58 Cong. Rec. 618, June 4, 1919).



       While the empirical examinations of the timing of women's suffrage across the states do

not produce a consensus explanation, none of them fully tests the competing hypotheses against

each other. The general picture that emerges from these studies is that the extension of women's

suffrage was the outcome of a political process. Male legislators and voters weighed the costs

versus benefits of women's suffrage, and women's suffrage organizations took actions to

increase the political benefits of supporting suffrage.

Conclusion

       Economic theories of suffrage extension suggest that groups in power extend voting

rights to promote their policy agendas or to capture votes from political rivals. Each of these

factors played a role in the women's suffrage movement in the United States, although not

necessarily at the same time and in the same way. Women's suffrage organizations sought to

influence these political processes. Although some economists have discounted their

contributions, these organizations were key to the success of the movement. They formed

coalitions with other social movements and built a base a support that created electoral pressure


                                                 27
to extend the vote to women. The empirical evidence also suggests that women were more likely

to get the vote when men and other groups (such as liquor interests) had less to lose, or when

elections were close.

       How did women having the vote change the political process? A number of scholars have

taken advantage of the geographic variation in the timing of women's suffrage to look at the

impact on public policy. Lott, Jr. and Kenny (1999) and Miller (2008) both find a positive

relationship between suffrage extension and public goods expenditures. Miller (2008) further

shows that women gaining the vote led to reductions in child mortality, indicating that the

increased public goods expenditures were being allocated in ways that improved child health.

Moehling and Thomasson (2012) find that the timing of women's suffrage had a statistically

significant impact on states' decisions to participate in the Sheppard-Towner program, which

provided federal funds for public health education for mothers in the 1920s. States that were late-

enactors of women's suffrage engaged more fully in this program perhaps because policymakers

in these states sought to court the new women voters. Carruthers and Wanamaker (2015) find that

suffrage led to an increase in public school expenditures.

       Assessments of the longer-term impact of the Nineteenth Amendment suggest that,

despite generating a tremendous expansion in the electorate, the 1920 election did not lead to a

seismic change in the political structure. Rather than revolution, the outcome of the election was

a return to "normalcy" (Keyssar 2009, 175). Some politicians initially feared that women would

vote as a bloc, but by the mid-1920s, it was clear that women's political interests were as varied

as those of men. Moehling and Thomasson (2012) argue that the fate of the Sheppard-Towner

program reflected this evolution of politicians' views on women's voting power. Politicians

voted for the program in 1921 wanting to demonstrate their support for a "woman's issue." But

                                                28
by 1926, when the program came up for renewal, politicians no longer were worried about losing

women's votes and the program was repealed rather than renewed. The long-term legacy of the

Nineteenth Amendment is discussed in the companion paper in this symposium by Cascio and

Shenhav.

       The Nineteenth Amendment also failed to provide universal suffrage for black women.

The Southern states blocked black women from voting by using Jim Crow laws, just as they had

long done to black men. Women's suffrage organizations refused to take up this cause, a stance

consistent with the ways black women had been marginalized in the women's suffrage

movement. As black women sought to join national women's organizations, they had been

continually rebuffed. Suffrage supporters at a women's rights convention in Ohio in 1851 only

very reluctantly let abolitionist Sojourner Truth take the floor to deliver her now-famous "Ain't I

a Woman" speech, worrying that she would harm their cause (Buhle and Buhle 2005, 104-105).

Even in the North, blacks were second-class citizens who were routinely excluded by whites. In

an 1895 speech in which she exhorted black women to take leadership, suffragist Josephine St.

Pierre Ruffin (1895) called on white women to join with them, stating, "[W]e are not drawing the

color line; we are women, American women, as intensely interested in all that pertains to us as

such as all other American women; we are not alienating or withdrawing, we are only coming to

the front, willing to join any others in the same work and cordially inviting and welcoming any

others to join us" (Ruffin 1895).

       While whites mostly ignored Ruffin's appeal, new clubs for black women formed. Mary

Church Terrell served as the first president of the National Association of Colored Women in

1896 (Flexner and Fitzpatrick 1996, 183). She was one of the few blacks allowed to speak at the

segregated National American Women's Suffrage Association Convention in 1903, where she

                                                29
urged white women to "stand up not only for the oppressed sex, but also for the oppressed race"

(Stanton et al. 1881, 5; 106). In the first national suffrage parade held by the National American

Woman Suffrage Association in Washington, D.C. in 1913, Terrell, along with Ida B. Wells, was

forced to march with other blacks in the back, so as not to upset Southern delegates, which Wells

famously refused to do (Terborg-Penn 1998, 122­23).

        After the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, prominent women's suffrage

organizations continued to refuse to fight for the rights of black women to vote when those rights

were curtailed by Jim Crow laws like poll taxes and literacy tests. In 1921, Alice Paul refused to

let Mary C. Talbert, the president of the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs, speak

on black voting rights at the National Woman's Party convention. Paul defended her decision by

asserting that this was about race, not women's rights (Cott 1984, 50­54). It would not be until

1965, with the passage of the Voting Rights Act, that all women could be said to have the right to

vote.




                                                 30
REFERENCES
Bertocchi, Graziella. 2011. "The Enfranchisement of Women and the Welfare State." European
Economic Review 55: 535­53.
Braun, Sebastian, and Michael Kvasnicka. 2013. "Men, Women, and the Ballot: Gender
Imbalances and Suffrage Extensions in the United States." Explorations in Economic History 50:
405­26.
Buhle, Paul, and Mari Jo Buhle. 2005. The Concise History of Woman Suffrage: Selections from
the History of Woman Suffrage; Edited by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, Marilda
Joslyn Gage, and the National American Woman Suffrage Association. xxxiii, 468 p. Urbana:
Chicago: University of Illinois Press. //catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/004991412.
Carruthers, Celeste K., and Marianne H. Wanamaker. 2015. "Municipal Housekeeping: The
Impact of Women's Suffrage on the Provision of Public Education." Journal of Human
Resources 50 (4): 837­72.
Cott, Nancy F. 1984. "Feminist Politics in the 1920s: The National Woman's Party." The Journal
of American History 71 (1): 43­68.
Doepke, Matthias, and Michèle Tertilt. 2009. "Women's Liberation: What's in It for Men?"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1541­91.
DuBois, Ellen Carol. 1987. "Outgrowing the Compact of the Fathers: Equal Rights, Woman
Suffrage, and the United States Constitution, 1820-1878." Journal of American History 74 (3):
836­62.
Flexner, Eleanor, and Ellen Fitzpatrick. 1996. Century of Struggle: The Woman's Rights
Movement in the United States. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press.
Geddes, Rick, and Dean Lueck. 2002. "The Gains From Self-Ownership and the Expansion of
Women's Rights." American Economic Review 92 (4): 1079­92.
Grimes, Alan P. 1967. The Puritan Ethic and Woman Suffrage. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Harper, Ida Husted. 2005. The Life and Work of Susan B. Anthony (Volume 1 of 2). Including
Public Addresses, Her Own Letters and Many From Her Contemporaries During Fifty Years.
Project Gutenberg E-book #15220. https://www.gutenberg.org/files/15220/15220-h/15220-h.htm.
Hooks, Janet M. 1947. Women's Occupations through Seven Decades. U.S. Department of Labor
Women's Bureau Bulletin 218. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office.
Jones, Ethel B. 1991. "The Economics of Woman Suffrage." The Journal of Legal Studies 20 (2):
423­37.
Keyssar, Alexander. 2009. The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United
States. New York: Basic Books.
                                               31
Khan, B. Zorina. 1996. "Married Women's Property Laws and Female Commercial Activity:
Evidence from United States Patent Records, 170-1895." Journal of Economic History 56 (2):
356­88.
King, Brayden G., Marie Cornwall, and Eric C. Dahlin. 2005. "Winning Woman Suffrage One
Step at a Time: Social Movements and the Logic of TheLegislative Process." Social Forces 83
(3): 1211­34.
Klinghoffer, Judith Apter, and Lois Elkis. 1992. "`The Petticoat Electors': Women's Suffrage in
New Jersey, 1776-1807." Journal of the Early Republic 12 (2): 159­93.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico. 2004. "Why Did Elites Extend the Suffrage? Democracy
and the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain's "Age of Reform." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119 (2): 707­65.
Llavador, Humberto, and Robert J. Oxoby. 2005. "Partisan Competition, Growth, and the
Franchise." Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 1155­89.
Lott, Jr., John R., and Lawrence W. Kenny. 1999. "Did Women's Suffrage Change the Size and
Scope of Government?" Journal of Political Economy 107: 1163­98.
McCammon, Holly J. 2003. "`Out of the Parlors and into the Streets': The Changing Tactical
Repertoire of the U.S. Women's Suffrage Movements." Social Forces 81 (3): 787­818.
McCammon, Holly J., and Karen E. Campbell. 2001. "Winning the Vote in the West: The
Political Successes of the Women's Suffrag." Gender and Society 15 (1): 55­82.
------. 2002. "Allies on the Road to Victory: Coalition Formation Between the Suffragists and
the Woman's Christian Temperance Union." Mobilization: An International Quarterly 7 (3): 231­
51.
McCammon, Holly J., Karen E. Campell, Ellen M. Granberg, and Christine Mowery. 2001. "How
Movements Win: Gendered Opportunity Structures and U.S. Women's Suffrage Movements,
1866 to 1919." American Sociological Review 66 (1): 49­70.
McCammon, Holly J., Lyndi Hewitt, and Sandy Smith. 2004. "`No Weapon Save Argument':
Strategic Frame Amplification in the U.S. Woman Suffrage Movements." The Sociological
Quarterly 45 (3): 529­56.
McConnaughy, Corrine. 2013. The Woman Suffrage Movement in America: A Reassessment. New
York, New York: Cambridge University Press.
McDonagh, Eileen L., and H. Douglas Price. 1985. "Woman Suffrage in the Progressive Era:
Patterns of Opposition and Support in Referenda Voting, 1910-1918." American Political Science
Review 79 (2): 415­35.
Miller, Grant. 2008. "Women's Suffrage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival in
American History." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123: 1287­1327.


                                               32
Moehling, Carolyn M., and Melissa A. Thomasson. 2012. "The Political Economy of Saving
Mothers and Babies: The Politics of State Participation in the Sheppard-Towner Program."
Journal of Economic History 72 (1): 75­101.
Nicholas, Kathryn A. 2018. "Reexamining Women's Nineteenth-Century Political Agency:
School Suffrage and Office-Holding." Journal of Policy History 30 (3): 452­89.
Ruffin, Josephine St. Pierre. 1895. "Address to the First National Conference of Colored
Women." presented at the First National Conference of Colored Women, Boston, July 29.
https://www.blackpast.org/african-american-history/1895-josephine-st-pierre-ruffin-address-first-
national-conference-colored-women/.
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, Ida Husted Harper, Matilda Joslyn Gage, and Susan B. Anthony. 1881.
History of Woman Suffrage. 6 vols. Rochester, NY: Susan B. Anthony.
Terborg-Penn, Rosalyn. 1998. African American Women in the Struggle for the Vote, 1850-1920.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/heb.01762.
Weiss, Elaine. 2018. The Woman's Hour: The Great Fight to Win the Vote. New York: Viking.




                                               33
           Figure 1: Married Women's Property Laws Enacted Prior to 1900




                          Source: Khan (1996), Table 1, pp. 363-4.
Notes: The data displayed refer to the enactment of laws granting married women control over
 property. Khan (1996) also provides the dates of laws giving married women control of their
    earnings and the right to engage in contracts and business without husband's consent.




                                            34
Figure 2: Women's School Suffrage Prior to Nineteenth Amendment




            Source: Nicholas (2018), Table 1, pp. 463-7.




                                35
Figure 3: Women's Full and Presidential Suffrage Prior to the Nineteenth Amendment




 Sources: Keyssar (2009), Table A.20, p. 368; McDonagh and Price (1985), Table 1, p. 417.




                                           36
