                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               GLOBAL MACRO-FINANCIAL CYCLES AND SPILLOVERS

                                         Jongrim Ha
                                       M. Ayhan Kose
                                      Christopher Otrok
                                       Eswar S. Prasad

                                     Working Paper 26798
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26798


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




We thank Linda Goldberg, Andrej Sokol, and Mark Watson for their detailed suggestions. We
appreciate helpful feedback from Stijn Claessens, Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Thomas Drechsel,
Ippei Fujiwara, Thomas Helbling, Raju Huidrom, Ergys Islamaj, Jinil Kim, Soyoung Kim,
Naotaka Sugawara, Linda Tesar, and Kei-Mu Yi, and participants at the IMF 2017 Annual
Research Conference, 2018 AEA Meetings, 2018 IMFC3 at Keio University, 2018 CEBRA
Annual Meetings, and the Fall 2019 Midwest Macroeconomic Meetings. Meongsu Lee provided
excellent research assistance. The authors gratefully acknowledge research support from NSF
Grant SES 1156262. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the institutions they are
affiliated with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jongrim Ha, M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Macro-Financial Cycles and Spillovers
Jongrim Ha, M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad
NBER Working Paper No. 26798
February 2020
JEL No. C1,C32,E32,F4

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a new dynamic factor model that allows us to jointly characterize global
macroeconomic and financial cycles and the spillovers between them. The model decomposes
macroeconomic cycles into the part driven by global and country-specific macro factors and the
part driven by spillovers from financial variables. We consider cycles in macroeconomic
aggregates (output, consumption, and investment) and financial variables (equity and house
prices, and interest rates). We find that the global macro factor plays a major role in explaining
G-7 business cycles, but there are also spillovers from equity and house price shocks onto
macroeconomic aggregates. These spillovers operate mainly through the global macro factor
rather than the country-specific macro factors (i.e., these spillovers affect business cycles in all
G-7 economies) and are stronger in the period leading up to and following the global financial
crisis. We find little evidence of spillovers from macroeconomic cycles to financial cycles.

Jongrim Ha                                       Christopher Otrok
World Bank                                       Department of Economics
1818 H Street NW MC 2-511                        University of Missouri
Washington, DC 20433                             Columbia, MO 65211
jongrimha@worldbank.org                          and Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis
                                                 otrokc@missouri.edu
M. Ayhan Kose
World Bank                                       Eswar S. Prasad
1818 H St NW                                     Dyson School of Applied Economics and
Washington, DC 20433                             Management
and Brookings institution and CEPR               Cornell University
akose@worldbank.org                              301A Warren Hall
                                                 Ithaca, NY 14853
                                                 and NBER
                                                 eswar.prasad@cornell.edu
1. Introduction

Rising cross-border trade and financial flows, coupled with the increasing prominence of
financial markets, appear to have intensified spillovers between financial markets and
macroeconomic activity, both within and across economies. The 2007-09 global financial crisis
dramatically highlighted these linkages. However, there was substantial heterogeneity across
countries in how their financial markets and economies were affected by the crisis and ensuing
global recession. Most advanced countries experienced deep contractions, but the timing and
duration of the contractions and subsequent recovery have differed sharply across countries.
The notion of a tightly linked global economy in which macroeconomic and financial
disturbances are transmitted symmetrically, in terms of both speed and intensity, across
countries is clearly not a suitable characterization.

This warrants a more nuanced analysis of business cycle transmission that accounts for various
sources and channels of shock propagation across borders. A sharper distinction is also needed
between macroeconomic aggregates (output, consumption, investment) and financial market
variables (financial asset prices and house prices), both as sources of shocks and as channels of
propagation. The empirical literature has tended to focus on only one of these channels at a
time and often in the context of a single country, ignoring both the potentially large feedback
effects between them and cross-border spillovers. Another important issue is whether
comovement among macroeconomic and financial variables is the result of spillovers of country-
specific or variable-specific shocks, or simply reflects common shocks. Existing econometric
models have not been able to make a convincing distinction.

In this paper, we attempt to provide an empirical characterization of macroeconomic and
financial cycles in a setting that allows us to analyze the relationships between these two types
of cycles, including potential spillovers between them. We begin by examining whether there
is a common global cycle in financial variables, similar to the one that has been documented
for macroeconomic aggregates. Our empirical analysis focuses on the G-7 economies over the
period 1985-2019. The mid-1980s have been identified as the beginning of the recent wave of
financial globalization (e.g., Kose, Otrok, and Prasad, 2012). Using a dynamic factor model
that comprises three key financial variables--equity prices, house prices, and interest rates--
we find no evidence of a common global cycle among these variables for the G-7 economies.
Instead, we find evidence that there are global cycles specific to each financial variable (which
are proxies for different asset classes)--there is a global equity price cycle, a separate global
interest rate cycle, and a house price cycle. We then ask if there is a common cycle among real
and financial variables--that is, do the shocks that drive cycles in macroeconomic aggregates
also drive any of the financial cycles? The answer we find is again no.

Do these results imply that global macroeconomic and financial cycles evolve independently of
each other? This question brings us to the heart of the model developed in this paper, which
is designed to investigate cross-border spillovers across macroeconomic and financial cycles.
During the global financial crisis, financial market spillovers appear to have been the main
mechanism for transmission of shocks across advanced economies, but there is little formal
evidence on this point. The crisis also suggests extensive feedback between these two types of
cycles, making it imperative to study them in a unified setting. Our objective, therefore, is to
study the dynamics of business and financial cycles in a unified model that allows us to
characterize potential global macro-financial cycles and spillovers.




                                               1
We develop a new dynamic factor model to capture spillovers in both directions across the
financial sector and macroeconomy.2 Existing factor models attribute the observed comovement
among multiple macroeconomic aggregates to a small set of underlying shocks and help identify
the relative importance of different driving forces for national and global business cycles--
global shocks, shocks specific to certain groups of countries, and country-specific shocks.
However, we are also interested in the global propagation of shocks originating in one sector
(macroeconomic or financial) to other sectors. The model we develop explicitly captures
spillovers from one type of factor to another. Specifically, our model allows us to analyze the
quantitative importance of cross-border spillovers of shocks hitting different segments of
financial markets onto macroeconomic variables through the global and country-specific
macroeconomic factors.

We report four major findings. First, while the global macroeconomic (macro) factor plays an
important role in explaining business cycle fluctuations, there are sizeable spillovers from
specific financial variables--equity prices and house prices, in particular--to macroeconomic
variables. Spillovers from the global interest rate factor also contribute to macroeconomic
fluctuations but they are less important as sources of cross-border spillovers. Second, spillovers
from the equity and housing markets operate mainly through the global macro factor rather
than the country-specific macro factors. This means, for instance, that movements in global
equity prices influence the global macroeconomic cycle (i.e., the spillovers affect overall business
cycles in all G-7 economies), in turn affecting fluctuations in domestic macroeconomic variables
in our sample. Third, common cycles among macroeconomic and financial variables, and also
the spillovers from financial to macroeconomic variables, are stronger in the period leading up
to and following the financial crisis.

Fourth, we find little evidence of spillovers from macroeconomic cycles to financial cycles. One
exception is in the case of interest rates, which experience significant spillovers from the global
macro factor. In addition to these new results we also confirm, consistent with the prior
literature, that there are common business cycles, as reflected in the comovement of
macroeconomic aggregates, among the G-7 economies. Our finding of common cycles in certain
financial variables, especially equity prices and interest rates, also accords with the previous
literature.

Our analysis straddles a number of related strands in the literature. There is a large body of
work studying macro-financial linkages--the two-way interactions between the real economy
and the financial sector.3 Shocks originating in the real economy can be propagated through
asset prices, thereby amplifying business (macroeconomic) cycles. Imperfections in financial
markets can intensify such propagation effects and, consequently, lead to more pronounced
macroeconomic fluctuations. Conversely, shocks that hit financial markets can result in more
pronounced asset price movements and macroeconomic fluctuations. Through cross-border
linkages, these developments can lead to international spillovers.


2
  Our work builds on a large empirical literature using dynamic factor models to characterize business and financial
cycles within and across countries (see Stock and Watson, 2011, 2016, and Breitung and Eickmeier, 2016 for surveys
of methods and applications for this class of models). Using a dynamic factor model, Stock and Watson (2005) and
Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2003, 2008) document the roles played by global and/or group-specific factors in
driving business cycles. Using a factor model, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) argue that a common factor drives
a sizeable portion of variation in equity prices, commodity prices, and bond indices. Hirata et al. (2012) report that
common factors play an important role in explaining cycles in certain financial variables, including equity and house
prices, and credit.
3
  Brunnermeier, Eisenbach, and Sannikov (2013), Cochrane (2017), and Claessens and Kose (2018) present surveys
of different branches of the literature on macro-financial linkages.

                                                          2
Fluctuations in financial markets are shown to have a significant impact on the real economy
in a wide range of theoretical models (Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999; Carlstrom and
Fuerst, 1997; and Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997). In these models, wealth and substitution effects
can be amplified by changes in access to external financing, including through the financial
accelerator and related mechanisms operating through the balance sheets of firms, households,
and countries. These mechanisms imply, for instance, that a decline in asset prices lowers an
entity's net worth, reducing its capacity to borrow, invest, and spend (an increase in asset
prices has the opposite effect). This process, in turn, can intensify fluctuations in asset prices
and amplify macroeconomic fluctuations. A number of recent theoretical studies employ similar
mechanisms to analyze the roles of leverage constraints, financial integration, global banks,
and different types of financial shocks in explaining international business cycle comovement
in the context of multi-country models with financial imperfections.4

A sizeable empirical literature studies macro-financial linkages at the country level but the
research on global macro-financial cycles and spillovers is in its early stages.5 Our paper
contributes to this nascent literature in multiple dimensions. Ours is the first study to explicitly
distinguish between common shocks and cross-border spillovers in a systematic fashion that
accounts for global and country-specific factors, along with spillovers. The models used in the
previous literature are unable to disentangle spillovers from common shocks. Second, our model
enables us to analyze linkages between business and financial cycles without requiring a strong
a priori stand on the nature of spillovers between them. Finally, we consider common cycles
and spillovers in an empirical model that encompasses both macroeconomic and financial
variables in multiple countries (instead of focusing on a single country).

In Section 2, we employ a standard dynamic factor model to assess the evidence for a global
financial cycle. In Section 3, we introduce our new dynamic factor model that is used to capture
spillovers between the financial sector and macroeconomy. Next, we discuss the results of
models that allow for spillovers from the financial sector to the macroeconomy. In Section 5,
we describe the results of models that allow for spillovers from the macroeconomy to the
financial sector. Section 6 concludes.

2. Modelling Global Financial Cycles

We first briefly analyze the evidence for a global financial cycle by using a standard dynamic
factor model. Our concept of the global financial cycle is broad-based in the sense that it




4
  Some studies have focused on the role of asset prices in transmitting financial shocks to business cycles (Adrian,
Colla, and Shin, 2013; Geanakoplos, 2010). For recent theoretical studies of international business cycle comovement
in models with financial market imperfections, see Devereux and Sutherland (2011), Dedola and Lombardo (2012),
Kollmann (2013), and Perri and Quadrini (2018). For a survey on the theory and empirics of macro-financial
linkages, see Claessens and Kose (2018).
5
  For empirical research on macro-financial cycles and spillovers, see Helbling et al. (2011) and Eickmeier and Ng
(2015). These studies document that global credit shocks have been influential in driving macroeconomic
fluctuations. Ciccarelli, Ortega, and Valderrama (2016) find that both common and country-specific factors play
important roles in explaining cross-border spillovers in real and financial variables. The literature examining
interactions between business and financial cycles at the country level includes Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2009,
2012), Borio (2014), Cesa-Bianchi (2013), Mian, Sufi, and Terebbi (2015), and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2017).
Meeks (2012) and Prieto, Eickmeier, and Marcellino (2016) employ time-series methods to analyze the roles played
by financial markets in driving US business cycles. Others consider the linkages between financial sector and
macreoconomy during financial crises (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009, and Claessens et al., 2014).


                                                         3
captures cyclical fluctuations that are common across multiple financial markets.6 Specifically,
we analyze the existence of a global financial cycle based on prices in three major financial
markets--stock markets, government securities markets, and housing markets.7 Our analysis
covers the G-7 countries over the period 1985:Q1-2019:Q2. We focus on the G-7 economies
since they account for a substantial fraction of world output and, given their levels of economic
and financial integration, provide the best likelihood of finding significant spillover effects.
These results will, therefore, provide a benchmark for future studies that could include a
broader range of countries, including emerging market economies. It is worth emphasizing that,
since our primary objective in this paper is to model spillovers between financial and macro
variables rather than to precisely estimate a global financial cycle, we do not use a large array
of financial variables. Rather, we focus on just a handful of variables that have been identified
as relevant for macro fluctuations and also limit our analysis to relatively low (quarterly)
frequencies rather than high-frequency (e.g., daily) financial market data.

2.1. A Dynamic Factor Model with Common Financial Cycles

In our initial empirical analysis of financial cycles, we employ a standard dynamic factor model.
This class of empirical models is useful in identifying a few common factors that drive
fluctuations in large multi-dimensional datasets. These factors can capture common
fluctuations across the entire dataset (i.e., the world) or across subsets of the data (e.g.,
country-specific or variable-specific groupings). Our basic model contains: (i) a global financial
factor common to all financial variables (and all countries) in the system; (ii) a factor common
to each financial variable; (iii) a country factor common to all financial variables in each
country; and (iv) an idiosyncratic component for each series.

We start by writing the dynamic factor model in a general matrix form:

(1)      Yt = Ft + t

(2)      t =  (L)t -1 + U t with             E( U t U t ' ) =  ,

(3)      Ft =  (L)Ft -1 + Vt with E (Vt Vt ' ) =  k .

Yt is an n-dimensional vector of time series data. t is an (n  1) vector of idiosyncratic
components that captures movement in each observable series that are specific to that time
series. Each element of t is assumed to follow an independent AR(q) process as in equation
(2). Hence, (L) is a block diagonal lag polynomial matrix and  is a covariance matrix that
is restricted to be diagonal. The latent factors are denoted by the vector Ft.8 This vector
contains contemporaneous values of the factors as well as lags. The lags of the factor enter the
state equation (3) to allow for dynamics in each factor.


6
  This view of the global financial cycle follows the basic idea of studying business cycles in multiple aggregates,
rather than focusing on cycles in a single variable such as output or industrial production (Kose and Terrones,
2015).
7
  More details about our database are in Appendix Table A1. Financial and macroeconomic series are all at a
quarterly frequency, seasonally adjusted, and deflated by the CPI for each country. We use growth rates of all
variables and, following Stock and Watson (2012), remove low-frequency movements using the Local Mean method.
8
  The set of equations (1)­(3) comprises a state space system where (1) and (2) combined correspond to the
measurement equation and (3) corresponds to the state transition equation. This state space structure is exploited
in the Gibbs sampling procedure when the model parameters are estimated.

                                                         4
If we let s be the number of factors (s < n) and p be the order of the autoregressive process
that each factor follows, then we can define m = sp as the dimension of the state vector. F is
then an (m  1) vector of unobservable factors (and its lags) and (L) is a matrix lag
polynomial governing the evolution of these factors. The variance covariance matrix of this
equation, Ik, is assumed to be an identity matrix for normalization purposes. Typically, the
matrix (L) is restricted to be block diagonal. In Section 3, we will model spillovers by relaxing
that restriction in a number of ways.

While, in principle, all variables can load on all factors in these models, we want to make a
clear distinction in our model between global, country-specific, and financial variable-specific
factors in this section. In order to identify such factors, we follow Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman
(2003) and impose zero restrictions on some of the  parameters. This implies that, for example,
only the equity price variable in each country has a non-zero factor loading on the factor we
label "equity prices". The zero restrictions of this sort that we impose on  imply that the
model can then be written as:

          ,,           ,,                         ,,                     ,,                      ,,
(4)              =                          +                       +                        + 

(5)       it, j,k =  i , j,k (L) it,-j1
                                      ,k
                                         +  it, j,k ,

(6)      f tm =  m (L)f tm
                         -1 +  t
                               m
                                 for m = 1...(1+ K + J).


We use this model to investigate common cycles in financial variables.

2.2. Common Factors Driving Financial Cycles

We begin with the most basic one-factor version of this model that allows for only a global
factor common to all variables and countries. Panel A in Figure 1 shows the contributions of
the global factor to the variance of each series. The variance contributions of the global factor
are sizable for equity prices but small for the other variables. We then split the full sample into
two overlapping sub-samples: a pre-crisis sample (1985-2007) and a recent sample (1998-2019).
The first period excludes the global financial crisis while the second one includes part of the
period of the Great Moderation and the subsequent crisis. The variance contributions of the
global factor are on average higher in the second period for all three financial variables. For
instance, the contribution of the global factor to the variance of equity price fluctuations rises
from 51 percent in the first period to 62 percent in the latter period. For the other variables--
housing prices, and interest rates--the variance contributions of the global factor are less than
10 percent in both periods.9

The residual variance in the above exercise could in principle be accounted for by other factors
that could be common across specific groups of the data. In Table 1, we present results for the
one-factor model as well as two other versions of our basic model that, in addition to the global
factor, include (i) variable-specific factors that capture common cross-country fluctuations
specific to each financial variable, and (ii) both variable-specific factors and country-specific
factors that capture the comovement of all financial variables within a particular country. Since
comovement of financial market variables appears to be stronger in the period 1998-2019, we
show only the results for the models estimated over that period.

9
  We also examined the importance of different factors for the period 2008-2019. Relative to the period 1998-2019,
the variance shares explained by the global factor increase for almost all financial variables.

                                                        5
The results indicate that the contribution of the global factor to the variance of equity price
fluctuations is smaller in the multi-factor models, accounting on average for 10-14 percent of
the variance in the two extended versions of the model (Panel B in Figure 1). In the model
with three factors, the variance contributions of the global factor to fluctuations in equity
prices are sizeable for only a few countries. Instead, the bulk of fluctuations in each of the
financial variables is explained by the variable-specific financial factors. For fluctuations in
equity prices, for example, the common equity price factor is responsible on average for roughly
62 percent of variation across countries in the three-factor model. For house prices and interest
rates, the variable-specific factor accounts on average for one-fifth to one-third of the variance
and the global factor for less than 3 percent. Country-specific factors in general play a minor
role in explaining fluctuations in the financial variables although they do play a more prominent
role in explaining house price fluctuations in Canada and the United States and interest rate
fluctuations in Japan and the United States.

The picture that emerges from these exercises is that the global financial factor does not play
a major role in explaining the variance of fluctuations in any of these financial variables. Most
of the literature on the presence of a global financial cycle is based on comovement of one
financial variable across countries. Our findings are consistent with this view.10 Indeed, we find
that there is strong evidence of cross-country comovement of equity prices and interest rates.
For house prices, the variable-specific factor plays a smaller but still sizeable role in explaining
cross-country comovement. But our results also highlight that there is limited empirical
evidence to support the concept of a global financial cycle that encompasses multiple financial
markets or asset classes, at least for the major financial market indicators of interest to us.

We acknowledge that there could be more cross-country financial market synchronization at
higher frequencies, especially in response to unanticipated policy shocks, financial disruptions,
and news shocks.11 However, the quarterly frequency that we focus on is more relevant for
analyzing the linkages between the financial sector and the macroeconomy (we conduct some
robustness exercises with monthly data in Section 6). The findings highlighted above--the
absence of a broad-based global financial cycle that encompasses multiple asset markets--will
play an important role in the construction of the empirical model that we use to capture
spillovers between the financial sector and macroeconomy in the next section.

3. A Dynamic Factor Model with Macro-Financial Spillovers

We now provide a more general representation of the standard framework used in the previous
section and use that as the basis for developing a new dynamic factor model. This new model

10
   Some recent studies document evidence in support of strong cross-country comovement of cycles in individual
financial variables. See Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2011) for highly synchronized cyclical phases of individual
financial market segments, including equity and housing markets; Hirata et al. (2012) and Cesa-Bianchi, Cespedes,
and Rebucci (2015) for the synchronization of cycles in equity and house prices and credit. Some of these studies
also document that the degree of comovement of cycles in financial variables has increased over time (Claessens and
Kose, 2018). Some other studies that examine the presence of a global financial cycle report mixed findings. For
example, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) find that one global factor explains an important part of the variance
of a large cross section of equity prices, commodity prices, and bond indices. Rey (2015) argues that there is a global
financial cycle in capital flows, asset prices, and credit. By contrast, Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose (2017) conclude
that there is no significant global financial cycle in capital flows. Avdjiev et al. (2017) and Buch et al. (2019)
document that the importance of the global factor in global liquidity flows increases around and after the global
financial crisis, largely due to the transmission of U.S. monetary policies.
11
   For example, a rich literature on contagion employs higher-frequency data to analyze the extent of comovement
of different types of asset prices across countries (Forbes, 2013).

                                                          6
allows us to study spillovers between financial and macroeconomic (macro) variables, and also
permits us to disentangle such spillovers from common shocks. For the macro time series, we
use quarterly real deseasonalized data on output, consumption, and investment.

3.1. Modelling Macroeconomic and Financial Cycles

We use the same zero restrictions as in Section 2 to first estimate a series of models where the
factors can be identified as common, macro, or financial. We allow all variables to load on the
same common factor. This addresses the question of whether or not there is a common cycle
between financial and macroeconomic variables. A common cycle between the two types of
variables would mean that they are driven in part by common shocks. We estimated such
models combining in sequence macro series with (i) equity prices, (ii) house prices, and (iii)
short-term interest rates. In no case did we find a common component. In other words, there
is no common shock that jointly drives macroeconomic and financial variables.

This motivated us to treat the macro and financial blocks as separate in the specification of
the factor model. Specifically, this means that the macro variables have zero factor loading on
the financial factor, and the financial factors have zero factor loadings on the macro variables.
A benefit of this approach is that we cleanly label "macro" and "financial" factors by imposing
these zero restrictions. This implies that we can rewrite equation (1) as:

                                               0           
                                [  ] = [         ] [  ] + [  ]
                                         0                 

where the M superscript refers to a block of macroeconomic variables, the F superscript
represents the block of financial variables, and the zeros stand for appropriately sized matrixes
of zeros.

The next step is to impose restrictions on the factor loading matrices within the macro and
financial blocks. Based on the results in Section 2, which indicated that there is no common
cycle across all financial variables, we estimate a sequence of macro-financial models where the
financial block consists of one financial variable for each of the G-7 countries in our sample.
This yields a financial block where  is a 7x1 vector with the financial data for each country
at time t,  is a single factor (but  is not scalar because the lags of that factor appear in the
state equation), and F is non-zero for the relevant financial variable loading on the financial
factor (note again that  is not of dimension 1x7 because of the presence of lags of the factor).
The financial factor is then interpreted as a global factor for the relevant financial variable.

For the macro block, we partition the data to allow for global and country-specific macro
factors. With our dataset comprising output, consumption, and investment for G-7 countries,
the block will have one common macro factor and seven country-specific macro factors.
Identification of the country factors is obtained by allowing only variables within each country
to load on a particular factor, which we then label that country's factor.

We do not have a country-specific financial factor because we did not find a common
component across the financial variables within a country in our previous exercise. This is an
empirical result, not an assumption. We do find that global and country-specific factors are
both relevant for the macro block, which is consistent with the findings in the literature (Kose,
Otrok, and Whiteman 2003, 2008).


                                               7
3.2. Modeling Spillovers


As noted above, a standard assumption in the factor literature is that the matrix governing
the evolution of the factors, (L), is block diagonal. This assumption imposes a structure on
the model that the latent factors evolve independently of each other. We now seek to relax this
assumption in some dimensions to allow spillovers across the factors. Since we have found that
there are no common shocks across macro and financial variables, their comovement is driven
only by spillovers. For example, a global financial shock may affect the global macro factor
with a lag. To capture these effects, we relax the assumption that (L) is strictly block
diagonal. As with the  matrix, we could in principle allow the entire matrix to be unrestricted.
In practice, this would result in a proliferation of parameters that would add uncertainty to
the estimates and make the results harder to interpret. Instead, we turn on spillovers in
sequence from one factor to another. We focus on those spillovers that are "statistically" and
"economically" interesting.


A spillover from one factor to another is captured by allowing one factor to load on lags of
another factor as well as its own lags. For example, to measure spillovers from the world
financial factor ( ) to the world macro factor (, ), we would model the factor evolution
equation for the world macro factor as:

(7) , = ,
        
          (), + ,,
                
                   () + ,


Generically speaking, when we say factor `A' spills over to factor `B', we are referring to a
structure such as this one. Note that the only commonality across these variables comes from
the spillovers that occur with a one (or more) period lag. There are no shocks that are common
to the two types of factors. If there were a common shock, then the two types of variables
would both load on one common factor, which would contain a common contemporaneous
shock. However, as noted above, our results show that there is no common factor across the
macro and financial blocks--so, empirically, there is no common shock.

A key assumption of the model is that spillovers occur with a one period lag. In the context of
macroeconomic variables, the assumption implies that these variables are "sluggish" in their
response to financial shocks. That sluggishness can arise from real or nominal rigidities, or, in
the international context, from trade frictions.12 Since macroeconomic data are released in the
quarter after the data are realized, financial markets would react with a one quarter lag,
justifying our assumption in the context of the model that captures spillovers from the
macroeconomy to the financial sector.

We concentrate on spillovers from the macro to the financial block, and vice versa. Shocks
from the financial block are interpreted as global in nature because, as documented above,
there is a distinct global cycle and no country-specific financial cycle in the three financial
variables we focus on. From the macro block, we have both country-specific and global macro
shocks that can affect the financial cycles.13 To highlight the different types of spillovers, we

12
   In simple terms, our assumption is equivalent to ordering macroeconomic variables after financial variables in a
Cholesky identification of a VAR. Since we are using quarterly data and assume that spillovers take place with a
one period lag, our model framework is unable to capture spillovers at higher frequencies than a quarter. We also
report robustness results with the monthly data later in the paper.
13
   We do not argue or show here that there are no cross-block spillovers within countries. Instead, we only focus on
spillovers at the global level.

                                                         8
isolate them by allowing for one type of spillover at a time. For example, our first model allows
for spillovers from the financial factor (one for each of three financial variables) to the world
macro factor as in equation (7). Each of our models can be described as relaxing the zero
restriction on the lag polynomial in equation (6) to allow one factor to depend on lags of
another. When we write that one factor spills over to another, we mean that we allow for non-
zero coefficients in the relevant rows of (L).

Our four models can be described as follows: In Model 1, the financial factor spills over to the
world macro factor. In Model 2, the financial factor spills over directly to country macro factors.
The difference between these two models is that the first imposes proportional responses (scaled
by the factor loading) to the financial factor, meaning that the financial spillovers are
symmetric across countries, while the second allows for asymmetric responses. Model 3 allows
for the world macro factor to spill over to the financial factor. Model 4 allows the U.S. country
factor to spill over to the financial factor. In principle, any country can be used here; we choose
the United States since, in view of its being the largest economy and having a dominant role
in global finance, conventional wisdom is that spillovers from its economy are most likely to
affect others.

In addition, we estimate models that are combinations of these. For example, Models 1 and 2
combined would capture both channels through which the financial factor affects macro
activity. We have estimated such models and they naturally lead to variance decompositions
where the overall spillover effects equal the sum of the variance contributions of the spillover
effects from Models 1 and 2. The same is true for Models 3 and 4.

The combination of models such as Models 1 and 2 yields the same result as estimating the
two models separately because our spillover model does not deliver `new' factors compared to
a standard factor model.14 The spillover parameters do not affect the estimates of the factors
themselves. We have estimated models without spillovers and found factors that are identical
to those without spillovers. The value added here then is in the variance decompositions that
break down the common factors into sources that are macro and financial in nature.
Specifically, we know there is a global business cycle in macro aggregates (i.e., there is a
significant common factor among key macroeconomic variables). We document how much of
that global business cycle is due to spillovers from financial cycles--or, more precisely, how
important are innovations that originate in the financial side of the economy for the macro
side. Likewise, we document what proportion of financial cycles can be attributed to
innovations that originate in the real side of the economy (macroeconomy).

3.3. Model Estimation and Identification

The estimation of the model is Bayesian, though we have strong priors only on the stationarity
of the model. Since we are interested in the parameters of the model to measure spillovers,
approximate solutions to the model are not appropriate. The state space approach to estimating
parametric factor models is shown to yield more accurate estimates of variance decompositions
than the asymptotically justified principal components methods when the model includes
multiple layers of factors (Jackson et al., 2016). The size of the model allows us, with some
partitioning of the model into blocks, to evaluate its exact likelihood.


14
  Our model does not provide a new estimate of the global common factor since our macro factor is in fact the same
as in a standard model. Our model decomposes the movements in that common macro factor into shocks that are
innovations to the factor itself, and shocks that originate elsewhere, such as the financial sector, and then spill over
into the macro sector.

                                                           9
It is not possible to derive analytical solutions for the posterior distribution of the model.
Therefore, we use numerical methods to simulate from the posterior distribution of model
parameters and factors. We use a state space approach following Kim and Nelson (1998). Their
approach is based on using a Gibbs sampler to sequentially sample from the posterior of the
parameters conditional on the last draw of the factors and then the factors conditional on the
draw of the parameters. The estimation procedure for state-space estimation of dynamic factor
models is fairly well known. The specific procedure for drawing factors and parameters is
described in Jackson et al. (2016).

The number of lags that describe the evolution of the idiosyncratic shocks (q) and latent factors
(p) are kept at 2 and 3, respectively.15 Our priors for the model parameters are generally weak,
with the exception that we impose stationarity on the dynamic components. The prior for the
autoregressive coefficients in the law of motion of each idiosyncratic shock is (0, 0 ). The
variance terms of the prior 0 are calculated numerically based on a prior over the roots of the
polynomial. We specify a prior over each root of the polynominal that is N(0,0.5). We then
draw the two roots and translate those roots into polynomial coefficients. If the polynomial is
stationary, we retain the draw. These terms are then averaged to get the elements of 0 .

The prior for the autoregressive coefficients that govern the evolution of each factor is similarly
specified. When (L) is block diagonal, the only variables that enter each factor equation are
its own lags. In this case, the prior for the autoregressive coefficients corresponding to these
lags is (0, 0 ). As with the idiosyncratic terms, these values come from first specifying a prior
over the roots of the polynomial and then translating it into priors for the coefficients. When
the block diagonality is relaxed to allow for spillovers, lags of other factors also appear in the
law of motion of one or more factors, depending on the exact specification of (L). Accordingly,
in these specifications the variance covariance matrix 0 is augmented to include priors for
the coefficients of those lags as well.16 The prior on all factor loading coefficients is N(0,1). The
prior for the innovation variances in the observable equation is Inverted Gamma (0.1*T, 0.252).
These priors are fairly diffuse and none of the results we report below are sensitive to changes
in them.

The model faces standard identification issues that permeate this literature. Following the
previous literature, we require that one factor loading for each factor be positive. Second, we
normalize the innovation variances of the factors to unity as the scale of the factors is not
identified. The additional parameters we estimate in the model cause no new problems for
identification. To see this, consider the main blocks that we draw from in the Gibbs sampler.
Drawing from the factors conditional on the parameters is a standard use of the Carter-Kohn
version of the Kalman filter. The fact that there are fewer zero restrictions than usual has no
effect on this step, as the filter itself is derived under the assumption that all elements are non-
zero. Conditional on the factors, the parameters are drawn equation by equation. For example,
drawing the 
                  W ,US
                   term just requires that an additional regressor (the U.S. factor) appears in
the regression. There is no concern about the factors being misidentified--say, as the world
rather than U.S. factor--as the factors are identified through the zero restrictions on the factor
loading equations.

15
   That q = p-1 is a matter of convenience as this allows us to perform quasi-differencing of the observables in a
straightforward manner. We estimated some of the models with longer lags but the lags beyond 3 were not
statistically significant in nearly all cases.
16
   For example, the prior for the autoregressive coefficients in the law of motion of the world factor with spillovers
                                                                                     0
from the financial factor (Model 1) is then given by (0, 00 ) where 00 = [ 0           ].
                                                                                0 1

                                                         10
3.4. Variance Decompositions

We quantify the relative importance of various factors by calculating how much of the
unconditional variance of each observable variable can be attributed to which factor. In the
benchmark case, the factors are assumed to be orthogonal so one can simply apply the variance
operator to the left and right hand sides of equation (1) and calculate the variance shares.
However, in the model presented above, the factors are not orthogonal by assumption of the
spillovers. Hence, we need an alternative method for quantifying the relative importance of
different factors.

Our approach is to use a forecast error variance decomposition and let the horizon go to infinity.
In a stationary system, the unconditional variance is the limit of the forecast error variance as
the horizon goes to infinity, so this procedure still yields a decomposition of the unconditional
variance of each series. This indicates how much of the variance in each observable variable is
attributed to the innovations to each factor and is equivalent to writing out the MA()
representation of the model and then applying the variance operator. If a factor is relatively
more important for a variable, then its share of the explained variance will be large.

In practice, we apply standard VAR forecasting formulas (with many zeros imposed on the
VAR coefficients) to calculate the variance decompositions. These formulas trace the impact
of an innovation to factor A on factor B at horizon h. The variance decompositions for
observable variable Y then rescales the factor decomposition based on the factor loadings of Y
on each factor. For example, denote the variance of the world macro factor explained by the
financial factor at horizon H as VarH(FW|FF). The variance of U.S. output at horizon H due to
the financial factor is then given by:

                                              2
                                        [, ]  (  |  )
                        VarH(YUS|F )=
                                    F
                                              ( )


In this case, U.S. output does not load on the financial factor. Yet, the formula reveals that
U.S. output does depend on the financial factor, due to the impact of the financial factor on
the world macro factor. This is the spillover we attempt to measure.

We examine the variance decompositions at a horizon of 30 periods (quarters) in order to
abstract from short-term fluctuations. In practice, the variance decompositions generally settle
down after about 8 quarters, so our approach essentially focuses on a medium- to long-term
forecasting horizon. The relative share of each factor's contribution to the forecasting error of
each variable does not change substantially from short- to long-term forecasting horizons. The
spillover effects, however, do increase over the first few quarters since these effects are generated
from lags of the macro or financial factor.

An interesting ancillary question is whether the contributions of different factors have changed
over time. In particular, a question is whether the financial crisis that hit the world economy
in 2008-09 has a major bearing on the results. To address this issue, we consider two exercises.
First, we estimate the models over the full sample (1985-2019) and then separately over two
partially overlapping periods: 1985-2007 and 1998-2019. The first period excludes the financial
crisis while the second one includes part of the period of the Great Moderation and the
subsequent crisis. Second, we consider an exercise that involves the estimation of our combined
Models 1 and 2 over 15 year rolling sub-periods with one year increments. This provides a
better characterization of the evolution of the importance of common factors and spillovers in

                                                  11
explaining variation in macroeconomic and financial variables, especially during the global
financial crisis.

To avoid cluttering the tables in the main text, we mostly report variance decomposition results
averaged across the G-7 economies. We do not report posterior coverage intervals for the
variance decompositions (which, in turn, are posterior medians of the variance decompositions
based on 10,000 draws). In the main text, we emphasize those results where the one standard
deviation bands of the coverage intervals around the estimated medians do not include zero.

3.5. Global and Country-Specific Factors

Before getting into the details of results from variance decompositions, we briefly discuss the
estimated factors and their properties. Figure 2 plots the global macro factor, the U.S. country
factor, and global factors of the three financial variables. The figure presents the posterior
median for each factor, along with the 16 and 84 percent posterior quantile bands. The factors
are estimated reasonably precisely as the quantile bands are generally quite tight.17

The estimated global factor tracks global output growth well and picks up the major peaks
and troughs: the recession of the early 1990s; the 2001 recession and the subsequent recovery;
and the global financial crisis. The U.S. country factor also picks up the main cyclical episodes.
The correlation between the U.S. country factor and global factor is about 0.16. We also check
the cross-correlations among the country factors. These correlations are often quite low,
implying that most of the business cycle comovement among G-7 countries is captured by the
global macro factor, with little residual correlation among the country-specific cycles.

The estimated financial factors are also consistent with major developments in financial
markets. The equity price factor is substantially more volatile than the common factors for
each of the other financial variables. The posterior quantile bands for the house price factor
are larger than those for the other financial variables, reflecting more variability across G-7
countries in the time series behavior of house prices. The volatility of the house price factor is
high in the late 1980s-early 1990s and mid to late 2000s, reflecting boom-bust cycles in G-7
housing markets during these periods. Between these two periods, the house price factor has
substantially lower volatility.

4. Spillovers from the Financial Sector to the Macroeconomy

4.1. Global Spillovers

In this section, we explore the importance of spillovers from the financial sector in explaining
fluctuations in macroeconomic aggregates of the G-7 countries. We estimate Models 1 and 2
for this purpose. In the former model, the global financial factor spills over to the global macro
factor whereas, in the latter one, it spills over directly to country-specific macro factors. We
also estimate the combination of these two models in which financial market spillovers operate
through both the global and country-specific macro factors. Table 2 reports the averages of
variance decompositions based on these three models for each financial variable.



17
  In Appendix Tables A2 and A3, we report posterior medians of factor loadings and factor vector-autoregressive
coefficients.


                                                      12
Equity Prices. We first consider equity prices as the main measure of global financial market
activity. The comparison of results from Models 1 and 2 indicate that spillovers from the equity
markets to output and investment take place mostly through the global macro factor (rather
than country-specific factors). For instance, the spillovers from the global equity price factor
through the global macro factor in Model 1 account for 7 percent of output fluctuations for the
full sample (see Table 2, Panel A, third column marked SF). The spillovers through the
country-specific macro factor (Model 2) account for a much smaller share of output
fluctuations--just 1.3 percent. The global equity price factor is responsible for 5 percent of the
variation in investment in Model 1 but only a negligible fraction of consumption fluctuations.
The results from the combination of Models 1 and 2 indicate that the spillovers through the
global macro factor and country-specific factors are together responsible for 17 percent of
output fluctuations, 6 percent of consumption fluctuations, and 11 percent of investment
fluctuations in 1998-2019. These results collectively suggest that spillovers originating in equity
markets play a significant, although not large, role in explaining macroeconomic fluctuations.

The potency of spillovers from equity markets has increased over time for all macroeconomic
variables (Figure 3). For example, the average variance of output due to spillovers from the
global equity price factor in Model 1 increases from 4 percent in 1985-2007 to 15 percent in
1998-2019.18 This increase is mainly driven by the larger role of spillovers from the global macro
factor as the importance of spillovers through the country-specific macro factors has not
changed much over time. Contributions of spillovers from equity markets to fluctuations in
output and investment have become larger in 1998-2019 than those in the case of consumption.
Interestingly, the comovement of equity prices, captured by the fraction of variance of equity
prices accounted for by the global equity price factor (Table 2, column marked F), increases
only slightly in 1998-2019 relative to 1985-2007 (from 50 to 59 percent in the combined model).
Thus, it is not the greater integration of equity markets across the G-7 countries but the size
of their spillover effects on to macro cycles that distinguishes the latter period from the former
one.

How important are financial market spillovers relative to the global macro factor in driving
macroeconomic fluctuations? Among the G-7 countries, the role of spillovers from the global
equity markets is on average smaller but, relative to that of the global macro factors, it remains
sizeable (Figures 4 and 5). Specifically, over the period 1998-2019, the global macro factor
(comparable numbers for spillovers from the global equity price factor are in parentheses) on
average accounts for about 34 (17) percent of output fluctuations, 8 (6) percent of consumption
fluctuations, and 22 (11) percent of investment fluctuations. While the average variance of
output and investment explained by the global macro factor is higher in this period compared
to 1985-2007, the corresponding increase in the relative importance of spillovers from the global
equity price factor between the two periods is slightly larger.

The global macro factor explains a much larger fraction of output variance than it does for
consumption. This result is consistent with other evidence that, contrary to the predictions of
standard international risk sharing models, output fluctuations are more correlated across
countries than consumption fluctuations (Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland 1992). Country-specific
factors account for about one-quarter to one-third of fluctuations in output and investment,
and an even higher share of consumption fluctuations, in the 1998-2019 period (Table 2,
columns marked C).

18
  We check the robustness of these findings by studying the posterior coverage intervals around the posterior
medians of the estimated variance contributions (Appendix Figure A5). Nonoverlapping posterior coverage intervals
indicate "statistically significant" changes between the two periods. Our results indicate that the averages presented
here are representative of patterns at the country level.

                                                         13
Given that the combined model captures both the global and country-specific channels of
spillovers and the degree of comovement is higher in the period 1998-2019, in the rest of this
sub-section we focus our discussion on the results from the combined model over the second
period--the table does report results for the full sample and the earlier period.

House Prices. In Panel B of Table 2, we present results using house prices as the financial
market variable. This is of particular interest as developments in housing markets in the United
States and certain other G-7 countries seem to have played a significant role in precipitating
the 2009 global recession and amplifying the recession's macroeconomic effects. The cross-
country comovement of house prices, as captured by the share of fluctuations in this variable
accounted for by the estimated global house price factor, is much smaller than that of equity
prices. For the combined model, this share is only about 12 percent for the full sample and 20
percent for 1998-2019 (column marked F, last row of panel B).

Although it is smaller than that of the global equity price factor, the role of the global house
price factor in driving macroeconomic fluctuations is significant and increases over time. The
results from the combined model for the period 1998-2019 indicate that the global house price
factor on average accounts for about 16 percent of output fluctuations, 11 percent of investment
fluctuations, and 6 percent of consumption fluctuations (column marked SF). Similar to the
results with equity prices, the spillover effects on to the macroeconomy operate mainly through
the global macro factor rather than the country-specific factor--in the case of output, the
corresponding variance contributions are 15 percent and 2 percent, respectively.

The global macro factor plays an increasingly more important role in explaining fluctuations
in output and investment (Table 2 and Figure 5). Similar to the results with equity prices,
although the role of the global macro factor has become more pronounced in the second period,
the relative importance of spillovers from the global house price factor nearly doubles between
the two periods (the absolute increase in the variance contribution of the global macro factor
is greater). Over the period 1998-2019, the average variance of output explained by the global
macro factor is about two to three times larger than that of spillovers from the global house
price factor (40 percent versus 16 percent), compared to a ratio of roughly four over the full
sample (33 percent versus 8 percent).

Interest Rates. Panel C of Table 2 shows the results when we use short-term interest rates as
the financial market variable. During 1998-2019, the variance contributions of the global
interest-rate factor through the spillover effects on the global macro factor amount to 7 percent
for output, 4 percent for consumption, and 5 percent for investment fluctuations (see column
marked SF, bottom row of the panel). As in the case of the equity and house prices, a
substantial portion of these spillovers takes place through the global macro factor. The average
variance explained by spillovers through the country-specific factors are in the range of only
about 1-2 percent. Although the importance of the global macro factor increases by more than
twofold in the second period (48 percent versus 21 percent), the change in the variance of
output due to the spillovers from the global interest rate factor registers only a marginal
increase. The average variance of interest rates due to the global interest rate factor rose from
25 percent in 1985-2007 to 31 percent in 1998-2019. The degree of comovement of interest rates
across G-7 countries is much higher than that of house prices, although lower than that of
equity prices, especially in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. Our headline results did
not change when we used long-term interest rates (10-year bond yields) (These robustness
exercises are discussed in more detail in Section 6).


                                                14
Evolution of Spillovers. Splitting the full sample into two overlapping periods has provided a
coarse view of how the relative importance of different factors has shifted over time. To explore
this dimension of the analysis further, we now briefly discuss results from the estimation of our
combined Models 1 and 2 over 15 year rolling sub-periods with one year increments. In Figure
6, we present the average variance of output explained by the global macro factor and spillovers
stemming from the financial sector over the rolling sub-periods. The results indicate a sharp
increase in the importance of the global macro factor especially after the 2007-08 global
financial crisis. Specifically, the average variance due to the global macro factor (over the 15-
year rolling sub-periods) increases from about 20-30 percent from the early 2000s to roughly
35-55 percent after 2007, depending on which financial variable we use in estimating the
model.19

While spillovers from the global equity and house price factors to output fluctuations have
become larger after the global financial crisis, those associated with the global interest rate
factor have not changed much. For example, prior to the 2007-08 crisis, spillovers from the
global equity and house price factors on average account for 7 percent and 8 percent,
respectively, of output variation over the 15 year rolling sub-periods. With the unfolding of the
crisis, spillovers from these two factors on average account for 15-25 percent of output variance.
These results are broadly consistent with our earlier findings from the two specific sub-samples
(1985-2007 and 1998-2019). However, the results with the rolling windows also highlight
significant changes in the nature of cross-border spillovers and the extent of comovement
between the financial sector and the macroeconomy during periods of financial stress. There
was naturally a steep increase in the importance of the global macro factor because of the
global financial crisis. In addition, spillovers from some financial market segments onto the
macroeconomy have become more pronounced after the onset of the crisis.

Summary. The main results to this point can be summarized as follows. First, among the G-7
countries, there are sizeable spillovers from the global equity and house price factors onto
macroeconomic fluctuations. These spillovers are responsible for a larger share of variation of
output and investment than of consumption. There are also some spillovers from the global
interest rate factor but their contributions to macroeconomic fluctuations are relatively modest
compared with those of equity and house prices.

Second, the global macro factor plays a more important role than the financial factor in
explaining macroeconomic fluctuations but the relative importance of spillovers stemming from
the financial sector is sizeable, especially in the case of equity and housing markets.20 Third,
spillovers from the global equity and house price factors operate mainly through the global
macro factor rather than through the country-specific macro factors.

Fourth, the importance of spillovers from the equity price and house price global factors has
risen over time. Specifically, it increased by more than twofold in the case of equity prices and
by more than threefold in the case of house prices in 1998-2019. The importance of spillovers
from equity and housing markets has increased over time, especially after the global financial

19
   These findings are consistent with others in the literature that also report an increase in the extent of business
cycle synchronization during periods of financial stress (Helbling et al., 2011; Imbs ,2010; and Kalemli-Ozcan,
Papaioannou, and Peydro, 2013).
20
   This result is broadly in line with the findings with those in Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019) and Di
Giovanni, Levchenko, and Mejean (2018) in the sense that most of the business cycle synchronization among G-7
countries is accounted for by common or correlated shocks, and that the cross-border transmission of shocks has an
economically meaningful, but smaller, role in comovement.


                                                        15
crisis. Given the global nature of the crisis, there has also been a substantial increase in the
importance of the global macro factor in explaining macroeconomic fluctuations after 2007.
Finally, both equity prices and interest rates display a high degree of cross-country comovement
among G-7 countries. The degree of cross-country comovement of equity prices and interest
rates has intensified in the period 1998-2019 relative to 1985-2007. Comovement of house prices
is modest, even during the latter period.

These results emphasize the importance of spillovers from the financial sector to the
macroeconomy.21 We document that spillovers from cross-country comovements in global
equity and housing markets play a substantial role in driving national business cycle
fluctuations even after accounting for the roles played by the global and country-specific macro
factors. These results lend support to the findings in theoretical studies linking developments
in equity and housing markets to macroeconomic fluctuations. For example, some studies
examine how fluctuations in equity prices can be associated with leverage cycles that can then
translate into fluctuations in the real economy (Adrian, Colla, and Shin, 2013; Geanakoplos,
2010; Mendoza, 2010; Jermann and Quadrini, 2012). Other studies analyze how shocks
originating in housing markets can be a source of macroeconomic fluctuations in the context
of general equilibrium models (Iacoviello, 2005; Liu, Wang and Zha, 2015).

Our results indicate that spillovers from the global interest rate factor also contribute to
macroeconomic fluctuations but their roles tend to be smaller than those of the global equity
and house price factors. The small role of the interest rate factor in driving macroeconomic
fluctuations in the period 1998-2019 may reflect the weak role of monetary policy in influencing
economic activity once policy rates in the G-7 economies approached the zero lower bound.

4.2. Country-Specific Spillovers

In the discussion above, we have focused on averages for the G-7 countries. We now present
results at the level of individual countries. The composite spillovers from financial variables to
output growth fluctuations, operating through both the global factor and the country-specific
factors (combination of Models 1 and 2), are shown for each country and macroeconomic
variable in Tables 3-4. Table 3 shows the combined spillovers over different periods. For all
financial variables, these spillovers are usually much higher--or at least as high--during the
period 1998-2019 relative to estimates based on the period 1985-2007 or the full sample. Hence,
to conserve space, we mainly emphasize the results for 1998-2019.22 Table 4 shows the
breakdown of the variance contributions of different factors over the period 1998-2019.

Table 3 shows that there are significant spillovers from the global equity price factor to output
in all G-7 countries. The average variance of output due to spillovers associated with the global
equity price factor is about 17 percent, ranging from 10 percent in the United States to 24
percent in France. The spillover effects from the global house price factor are also quite large:
it on average accounts for 16 percent of output fluctuations (ranging from 10-13 percent in


21
   The variance decompositions we discuss here are a product of the factor loadings and the variances of the factors.
We present some of the key parameter estimates--the factor loadings and the vector-autoregressive coefficients on
the factors--in Appendix Tables A2 and A3. In most cases, the loadings of the macroeconomic factors on the global
macro factor are larger than the loadings on the country macro factors. The loadings of equity prices on the global
financial factor are much greater than the loadings of other financial variables on their corresponding financial
factors, confirming the evidence we presented earlier in the paper on the substantial comovement of equity prices
among G-7 countries.
22
   We present a selection of the key results for output fluctuations over the period 1998-2019 in Appendix Figure
A1 and detailed country-level results from the combined models in Appendix Table A4.

                                                        16
Japan and the United States to 20-21 percent in France and Germany). The comparison of the
contributions of spillovers from the global equity and house price factors with that of the global
macro factor indicate that spillovers from the financial sector play a relatively important role
in driving macroeconomic fluctuations in some countries. For example, in the United Kingdom,
the share of variance due to spillovers from the global equity price or the global house price
factor is around one-half of the variation that is explained by the global macro factor. The
importance of spillovers from the global interest rate factor is on average relatively smaller
than that of other financial variables but still sizeable in the three Euro zone countries (France,
Germany, and Italy).

For the United States, the global equity and house price factors play significant roles in driving
output, consumption, and investment fluctuations. The global interest rate factor plays a
smaller role in driving macroeconomic cycles in the United States. The global macro factor
accounts for 17 percent of the variance of U.S. output while the country factor accounts for
about 39 percent. The results are roughly similar for U.S. investment fluctuations while the
variance contribution of the global factor is much smaller for U.S. consumption fluctuations.
The results are qualitatively similar independent of which financial indicator we use. In the
case of output, the share of variance due to the spillovers from the global equity price factor is
about two-thirds that of the global macro factor (10.4 percent versus 16.5 percent), confirming
that financial market spillovers are important but less so than the global macro factor. In the
case of the house price factor, this ratio is about one-half (10.6 percent versus 22.1 percent).

We turn next to a relatively smaller but more open economy, Canada, where one would a priori
expect financial market spillovers to be larger than in the case of the United States. We indeed
find larger spillover effects from the financial cycle in Canada, especially when we use equity
prices as the financial indicator. The global equity price factor accounts for the following
variance shares: 13 percent of output fluctuations, 11 percent of consumption fluctuations, and
19 percent of investment fluctuations. The variance contributions are similar for each of the
macro variables when we use house prices as the financial indicator, and 5-7 percent in the case
of the global interest rate factor. When we look at the breakdown of variance contributions, it
appears that the global macro factor accounts for more of the fluctuations in all three Canadian
macroeconomic aggregates than in the case of the United States.

We also find sizeable financial market spillovers for other G-7 countries. For instance, in the
case of France, over the period 1998-2019, 24 percent of output fluctuations, 7 percent of
consumption fluctuations, and 18 percent of investment fluctuations are accounted for by the
spillovers from the global equity price factor. The corresponding numbers based on the house
price variable are 21 percent, 5 percent, and 17 percent, respectively. For Japan and the United
Kingdom, the contributions to the variance of output fluctuations from spillovers of the global
equity and house prices are around 13-16 percent.

These country-level results largely confirm the major conclusions that we summarized at the
end of the previous sub-section.

5. Spillovers from the Macroeconomy to the Financial Sector

5.1. Global Spillovers

We now explore a different channel for spillovers--from the global macro factor and the U.S.
country-specific macro factor to the financial sector. That is, we seek to understand the role of

                                                17
macroeconomic cycles in driving fluctuations in G-7 countries' financial markets. And it is
clearly of interest to examine if the U.S. business cycle affects global activity through its effects
on world financial markets. As noted in Section 3, we estimate Models 3 and 4 to study
spillovers from the macroeconomy to the financial sector. Model 3 captures spillovers from the
global macro factor to the global financial factor while model 4 captures spillovers from the
U.S. country-specific macro factor. In addition, we estimate a combination of these two models
in which spillovers from the macroeconomy to financial markets are transmitted through both
the global and U.S. country-specific macro factors. Table 5 presents the averages of variance
decompositions based on these three models for each financial variable.23

Our main finding is that there is little evidence of spillovers from macroeconomic cycles to
financial cycles. Spillovers from the macro factors to financial variables are smaller than those
from the financial sector to the macroeconomy. Specifically, the spillovers from the
macroeconomy account for just 1-2 percent of the variance of equity prices and house prices
even if one takes into account spillovers from both the global and U.S. country-specific macro
factors (the relevant results are under the column heading SR). By contrast, the spillovers from
the global and U.S. country-specific macro factors to interest rates are greater, amounting to
5 percent of the variance contribution to fluctuations in interest rates during the period 1998-
2019. Assuming that short-term interest rates are largely reflective of policy interest rates, this
result implies that any commonality in the policy actions of G-7 central banks is influenced to
a significant extent by common fluctuations in key macroeconomic variables in these countries.
The contribution of the U.S. country-specific macro factor to the variance of fluctuations in
interest rates is slightly larger than that of the global macro factor in the second sub-sample.
This is consistent with the observation that the Great Recession that initially hit the U.S.
rapidly induced monetary policy responses from other G-7 economies.

The relative roles of spillovers from the macroeconomy to the financial sector across the two
models and over time are quite different than those of spillovers from the financial sector to
the macroeconomy (Figure 7). For example, the comparison of results from Models 3 and 4
suggest that spillovers from either the global macro factor or the U.S. factor on to global
financial factors are quite muted. Moreover, the variance of financial variables accounted for
by spillovers from the macro factors does not change much over time except in the case of
interest rates. In light of these observations, we again focus on the results from the combined
model in the 1998-2019 period.

Comparing Tables 2 and 5 reveals the importance of separating out the spillover effects of
financial factors from global business cycles that reflect macroeconomic phenomena. For the
period 1998-2019, the variance contribution of the global macro factor to output fluctuations
in each country is on average about 49 percent when we allow for spillovers from the
macroeconomy to equity prices (Table 5, Panel A, last row, column heading W). When we
allow for spillovers from equity prices to the global macro and country-specific factors, the
variance contributions of the macro factors drop to an average of 34 percent (Table 2, Panel
A, last row, column heading W). The difference is accounted for by the spillovers from the
global financial factor on to the global and country-specific macro factors.

Returning to the results in Table 5, over the second sub-sample the global macro factor
accounts for about 48-50 percent of output fluctuations, 13 percent of consumption fluctuations,
and 31-33 percent of investment fluctuations (depending on which financial variable we use).

23
     Some of the results discussed below are summarized in Appendix Figure A1.


                                                   18
The global financial factor, which essentially measures the extent of cross-country comovement
of the relevant financial variable, on average accounts for about 58 percent of equity price
fluctuations and 30 percent of interest rate fluctuations (see column marked F). All of these
shares are higher when the model is estimated over the period 1998-2019 compared to the
period 1985-2007. The global financial factor plays a less important role in explaining house
price comovement.

We also examined the results from the estimation of our combined Models 3 and 4 over 15 year
rolling sub-periods with one-year increments.24 Similar to the findings in the previous section,
there is a significant increase over time in the importance of the global financial factor in
explaining fluctuations in equity prices and interest rates (but not house prices), especially
after the 2007-08 global financial crisis. Specifically, over the 15-year rolling sub-periods, the
average variance of equity prices in G-7 countries due to the global financial factor increased
from about 47 percent from the early 2000s to roughly 60 percent after 2007 in the case of
equity prices.

Spillovers from the macroeconomy to house prices have become larger after the global financial
crisis. Prior to the 2008-09 crisis, spillovers from the macro factors on average accounted for 1
percent of the variation in house prices over the 15 year rolling sub-periods. With the onset of
the crisis, this share rose to 4 percent. Spillovers from the macro factors to interest rates have
not changed much over time, explaining around 4-6 percent of total variation in interest rates.
These results are broadly consistent with our findings from the two sub-samples (1985-2007
and 1998-2019) documented above. Spillovers from the macro factors on to global equity have
not changed much over time.

The conclusion from this set of results is that the global and the U.S. macro factors have a
relatively modest impact on global financial cycles. One exception is that of G-7 short-term
interest rates, which seem to experience significant spillovers from the global and U.S. country-
specific macro factors. As we summarize in the next sub-section, there are also differences
across countries in terms of the strength of macro spillovers since spillovers from the
macroeconomy to the financial sector tend to be more pronounced in some countries.25

These results are generally supportive of some of the earlier findings in the literature. Some of
these studies consider the predictive ability of macroeconomic variables for financial aggregates
while others examine the explanatory power of the second moments of macro variables for the
second moments of financial aggregates. In the context of interest rates, both theory and
evidence point to the presence of an interest rate channel through which movements in policy
rates have implications for macroeconomic outcomes (Woodford, 2003). Some empirical studies
document that interest rates react to changes in macroeconomic variables (Gurkaynak and
Wright, 2012; Koijen, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2017; Bauer and Hamilton, 2018).
However, the existing literature presents a mixed verdict about the role of macroeconomic
fluctuations in explaining cycles in asset prices, including equity prices.26 Some of these studies
consider macro-financial interactions at lower frequencies (rather than the quarterly data we
employ here) and examine the impact of surprise macroeconomic announcements (rather than
the realized data as we do here).

24 Appendix Figure A2 presents the average variance of each financial variable explained by the global financial
factor and spillovers from the global and U.S. country macro factors over the rolling sub-periods.
25
   The posterior coverage intervals around the posterior medians of the estimated variance contributions are provided
in the Appendix Table A6.
26
   On the importance of macroeconomic variables for financial markets, see Stock and Watson (2003), Christiansen,
Schmeling, and Schrimpf (2012), Diebold and Yilmaz (2010, 2015), and Engle, Ghysels, and Sohn (2013).

                                                        19
5.2. Country-Specific Spillovers

Next, we briefly examine country-level results on the importance of spillovers from
macroeconomic aggregates to financial variables. The composite spillovers to financial variables
from macroeconomic fluctuations, operating through both the global and U.S. country-specific
macro factors (combination of Models 3 and 4), are shown for each country and each
macroeconomic variable in Tables 6 and 7 (Appendix Figure A3 highlights key results). We
again focus on the results for 1998-2019.

Table 6 shows that the spillovers from the global and U.S. country-specific macro factors to
financial variables are smaller than those from the financial sector to the macroeconomy across
countries. The largest spillover effects of macroeconomic cycles are on interest rates, with the
spillovers being largest in the cases of France, Canada, and the United States.

Among the financial variables that we consider, global comovement is clearly most pronounced
for equity prices. The contribution of the estimated global factor for equity prices accounts for
at least one-third of the fluctuations in domestic equity prices for all countries. The global
comovement in interest rates is also pronounced, with the global factor accounting for more
than half of the total variance in interest rates in the United States and Canada, and around
one-quarter in France and Germany. For house prices, the contribution of the global financial
factor is typically smaller. These results are consistent with those in section 2.2 (those results
were based on single or multiple factor models estimated on financial variables alone) and the
literature discussed in that section.

The importance of spillovers from the global and U.S. country-specific macro factors to the
global interest rate factor rises over time (Table 7). The average variance of short-term interest
rates ascribed to spillovers from the macro factors increases moderately from 4 percent in 1985-
2007 to 5 percent in 1998-2019. For three countries--France, Germany, and Italy--the share
of the variance in interest rates due to macro spillovers registers a substantial increase. For
house prices, the share of spillovers from macro factors increases substantially in Canada,
France, Italy, and the United Kingdom. The spillovers from macro factors onto equity prices
are quite muted for all countries, even in the second sub-sample (although in most cases the
variance contributions do increase marginally relative to those for the first sub-sample).

6. Robustness Tests: Alternative Specifications and Variables

In this section, we report results from a broad array of extensions to the baseline specifications
as well as additional robustness exercises that incorporate different variables.

6.1. Alternative Specifications and Factors

We first consider alternative specifications that allow for other combinations of factors. The
aim is to address potential concerns about whether the factors we have estimated could be
capturing other driving forces that do not enter into our baseline model.

We estimate a standard dynamic factor model for the three macroeconomic variables that, in
addition to a global factor, allows for variable-specific macroeconomic factors instead of
country-specific factors. Over the full sample, the global factor on average accounts for one-
third of the variation in output in G-7 countries while the variable-specific factor accounts for
nine percent (see Appendix Table A8). The global factor accounts for a substantially greater

                                               20
share of output variation than the variable-specific factor in all countries except Canada. The
same pattern holds for investment fluctuations, except in the case of the United States (where
the contribution of the variable-specific factor is greater), and for consumption fluctuations.
The relative importance of the global factor rises and that of the variable-specific factors falls
when we estimate the model over the period 1998-2019 relative to 1985-2007. In short,
estimating the model using this combination of factors confirms the importance of the global
factor and suggests that leaving out the variable-specific factors is unlikely to have influenced
our main results.

Next, we check if there is a global factor that is important for fluctuations in all three
macroeconomic variables and, in turn, each of the three financial variables (the results are in
Appendix Table A9). That is, we now allow for a common factor across four variables--the
three macro variables and the relevant financial variable. We find that there is no common
factor that significantly explains fluctuations in the macroeconomic variables and equity prices.
The common factor in this model explains about half of the total variance in equity prices but,
on average, less than 8 percent of the variance in any of the macro variables. When other
financial variables are included in the model, the common factor accounts for a sizable fraction
of the variance in the macroeconomic variables but less than 11 percent and 3 percent,
respectively, of the variance in house prices and interest rates. These results confirm the
validity of our modeling assumption that there is no single common factor that drives both the
macro and financial variables.

Finally, we estimate a standard factor model that includes all three financial variables and
allows for global and country-specific financial factors. In other words, we also allow for
country-specific financial cycles that encompass equity prices, house prices, and interest rates.
The results (see Appendix Table A10) indicate that the global financial factor is significant
only for equity prices, which is consistent with the baseline results shown in Section 2. Country-
specific financial factors on average explain only a small fraction of the variance in equity prices
and interest rates, although they do seem to matter more for house prices. Overall, the results
validate our modeling choice of including one financial variable in the baseline model at a time,
rather than incorporating all three financial variables and additional factors (which would,
moreover, complicate interpretation of the results).

6.2. Implied Contemporaneous Correlation Between Macroeconomic and Financial Variables

A simple way to check the validity of our factor model specification is to compare the
contemporaneous actual correlations between macro and financial variables in our dataset with
the implied correlations of the corresponding pairs of variables based on our dynamic factor
models.27 In the data, the average correlation (G-7 average) of macro variables with equity and
house prices is 0.15 and 0.18, respectively, over the period 1985-2019. Interest rates are not
correlated with macroeconomic variables (average correlation coefficient: 0.04). The implied
contemporaneous correlations from our estimated models are quite close to the actual
correlations in the case of equity prices (0.11) and interest rates (0.02). The implied correlation
between macro variables and house prices (0.04) is lower than the actual correlation, which
may partly reflect our results on the weaker role of the global factor for G-7 house prices



27
  Due to the lack of common shocks between macro and financial variables and the orthogonality of the idiosyncratic
terms, the implied correlation between any pair of macro and financial variables is given by:   (  ,   ),
where  and  are factor loadings of the macro and financial variable, respectively, and (  ,   ) is the
correlation coefficient between the estimated global macro and financial factors.

                                                       21
compared to other financial variables. Overall, the dynamic factor estimation results capture
the correlations between macro and financial variables well.

6.3. Credit Growth as an Alternative Financial Variable

We have focused on three key financial variables that represent major financial markets with
potential macro implications. In this sub-section, we consider an additional quantity variable
that is relevant for macro outcomes--growth in real credit to the nonfinancial sector. Detailed
results, which we only briefly summarize here, are in Appendix Figure A4 and Appendix Table
A11.

Consistent with other financial factors as well as macroeconomic factors, the global credit factor
tracks global recessions and subsequent recoveries. The magnitude of spillovers originating from
the global credit factor is, however, smaller than that of other financial variables: the global
credit factor (models 1 and 2 combined) on average accounts for only 4-6 percent of the variance
of output, consumption, and investment in G-7 economies during 1998-2019. We find negligible
spillovers from the global macroeconomic factor and U.S. macro factor (models 3 and 4) to the
global credit factor. The average variance of credit accounted for by spillovers from these two
macro factors is less than 1 percent.

Our findings are broadly consistent with those in Helbling et al. (2011), who document that
shocks originating in credit markets appear to play a smaller role during "normal" business
cycles and a larger one during periods of financial stress. Other studies argue for a more
prominent role for credit shocks in explaining the global dimension of the Great Recession
(Perri and Quadrini, 2018) and in accounting for macro fluctuations at the country level (e.g.,
Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012).28

6.4. Long-term versus Short-term Interest Rates

Next, we replace the short-term interest rates used in our baseline models (yields on 3-month
government paper), which can be regarded as a close to approximation to policy rates, with
long-term interest rates (ten-year government bond yields). Variance decomposition results for
spillovers between macro factors and the long-term interest rate factor are reported in Table
A12. The results are in general similar to those using short-term interest rates (see panel C in
Tables 2 and 5). However, there are some noteworthy differences. First, the spillovers from the
global long-term interest rate factor to macro variables (combination of models 1 and 2) are
slightly greater (about 2-3 percentage points more) than was the case with short-term interest
rates. Second, the spillovers from macro factors to long-term interest rates are also greater than
was the case for short-term rates. Third, comovement among G-7 long-term interest rates, as
measured by the average variance contributions of the common interest rate factor to interest
rate fluctuations in each country, is higher than for short-term government bond yields. One
interpretation of these findings is that global macro fluctuations are associated not only with
cross-country comovement of short-term interest rates (via coordinated monetary policies) but
also comovement of inflation expectations and risk premia, which are additional determinants
of long-term bond yields. We leave a more careful examination of this issue for future work.




28
   Some authors contend that indicators of credit standards applied by lenders and credit spreads are better
indicators than credit growth to assess the strength of linkages between credit markets and the macroeconomy
(Lown and Morgan, 2006; Meeks, 2012; Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012; Faust et al., 2013).

                                                    22
6.5. Alternative House Price Series

Obtaining consistent cross-country data on house prices is a challenge. We use data from
Haver Analytics for our benchmark results. In this sub-section, we examine whether the results
would be affected if we use BIS real house price indexes instead. The results (see Appendix
Table A13) were quite similar even in terms of magnitudes. For instance, the spillover effects
of the house price factor on average account for 17 percent of the variance of output during
1998-2019 (16 percent in the baseline, Panel B of Table 2). The spillover effects from macro
factors to house prices remain small and the average share of the global house price factor in
accounting for the variance of house prices in each country is similar for both house price
variables.

6.6. Does the United States Drive the Main Results?

The U.S. remains the dominant economy in the world, especially in terms of international
finance. To test whether our results, including the estimates of various global factors, could
simply be proxying for the influence of the U.S, we now re-estimate models 1 and 3 excluding
the U.S. from the dataset.29 Comparing the results regarding spillovers in Table A14 to the
corresponding ones in Tables 2 and 5, most of the main results (in terms of average variance
contributions) look similar. One exception is that the spillover effects from the global house
price factor and the global interest rate factor to macroeconomic variables are much smaller
when the U.S. is left out. Moreover, the degree of co-movement among equity prices and house
prices decreases substantially when the U.S. is excluded. Clearly, the U.S. is an important
driver of global cycles in those two financial markets, but the nature of financial-macroeconomic
spillovers that are our main focus is not just an artifact of U.S. economic dominance.

6.7. Alternative Sub-samples

The two overlapping sub-samples we have used so far represent the pre-global financial crisis
(1985-2007) and post-Asian crisis (1998-2019) periods. We now check the sensitivity of the sub-
sample results when we split the sample into two nonoverlapping periods of roughly equal
length: 1985-2000 and 2001-2019. The detailed results from this exercise are reported in
Appendix Table A15. The variance shares (for all three macro variables) of the global
macroeconomic factor and spillovers from the equity and house price factors double between
the two periods, while the shares of the country-specific macro factors are halved. These results,
which indicate rising comovement and increasing spillovers over time, are consistent with those
reported in Section 3 based on the original sub-samples and also those based on the 15-year
rolling windows (Figures 5 and 6). Variance decompositions based on the combined models 3
and 4, which capture macro to financial spillovers, estimated over the two new sub-samples
are again consistent with those based on the baseline sub-samples and the rolling-window
estimations. For instance, the spillover effects from macro to financial variables are sizeable
only in the case of interest rates.




29
  We have already quantified the direct impact of the U.S. on global macro-financial linkages via models 2 and 4.
Model 2 quantifies the spillover effects from financial variables to the U.S. country factor. Model 4 quantifies the
spillovers effects from the U.S. country factor onto each financial variable. The latter results show that the U.S. has
a sizeable impact on the dynamics in G7 short-term interest rates. The remaining question then is the sensitivity of
estimates of the global macroeconomic and financial factors, and their spillover effects, to the exclusion of U.S. data.

                                                          23
6.8. Higher-Frequency (Monthly) Data

An important issue is whether our use of quarterly data drives the key results, for instance by
conflating common shocks and spillovers. If shocks are transmitted rapidly from financial to
real variables and vice versa, our estimates would underestimate actual spillovers. As discussed
earlier, while asset prices move quickly in response to news and other shocks, macro variables
tend to be more sluggish in general and the economy-wide aggregates we study are available
only at a quarterly frequency and are reported with a lag. Nevertheless, in order to investigate
this issue further, we use monthly industrial production as an indicator of macroeconomic
cycles. In this part of the analysis, we focus on the period 1998-2019 and, since we use just one
macroeconomic variable, only models 1 and 3 are applicable in analyzing spillovers.30

Appendix Table A16 (Panel A) presents variance decompositions from a single factor model
applied to each of the financial variables. The global financial factor accounts for a large
fraction of the variance of equity prices but this is not the case for the other two financial
variables. In Panel B of Table A16, we present results from models that include industrial
production and each of the financial variables in turn, allowing for one common global factor.
The global factor has a significant explanatory role only for the variance of equity prices and
there is little evidence of strong comovement between industrial production and any of the
financial variables. These results are broadly consistent with our benchmark results based on
quarterly data.

When we allow for spillovers from financial variables to the macroeconomy (Model 1), we find
significant spillovers only from equity prices (Appendix Table A17).31 Moreover, the shares of
variance in industrial production accounted for by the global macro factor are much larger
than the shares accounted for by spillover effects. Appendix Table A18 shows that the spillover
effects from industrial production to the financial variables (Model 3) are small. Reflecting the
cross-country comovement of financial variables that we found even in the quarterly data, the
global financial factor accounts for a substantial fraction of the variance of each of the financial
variables. The degree of comovement of financial variables is higher in the monthly data than
in the quarterly data. Other than that, our main results on the relative importance of different
spillovers are preserved when we use monthly data.32

7. Conclusions

Our objective in this paper was to provide a joint empirical characterization of macroeconomic
and financial cycles, and the linkages between these cycles. We developed a new dynamic factor
model that allows us to study business cycle comovement, evaluate the magnitude of financial
market spillovers onto real macroeconomic aggregates (and vice versa), and differentiate
between global shocks and spillovers. We applied the model to quarterly macroeconomic and
financial market data for the G-7 economies over the period 1985-2019.


30
   Monthly data on house prices was available for only four of the G-7 countries: Canada, Japan, U.K., and U.S.
We use monthly growth rates of all variables except interest rates, for which we use the change in levels. As in the
previous exercises, the Stock and Watson (2012) local mean approach is used to eliminate long-term trends in the
data.
31
   The global house price factor exhibits smaller spillover effects onto the macroeconomic factor than in the
benchmark results. However, since the monthly global house price factor is extracted from data for only four
countries, this direct comparison might not be appropriate.
32
   In the benchmark results, one interesting finding was a sizable spillover effect from the U.S. country factor to
interest rates. Replicating that result is not feasible here since we do not have country-specific macro factors based
on multiple macro variables.

                                                         24
The major novelty of our factor model is that, unlike existing models, it enables us to
distinguish between common shocks and spillovers from one sector to another. For instance,
we are able to capture the extent to which spillovers from financial markets affect global
business cycles. This provides an economically valuable decomposition of why there is
comovement of some key macroeconomic and financial variables across the world. The model
is general enough that we can also model spillovers from one country to others. This adds a
second layer to our understanding of the nature of comovement. The model allows us to analyze
if it is the transmission of country-specific shocks or the prevalence of common shocks that
drives global business cycle comovement.

Our main findings are as follows. Over the period 1985-2019, there is evidence of common
business cycles, as reflected in the comovement of macroeconomic aggregates, among the G-7
economies. There are also common cycles in certain financial variables, especially equity prices
and interest rates.

Our analysis documents that the global macro factor plays an important role in explaining
fluctuations in macroeconomic variables but there are also quantitatively significant spillovers
from shocks to specific financial variables--equity prices and house prices, in particular--on to
macroeconomic variables. Interest rates (and credit) do matter as well but they are
quantitatively less important as sources of such spillover effects. Common cycles among real
and financial variables, respectively, and also the spillovers from financial to real variables are
stronger in the period leading up to and following the financial crisis.

While the global financial crisis is a special case, a broader understanding of the nature and
sources of comovement of business and financial cycles and the propagation mechanisms for
global, country or variable-specific shocks is important for designing effective stabilization
policies at the national level and for coordination of policies at the global level. It is also an
essential step to guide the development of theoretical models that could help explain changes
in global business and financial cycles and transmission mechanisms between them. A better
understanding of global macro-financial cycles and spillovers is an important building block for
the design of dynamic models that can replicate the changing nature of these linkages. Such
models could be helpful in analyzing alternative policy responses to different shocks.

There are a number of directions in which this work could be extended. The first would be to
integrate a broader group of countries, including emerging markets, into the analysis to examine
the shifting dynamics of macro-financial cycles across advanced and emerging market
economies. Second, it would be useful to investigate how business cycle dynamics play out at
the sectoral level and, in turn, how aggregate business and financial cycles are affected by
sectoral dynamics. Third, in light of our findings, it would be beneficial to explore the two-way
spillovers between domestic and global macro-financial cycles in the context of specific asset
prices. Finally, it would be worth considering how policy responses, including monetary, fiscal,
and financial sector policies, shape the transmission channels and feedback effects between
different groups of countries. This may require a different class of models, however.




                                                25
                                        References

Adrian, Tobias, Paolo Colla, and Hyun Song Shin, 2013, "Which Financial Frictions? Parsing
the Evidence from the Financial Crisis of 2007 to 2009," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012,
Vol. 27, eds. Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, pp. 159-214, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Leonardo Gambacorta, Linda S. Goldberg, and Stefano Schiaffi, 2017, "The
Shifting Drivers of Global Liquidity, " NBER Working Papers No. 23565, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge.

Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, 1992, "International Real Business
Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100:4, pp. 745-775.

Bauer, Michael D., and James D. Hamilton, 2018, "Robust Bond Risk Premia," Review of
Financial Studies, Vol. 31:2, pp. 399-488..

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, "The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, eds. John
B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, pp. 1341-1393, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Borio, Claudio, 2014, "The Financial Cycle and Macroeconomics: What Have We Learnt?"
Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 45, pp. 182-198.

Breitung, Jörg, and Sandra Eickmeier, 2016, "Analyzing International Business and Financial
Cycles Using Multi-Level Factor Models: A Comparison of Alternative Approaches," in
Dynamic Factor Models, Advances in Econometrics, Vol. 35, eds. Eric Hillebrand and Siem
Jan Koopman, pp. 177-214, Bradford: Emerald Group Publishing.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Thomas Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2013, "Macroeconomics
with Financial Frictions: A Survey," in Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth
World Congress of the Econometric Society, Volume II, D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano and E.
Dekel (eds), pp. 4-94. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Buch, Claudia M., Matthieu Bussiere, Linda S. Goldberg, and Robert Hills, 2019. "The
International Transmission of Monetary Policy, " Journal of International Money and Finance,
Vol. 91, pp. 29-48.

Carlstrom, Charles T., and Timothy S. Fuerst, 1997, "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis," American Economic Review, Vol.
87:5, pp. 893-910.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Andrew K. Rose, 2017, "How Important is the Global
Financial Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows," IMF Working Paper No. 17/193, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Cesa-Bianchi, Ambrogio, 2013, "Housing Cycles and Macroeconomic Fluctuations: A Global
Perspective," Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 37, pp. 215-238.




                                            26
Cesa-Bianchi, Ambrogio, Luis Felipe Cespedes, and Alessandro Rebucci, 2015, "Global
Liquidity, House Prices, and the Macroeconomy: Evidence from Advanced and Emerging
Economies," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 47:S1, pp. 301-335.

Christiansen, Charlotte, Maik Schmeling, and Andreas Schrimpf, 2012, "A Comprehensive
Look at Financial Volatility Prediction by Economic Variables," Journal of Applied Economics,
Vol. 27:6, pp. 956-977.

Ciccarelli, Matteo, Eva Ortega, and Maria T. Valderrama, 2016, "Commonalities and Cross-
Country Spillovers in Macroeconomic-Financial Linkages." B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics,
Vol. 16:1, pp. 231-275.

Claessens, Stijn, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2018, "Frontiers of Macrofinancial Linkages" BIS Papers
No. 95, Bank for International Settlement, Basel, Switzerland.

Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, Luc Laeven, and Fabián Valencia, 2014, Financial Crises:
Causes, Consequences, and Policy Reponses, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones, 2009, "What Happens During
Recessions, Crunches and Busts?" Economic Policy, Vol. 24:60, pp. 653-700.

------, 2011, "Financial Cycles: What? How? When?" NBER International Seminar on
Macroeconomics 2010, eds. Richard Clarida and Francesco Giavazzi, pp. 303-343, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

------, 2012, "How Do Business and Financial Cycles Interact?" Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 87:1, pp. 178-190.

Cochrane, John H., 2017, "Macro-Finance," Review of Finance, Vol. 21:3, pp. 945-985.

Dedola, Luca, and Giovanni Lombardo, 2012, "Financial Frictions, Financial Integration and
the International Propagation of Shocks," Economic Policy, Vol. 27:70, pp. 319-359.

Devereux, Michael B., and Alan Sutherland, 2011, "Evaluating International Financial
Integration under Leverage Constraints," European Economic Review, Vol. 55:3, pp. 427-442.

Diebold, Francis X., and Kamil Yilmaz, 2010, "Macroeconomic Volatility and Stock Market
Volatility, Worldwide," in Volatility and Time Series Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Robert
F. Engle, eds. Tim Bollerslev, Jeffrey R. Russell, and Mark W. Watson, pp. 97-116, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Diebold, F. X., and K. Yilmaz, 2015, Financial and Macroeconomic Connectedness: A Network
Approach to Measurement and Monitoring. New York: Oxford University Press.

di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean, 2018, "The Micro Origins of
International Business Cycle Comovement," American Economic Review, Vol. 108:1, pp. 82-
108.

Eickmeier, Sandra, and Tim Ng, 2015, "How Do US Credit Supply Shocks Propagate
Internationally? A GVAR Approach," European Economic Review, Vol. 74, pp. 128-145.


                                             27
Engle, Robert F., Eric Ghysels, and Bumjean Sohn, 2013, "Stock Market Volatility and
Macroeconomic Fundamentals," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95:3, pp. 776-797.

Faust, Jon, Simon Gilchrisst, Jonathan H. Wright, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2013, "Credit Spreads
as Predictors of Real-Time Economic Activity: A Bayesian Model-Averaging Approach,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95:5, pp. 1501-1519.

Forbes, Kristin, 2013, "The `Big C': Identifying Contagion," The Changing Policy Landscape,
Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 23-87.

Geanakoplos, John, 2010, "The Leverage Cycle," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Vol.
24, eds. Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, pp. 1-65, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2012, "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 102:4, pp. 1692-1720.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., and Jonathan H. Wright, 2012, "Macroeconomics and the Term
Structure," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 50:2, pp. 331-367.

Helbling, Thomas, Raju Huidrom, M. Ayhan Kose, and Christopher Otrok, 2011, "Do Credit
Shocks Matter? A Global Perspective," European Economic Review, Vol. 55:3, pp. 340-353.

Hirata, Hideaki, M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Marco E. Terrones, 2012, "Global
House Price Fluctuations: Synchronization and Determinants," NBER International Seminar
on Macroeconomics 2012, eds. Francesco Giavazzi and Kenneth D. West, pp. 119-166, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Huo, Zhen, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, 2019, "The Global Business
Cycle: Measurement and Transmission," NBER Working Paper No. 25978.

Iacoviello, Matteo, 2005, "House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
Business Cycle," American Economic Review, Vol. 95:3, pp. 739-764.

Imbs, Jean, 2010, "The First Global Recession in Decades," IMF Economic Review, Vol. 58:2,
pp. 327-354.

Jackson, Laura E., M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Michael T. Owyang, 2016,
"Specification and Estimation of Bayesian Dynamic Factor Models: A draw Carlo Analysis,"
in Dynamic Factor Models, Advances in Econometrics, Vol. 35, eds. Eric Hillebrand and Siem
Jan Koopman, pp. 361-400, Bradford: Emerald Group Publishing.

Jermann, Urban, and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2012, "Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 102:1, pp. 238-271.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2017, "Macrofinancial History and the
New Business Cycle Facts," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016, Vol. 31, eds. Martin
Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, pp. 213-263, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                             28
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou, and José-Luis Peydró, 2013, "Financial
Regulation, Financial Globalization, and the Synchronization of Economic Activity," Journal
of Finance, Vol. 68:3, pp. 1179-1228.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Hanno Lustig, and Stijin Van Nieuwerburgh, 2017. "The Cross-section and
Time Series of Stock and Bond Returns," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 88:C, pp. 50-
69.

Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles R. Nelson, 1998, "Business Cycle Turning Points, A New
Coincident Index, and Tests of Duration Dependence Based on a Dynamic Factor Model with
Regime Switching," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 80:2, pp. 188-201.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, "Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 105:2, pp. 211-248.

Kollmann, Robert, 2013, "Global Banks, Financial Shocks, and International Business Cycles:
Evidence from an Estimated Model," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 45:S2, pp.
159-195.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad, 2012, "Global Business Cycles:
Convergence or Decoupling?" International Economic Review, Vol. 53:2, pp. 511-538.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles Whiteman, 2003, "International Business
Cycles: World, Region, and Country Specific Factors," American Economic Review, Vol. 93:4,
pp. 1216-1239.

------, 2008, "Understanding the Evolution of World Business Cycles," Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 75:1, pp. 110-130.

Kose, M. Ayhan, and Marco E. Terrones, 2015, Collapse and Revival: Understanding Global
Recessions and Recoveries, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

Liu, Zheng, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha, 2013, "Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic
Fluctuations," Econometrica, Vol. 81:3, pp. 1147-1184.

Lown, Cara, and Donald P. Morgan, 2006, "The Credit Cycle and the Business Cycle: New
Findings Using the Loan Officer Opinion Survey," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol.
38:6, pp. 1575-1597.

Meeks, Roland, 2012, "Do Credit Market Shocks Drive Output Fluctuations? Evidence from
Corporate Spreads and Defaults," Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, Vol. 36:4, pp.
568-584.

Mendoza, Enrique G., 2010, "Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage," American
Economic Review, Vol. 100:5, pp. 1941-1966.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, 2015, "Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real
Economy," Journal of Finance, Vol. 70:6, 2587-2634.




                                            29
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey, 2015, "World Asset Markets and the Global
Financial Cycle," NBER Working Paper No. 21722, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge.

Perri, Fabrizio, and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2018, "International Recessions," American Economic
Review, Vol. 108:4-5, pp. 935-984.

Prieto, Esteban, Sandra Eickmeier, and Massimiliano Marcellino, 2016, "Time Variation in
MacroFinancial Linkages," Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 31:1, pp. 1215-1233.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2014, "Macroeconomic Effects of Asset-Price Shocks in a Globalized
Financial Market," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 116:1, pp. 190-217.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries
of Financial Folly, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Rey, Hélène, 2015, "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
Independence," NBER Working Paper No. 21162, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge.

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson, 2003, "Forecasting Output and Inflation: The Role of
Asset Prices," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 41:3, pp. 788-829.

------, 2005, "Understanding Changes in International Business Cycles," Journal of the
European Economic Association, Vol. 3:5, pp. 968-1006.

------, 2011, "Dynamic Factor Models," in The Oxford Handbook of Economic Forecasting,
eds. Michael P. Clements and David F. Hendry, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

------, 2012, "Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-09 Recession," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 81-156.

------, 2016, "Dynamic Factor Models, Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressions, and
Structural Vector Autoregressions in Macroeconomics," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol.
2, eds. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, pp. 415-525, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                            30
                                  Table 1. Variance Decompositions
                          (Models with Only Financial Variables; 1998-2019)

                                                    A. Equity Prices

                  One Factor Model                 Two Factor Model                       Three Factor Model
                 Global    Idiosyncratic   Global     Variable Idiosyncratic   Global    Variable Country Idiosyncratic
Canada           64.4          35.6         1.9        67.3        30.8         0.7       67.8       0.2        30.7
France           63.1          36.9        20.9        68.8        10.4        35.9       55.7       0.2         7.0
Germany          64.7          35.3        14.5        67.1        18.4        25.9       55.4       0.8        16.2
Italy            45.4          54.6        19.4        53.1        27.4        33.7       41.7       0.3        24.8
Japan            45.8          54.2         5.3        46.6        48.1         2.6       49.5     32.6         14.7
United Kingdom   78.7          21.3         1.5        79.0        19.5         0.7       79.4       0.8        18.1
United States    74.3          25.7         3.0        79.6        17.4         0.7       81.8       2.0        14.5
Average          62.3          37.7         9.5        65.9        24.6        14.3       61.6       5.3        18.0


                                                    B. House Prices

                  One Factor Model                  Two Factor Model                       Three Factor Model
                 Global    Idiosyncratic   Global     Variable Idiosyncratic    Global    Variable Country Idiosyncratic
Canada             8.7         91.3          1.1         8.2          90.7        0.5      28.6      44.3        26.2
France             6.9         93.1          0.7        16.8          82.5        0.2      14.3       2.9        82.5
Germany            0.0        100.0          1.5         0.7          97.8        0.8       0.6       8.0        90.3
Italy              8.2         91.8          0.9         5.6          93.5        0.1      29.0       0.4        70.0
Japan              0.0        100.0          0.1        11.3          88.6        0.1       0.3       7.7        91.7
United Kingdom     6.7         93.3          1.6        76.2          22.1        0.6      82.1       1.6        14.9
United States      0.6         99.4          2.1        15.0          82.8        0.2       0.4      29.3        69.6
Average            4.4         95.6          1.2        19.1          79.7        0.4      22.2      13.4        63.6




                                                          31
                                                    C. Interest Rates
                     One Factor Model               Two Factor Model                     Three Factor Model
                   Global   Idiosyncratic   Global    Variable Idiosyncratic   Global   Variable Country Idiosyncratic
Canada               1.3        98.7          0.9        0.6       98.6          0.2     65.7       5.6       24.5
France               0.6        99.4          0.7       61.2       38.2          0.5     40.5       2.2       55.3
Germany              1.3        98.7          3.3       33.5       63.2          2.7     27.5       1.3       67.5
Italy                0.3        99.7          0.6       19.1       80.4          0.4      9.0       1.0       88.9
Japan                0.6        99.4          2.7        1.5       95.9          0.6      5.2      10.0       83.3
United Kingdom       4.1        95.9          0.3       14.6       85.0          0.7     17.2       1.2       80.3
United States        0.1        99.9          6.4       27.0       66.6          0.8     44.8      40.6       13.7
Average              1.2        98.8          2.1       22.5       75.4          0.8     30.0       8.9       59.1
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The variance contributions are
attributed to: Global (global factor), Variable (variable-specific factor), Country (country-specific factor), and
Idiosyncratic (idiosyncratic factor). One factor model refers to the dynamic factor model that includes only a global
factor common to all variables and countries. Two factor model includes: (i) a global factor common to all variables
and countries; and (ii) variable-specific factors that capture common cross-country fluctuations specific to each
financial variable. Three factor model includes (i) a global factor common to all variables and countries; (ii) variable-
specific factors that capture common cross-country fluctuations specific to each financial variable; and (iii) country-
specific factors that capture the comovement of all financial variables within a particular country. The last row in
each panel shows the unweighted average of variance contributions in the respective columns.




                                                           32
   Table 2. Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Financial Sector to Macroeconomy
                         (Models 1, 2, and 1&2; G-7 Averages)

                                                  A. Model with Equity Prices

                            Output                       Consumption                  Investment           Equity prices
                W        C      SF           I     W       C      SF      I     W      C      SF     I       F      I
              Model 1
 1985-2019     31.4     33.1     7.4    28.2       7.1    29.2    1.7   62.0   20.1   24.4    4.7   50.8   56.0   44.0
 1985-2007     23.5     39.7     3.6    33.2       7.7    29.7    1.2   61.5   18.8   23.2    2.8   55.2   42.7   57.3
 1998-2019     34.6     24.7    15.4    25.3       8.6    31.3    3.9   56.3   22.3   17.0   10.0   50.6   59.6   40.4

              Model 2
 1985-2019     40.0     32.6      1.3   26.1      10.2    28.0    1.1   60.7   26.2   23.1    1.0   49.8   55.9   44.1
 1985-2007     30.3     36.5      2.1   31.1      10.8    29.1    1.6   58.5   24.3   21.6    1.3   52.8   50.6   49.4
 1998-2019     47.0     25.6      1.9   25.5      12.3    28.6    2.1   57.0   31.0   16.7    1.2   51.1   59.2   40.8

              Model 1&2
 1985-2019     31.7     33.6     8.7    26.0       7.3    29.6    2.9   60.3   20.6   22.5    5.7   51.2   55.9   44.1
 1985-2007     21.5     39.0     6.5    33.0       6.8    29.5    3.0   60.6   17.0   23.0    4.8   55.2   50.4   49.6
 1998-2019     33.6     24.4    17.3    24.7       8.3    30.7    6.2   54.8   22.1   16.1   11.4   50.4   59.3   40.7


                                                 B. Model with House Prices

                         Output                          Consumption                  Investment           House prices
              W         C       SF       I         W      C       SF     I      W      C     SF      I       F      I
             Model 1
1985-2019    33.7      33.0     6.2     27.2       8.1   28.1     1.5   62.3   21.4   25.0    3.9   49.6   12.4    87.6
1985-2007    25.7      38.6     3.6     32.2       8.9   29.7     1.3   60.0   20.0   22.7    2.8   54.4   10.7    89.3
1998-2019    38.8      23.1    14.7     23.4      10.5   31.0     3.9   54.6   26.3   16.0    9.9   47.9   19.8    80.2

             Model 2
1985-2019    37.0      33.3     2.0     27.7       8.1   28.4     1.5   62.0   23.6   23.8    1.3   51.3   10.5    89.5
1985-2007    27.6      37.8     3.2     31.4       9.0   29.8     2.3   58.8   21.7   21.6    2.0   54.7   10.6    89.4
1998-2019    50.0      23.7     1.9     24.4      13.8   28.1     2.2   55.9   33.9   16.8    1.3   48.0   20.4    79.6

             Model 1&2
1985-2019    33.0      33.7     8.2     25.2       7.8   29.0     3.1   60.1   21.4   22.1    5.4   51.2   12.4    87.6
1985-2007    19.2      41.8     5.9     33.2       5.5   30.2     3.2   61.0   16.3   25.2    4.2   54.3    9.6    90.4
1998-2019    39.8      21.9    16.1     22.3      11.2   28.9     6.3   53.6   27.7   15.4   11.1   45.8   20.0    80.0




                                                                 33
                                          C. Model with Interest Rates
                        Output                     Consumption                    Investment             Interest rates
              W        C     SF     I        W      C      SF      I       W       C     SF      I        F         I
            Model 1
1985-2019    38.5     34.4   1.3   25.9      9.6   28.0    0.3   62.1     25.0   23.2    0.8    50.9     24.5     75.5
1985-2007    26.4     38.1   3.0   32.5      9.2   29.1    1.1   60.5     20.4   23.6    2.4    53.7     24.3     75.7
1998-2019    48.8     23.2   4.4   23.6     14.0   28.9    1.3   55.8     32.7   16.5    3.0    47.8     30.5     69.5

            Model 2
1985-2019    39.6     33.5   1.4   25.6     10.0   27.6    1.1   61.2     25.9   22.8    1.0    50.4     24.7     75.3
1985-2007    27.2     38.6   2.2   31.9      9.1   29.7    1.7   59.5     21.7   22.2    1.4    54.8     23.9     76.1
1998-2019    48.8     24.6   1.6   25.1     12.9   29.0    2.0   56.1     32.7   17.6    1.1    48.6     31.2     68.8

            Model 1&2
1985-2019    38.9     32.6   3.0   25.5      9.9   27.6    1.6   61.0     25.6   22.9    2.1    49.5     24.6     75.4
1985-2007    20.6     41.4   5.9   32.1      6.4   33.0    3.6   57.0     18.4   26.4    4.5    50.7     24.9     75.1
1998-2019    48.0     22.2   7.1   22.7     13.8   28.6    3.5   54.1     33.3   16.0    5.0    45.7     30.9     69.1

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged across
the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro
factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SF (spillovers from financial to macro
factors), and I (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 1, the financial factor spills over to the global macro factor. In
Model 2, the financial factor spills over directly to the country-specific macro factor. Models 1 and 2 combined
captures both channels through which the financial factor affects macro fluctuations.




                                                          34
                       Table 3. Country-Specific Variance Decompositions:
                Spillovers from Financial Sector to Macroeconomy (Models 1&2)

                                    Equity prices                      House prices            Interest rates
                                Y          C           I          Y          C           I    Y       C           I
Canada       1985-2019        6.6        3.9         7.7         6.5        3.9        6.9   2.5     1.2        2.7
             1985-2007        4.4        1.7         2.8         5.4        2.4        3.2   5.5     2.7        3.5
             1998-2019       13.1       11.2        18.7        12.5       10.6       17.1   5.6     4.7        7.2
France       1985-2019       13.4         2.6       11.0        11.3        2.3        9.4   4.0     1.9        2.9
             1985-2007       12.8         4.0       11.3         8.0        3.3        6.8   7.8     4.7        7.0
             1998-2019       24.1         6.7       17.5        20.6        5.2       17.4   8.9     3.3        7.3
Germany      1985-2019        9.5         1.2        5.0         8.5        1.4        4.6   3.1     0.9        1.9
             1985-2007        5.8         2.0        4.3         5.1        2.2        3.4   4.3     1.8        3.6
             1998-2019       22.3         2.0       12.2        19.6        1.6       11.3   8.2     1.1        5.2
Italy        1985-2019       11.5         3.5        4.5        10.1        3.9        4.6   3.1     1.9        2.0
             1985-2007        8.7         5.7        5.6         6.0        3.9        4.6   5.9     4.0        4.7
             1998-2019       22.4         6.8        8.3        20.1        8.2        8.5   8.9     6.1        4.3
Japan        1985-2019        6.9         2.4        3.0         6.4        2.3        2.8   2.7     1.5        1.2
             1985-2007        5.0         2.7        2.9         4.8        3.2        2.8   4.8     2.5        2.6
             1998-2019       13.4         3.8        5.8        12.9        4.5        6.0   5.9     2.5        2.8
United   1985-2019            6.3         2.6        1.6         7.5        3.5        1.9   2.4     1.3        0.7
 Kingdom 1985-2007            2.9         1.6        1.2         5.6        3.4        2.0   4.5     3.6        1.6
         1998-2019           15.4         5.5        3.3        16.2        6.1        3.6   6.9     2.6        1.6
United       1985-2019        6.6         4.0        7.1         7.1        4.6        7.5   3.1     2.2        3.2
 States      1985-2007        5.9         3.7        5.4         6.5        4.3        6.8   8.3     5.8        8.8
             1998-2019       10.4         7.1       14.0        10.6        7.8       13.8   5.5     4.3        6.7
Average      1985-2019        8.7         2.9        5.7         8.2        3.1        5.4   3.0     1.6        2.1
             1985-2007        6.5         3.0        4.8         5.9        3.2        4.2   5.9     3.6        4.5
             1998-2019       17.3         6.2       11.4        16.1        6.3       11.1   7.1     3.5        5.0

Notes: This table shows the variance shares attributable to spillovers from the financial sector to the
macroeconomy. The relevant spillovers are from the global financial factors (equity prices, house prices, and
interest rates) to fluctuations in macro variables through the global macro factor and the country-specific macro
factor. The results are based on the combined Model 1 and 2, which captures spillovers to the global macro factor
(Model 1) and to the country-specific macro factor (Model 2) through which the financial factor affects macro
activity. Y, C, and I refer to output, consumption, and investment, respectively.




                                                           35
                        Table 4. Country-Specific Variance Decompositions:
                        Spillovers From Financial Sector to Macroeconomy
                                     (Models 1&2; 1998-2019)

                                              Equity prices                 House prices             Interest rates
                                          Y          C           I     Y          C           I     Y       C            I
Canada      Global Macro Factor        26.2       22.9        40.1   32.5       28.2       46.4   40.8    34.6        55.8
            Country-Specific Factor    12.7        9.6         3.7   11.4        6.4        6.5    9.5     7.8         5.9
            Idiosyncratic Factor       48.1       56.3        37.5   43.5       54.8       29.9   44.1    52.9        31.2
            Financial Spillovers       13.1       11.2        18.7   12.5       10.6       17.1    5.6     4.7         7.2
France      Global Macro Factor        48.3        6.8        36.4   55.3        8.9       47.9   66.2    10.9        57.7
            Country-Specific Factor    15.5       30.5         5.5   13.3       33.2        4.4   14.0    30.8         4.8
            Idiosyncratic Factor       12.1       56.0        40.6   10.8       52.7       30.3   10.9    55.0        30.1
            Financial Spillovers       24.1        6.7        17.5   20.6        5.2       17.4    8.9     3.3         7.3
Germany     Global Macro Factor        46.4        0.6        22.5   52.5        0.8       27.7   62.2     1.1        32.5
            Country-Specific Factor    15.4       25.1        25.1   14.6       22.7       24.2   15.9    21.7        26.8
            Idiosyncratic Factor       15.9       72.2        40.3   13.4       74.8       36.7   13.7    76.2        35.5
            Financial Spillovers       22.3        2.0        12.2   19.6        1.6       11.3    8.2     1.1         5.2
Italy       Global Macro Factor        46.0        5.8        15.4   52.2        8.7       19.5   62.4    11.3        23.7
            Country-Specific Factor    16.2       53.2        14.5   14.2       50.2       14.2   14.5    49.9        14.3
            Idiosyncratic Factor       15.4       34.3        61.8   13.5       32.8       57.8   14.2    32.7        57.7
            Financial Spillovers       22.4        6.8         8.3   20.1        8.2        8.5    8.9     6.1         4.3
Japan       Global Macro Factor        24.0        2.2         9.7   28.5        3.0       12.4   34.6     3.8        15.1
            Country-Specific Factor    39.8       50.6        21.9   38.2       49.9       21.8   38.6    50.2        22.1
            Idiosyncratic Factor       22.8       43.4        62.6   20.4       42.7       59.9   20.9    43.4        59.9
            Financial Spillovers       13.4        3.8         5.8   12.9        4.5        6.0    5.9     2.5         2.8
United   Global Macro Factor           27.8       10.3         6.4   35.5       14.3        8.8   43.5    17.2        11.2
 Kingdom Country-Specific Factor       32.8        9.5         3.3   27.7        7.7        3.2   28.4     7.8         3.4
         Idiosyncratic Factor          24.0       74.7        87.0   20.5       72.0       84.4   21.2    72.4        83.8
         Financial Spillovers          15.4        5.5         3.3   16.2        6.1        3.6    6.9     2.6         1.6
United      Global Macro Factor        16.5        9.8        24.3   22.1       14.5       31.1   26.6    17.7        37.0
 States     Country-Specific Factor    38.6       36.4        38.7   33.6       32.2       33.6   34.1    31.9        34.6
            Idiosyncratic Factor       34.5       46.7        23.0   33.8       45.5       21.5   33.8    46.2        21.6
            Financial Spillovers       10.4        7.1        14.0   10.6        7.8       13.8    5.5     4.3         6.7
Average     Global Macro Factor        33.6        8.3        22.1   39.8       11.2       27.7   48.0    13.8        33.3
            Country-Specific Factor    24.4       30.7        16.1   21.9       28.9       15.4   22.2    28.6        16.0
            Idiosyncratic Factor       24.7       54.8        50.4   22.3       53.6       45.8   22.7    54.1        45.7
            Financial Spillovers       17.3        6.2        11.4   16.1        6.3       11.1    7.1     3.5         5.0

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The results are based on
the combined Models 1 and 2, which capture spillovers of the global financial factor to the global macro factor
(Model 1) and to the country-specific macro factor (Model 2). Y, C, and I refer to output, consumption, and
investment, respectively.




                                                          36
 Table 5. Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Macroeconomy to Financial Markets
                        (Models 3, 4 and 3&4; G-7 Averages)

                                    A. Model with Equity Prices

                    Output             Consumption                Investment         Equity prices
             W         C      I      W      C          I    W         C        I   SR     F          I
            Model 3
1985-2019    39.6     34.8   25.6   9.8    28.5    61.7    25.7      24.2   50.0   0.7   55.6    43.7
1985-2007    22.7     43.0   34.3   6.7    30.9    62.4    17.6      25.3   57.1   0.5   50.5    49.0
1998-2019    49.5     26.2   24.3   13.4   30.3    56.3    33.4      17.8   48.8   1.0   58.9    40.1

            Model 4
1985-2019    40.8     32.2   27.0   10.2   28.3    61.5    26.6      23.9   49.5   0.3   55.4    44.3
1985-2007    29.9     37.7   32.4   10.5   29.6    59.8    23.7      22.8   53.6   0.3   50.4    49.3
1998-2019    49.7     25.4   24.9   13.4   28.9    57.7    33.0      17.2   49.7   0.4   58.9    40.7

            Model 3&4
1985-2019    39.2     34.4   26.4   9.6    29.0    61.4    25.3      24.5   50.1   1.0   55.1    43.9
1985-2007    25.3     41.1   33.6   8.0    30.4    61.6    19.0      25.5   55.4   0.8   50.4    48.8
1998-2019    49.0     26.4   24.6   12.9   30.0    57.0    31.7      18.3   50.1   1.3   58.3    40.4


                                    B. Model with House Prices

                    Output             Consumption                Investment         House prices
             W         C      I      W      C          I    W         C        I   SR     F          I
            Model 3
1985-2019   40.7      33.7   25.6   10.3   28.5    61.2    26.6     23.9    49.4   0.9   11.6   87.5
1985-2007   23.9      42.0   34.1    7.3   31.1    61.7    18.2     24.9    56.9   0.5    8.4   91.1
1998-2019   48.9      26.5   24.5   12.8   30.2    57.0    31.8     18.0    50.2   2.8   17.5   79.8

            Model 4
1985-2019   39.3      33.5   27.2    9.7   27.8    62.4    25.2     24.4    50.4   0.5   11.4   88.1
1985-2007   29.2      38.4   32.3    9.9   29.6    60.5    22.7     23.0    54.2   0.5    7.8   91.7
1998-2019   48.4      26.4   25.2   13.0   28.8    58.2    30.8     17.8    51.4   1.1   18.0   80.9

            Model 3&4
1985-2019   39.8      34.2   26.0    9.8   28.8    61.5    25.8     24.3    50.0   1.2   11.0   87.8
1985-2007   23.2      42.2   34.7    7.0   30.3    62.7    17.7     25.6    56.6   0.9    8.5   90.7
1998-2019   49.5      26.0   24.5   13.0   30.3    56.7    33.0     18.2    48.9   3.9   17.9   78.2




                                                  37
                                      C. Model with Interest Rates

                     Output                Consumption                Investment              Interest rates
               W        C       I        W       C       I        W       C        I       SR       F          I
             Model 3
1985-2019     40.0     33.9   26.1      9.7     29.0    61.2     25.7    24.3    50.0      1.0     24.9   74.1
1985-2007     24.0     41.6   34.4      7.3     31.1    61.6     18.0    25.4    56.7      3.0     24.2   72.8
1998-2019     48.6     26.2   25.3      12.8    30.3    57.0     31.4    18.6    50.0      2.1     30.8   67.1

             Model 4
1985-2019     40.5     33.4   26.1      10.3    28.7    61.0     26.4    23.0    50.6      1.1     23.9   75.0
1985-2007     29.4     38.1   32.5      10.2    29.8    60.0     23.2    22.8    54.0      1.4     23.4   75.2
1998-2019     47.8     26.8   25.5      12.4    29.6    58.0     30.4    18.3    51.3      2.2     29.6   68.2

             Model 3&4
1985-2019     39.1     34.6   26.3      9.5     28.7    61.7     25.2    24.6    50.2      2.5     24.3   73.2
1985-2007     24.2     41.7   34.1      7.3     31.7    61.0     18.1    24.7    57.2      4.3     23.4   72.3
1998-2019     48.3     27.2   24.4      12.7    29.7    57.6     31.0    18.4    50.6      4.9     29.6   65.4

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged
across the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global
macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SR (spillovers from macro to
financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 3, the global macro factor spills over to the financial
factor. In Model 4, the U.S. country factor spills over to the financial factor. Model 3 and 4 combined capture
both channels through which the macro factors affect fluctuations in financial markets.




                                                       38
        Table 6. Country-Specific Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From
           Macroeconomy to Financial Markets (Model 3&4; 1998-2019)

                                                             Equity          House        Interest
                                                             prices          prices          rates

Canada                 Global Financial Factor                   56.5           24.1            54.9
                       Idiosyncratic Factor                      42.2           70.6            35.9
                       Macroeconomic Spillovers                   1.3            5.3             9.2

France                 Global Financial Factor                   59.4           15.8            33.7
                       Idiosyncratic Factor                      39.3           80.5            60.8
                       Macroeconomic Spillovers                   1.4            3.7             5.6
Germany                Global Financial Factor                   61.4            4.5            24.4
                       Idiosyncratic Factor                      37.2           94.6            71.6
                       Macroeconomic Spillovers                   1.4            1.0             4.0

Italy                  Global Financial Factor                   44.6           39.7            14.3
                       Idiosyncratic Factor                      54.3           52.1            83.3
                       Macroeconomic Spillovers                   1.0            8.2             2.4
Japan                  Global Financial Factor                   33.5           11.0            11.1
                       Idiosyncratic Factor                      65.7           86.6            87.0
                       Macroeconomic Spillovers                   0.8            2.4             1.9
United Kingdom Global Financial Factor                           78.0           25.4            17.7
               Idiosyncratic Factor                              20.2           69.1            79.2
               Macroeconomic Spillovers                           1.8            5.5             3.0
United States          Global Financial Factor                   74.6            5.1            51.1
                       Idiosyncratic Factor                      23.7           93.8            40.3
                       Macroeconomic Spillovers                   1.7            1.1             8.6
Average                Global Financial Factor                   58.3           17.9            29.6
                       Idiosyncratic Factor                      40.4           78.2            65.4
                       Macroeconomic Spillovers                   1.3            3.9             4.9
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The results
are based on the combined Models 3 and 4, which capture spillovers from the global macro factor
(Model 3) and from the U.S. country factor (Model 4) to financial markets.




                                                  39
              Table 7. Country-Specific Variance Decompositions:
              Spillovers from Macroeconomy to Financial Markets
                                 (Model 3&4)

                                              Equity         House         Interest
                                              prices         prices           rates

    Canada                  1985-2019              1.1            1.3             3.7
                            1985-2007              0.9            0.5             5.2
                            1998-2019              1.3            5.3             9.2

    France                  1985-2019              1.0            0.9             2.2
                            1985-2007              1.0            1.7             3.9
                            1998-2019              1.4            3.7             5.6
    Germany                 1985-2019              1.0            0.2             3.1
                            1985-2007              0.9            0.6             6.9
                            1998-2019              1.4            1.0             4.0

    Italy                   1985-2019              0.7            0.8             2.0
                            1985-2007              0.6            0.5             4.5
                            1998-2019              1.0            8.2             2.4
    Japan                   1985-2019              0.4            1.0             1.0
                            1985-2007              0.1            1.5             1.5
                            1998-2019              0.8            2.4             1.9
    United Kingdom 1985-2019                       1.3            3.9             1.5
                   1985-2007                       1.0            0.7             2.5
                   1998-2019                       1.8            5.5             3.0
    United States           1985-2019              1.3            0.3             3.9
                            1985-2007              1.1            0.8             5.4
                            1998-2019              1.7            1.1             8.6

    Average                 1985-2019              1.0            1.2             2.5
                            1985-2007              0.8            0.9             4.3
                            1998-2019              1.3            3.9             4.9

Notes: This table shows the variance shares attributable to spillovers from the
macroeconomy to financial markets. The relevant spillovers are from macroeconomic
agregates to the global financial factors (equity prices, house prices, and interest rates)
through the global macro factor and the U.S. country factor. The results are based on
the combined Models 3 and 4, which capture spillovers from the global macro factor
(Model 3) and from the U.S. country factor (Model 4) to the financial sector.




                                              40
                       Figure 1. Variance Contributions of the Global Factor:
                               Models With Only Financial Variables

                                            A. One Factor Model
 80


 60
                                             1985-2019           1985-2007           1998-2019

 40


 20


   0
                 Equity prices                       House prices                        Interest rates

                               B. Models with Multiple Factors: 1998-2019
80

                           One Factor Model             Two Factor Model             Three Factor Model
60


40


20


  0
                Equity prices                        House prices                       Interest rates
Notes: These figures show the variance contributions of the global factor based on variance decompositions from
standard dynamic factor models estimated for the three financial variables (equity prices, house prices, and
interest rates). The one factor model refers to the dynamic factor model that includes only a global factor common
to all variables and countries. The two factor model includes: (i) a global factor common to all variables and
countries; and (ii) variable-specific factors that capture common cross-country fluctuations specific to each
financial variable. The three factor model includes (i) a global factor common to all variables and countries; (ii)
variable-specific factors that capture common cross-country fluctuations specific to each financial variable; and
(iii) country-specific factors that capture the comovement of all financial variables within a particular country.




                                                       41
                    Figure 2. Estimates of Macroeconomic and Financial Factors
                                            (1985-2019)
                A. Global Macro Factor                                                         B. U.S. Country Factor
 2                                                                              2

                                                                                1
 0

                                                                                0
-2
                                                                               -1

-4                Posterior mean
                                                                               -2                       Posterior mean
                  16-84 percentile
                                                                                                        16-84 percentile
-6                                                                             -3
      85   90      95        00            05           10          15    19         85   90      95        00        05        10    15    19


           C. Global Equity Price Factor                                                  D. Global House Price Factor
20                                                                             10

10
                                                                                5
 0

-10                                                                             0

-20
                                                                                -5                         Posterior mean
                        Posterior mean
-30
                        16-84 percentile                                                                   16-84 percentile
-40                                                                            -10
      85   90      95        00          05            10          15    19          85   90       95        00            05    10    15    19


           E. Global Interest Rate Factor
2
                                                Posterior mean
                                                16-84 percentile
1


0


-1


-2
      85   90      95       00        05              10           15    19
Notes: The factors shown as solid lines are posterior medians. The dashed lines represent the 16 and 84 percent
posterior quantile bands. Panels A and B are based on the combined Model 1&2 and Panels C to E are based on
the combined Model 3&4 estimated over the full sample (1985-2019). In Model 1, the financial factor spills over
to the global macro factor. In Model 2, the financial factor spills over directly onto the country-specific macro
factor. Models 1 and 2 combined capture both channels through which the financial factor affects macro
fluctuations. In Model 3, the global macro factor spills over to the financial factor. In Model 4, the U.S. country
factor spills over to the financial factor. Models 3 and 4 combined capture both channels through which the
macro factors affect financial markets.




                                                                          42
          Figure 3. Variance Decompositions:
  Spillovers From Financial Sector to Macroeconomy
            (Models 1 and 2; G-7 Averages)
                              A. Output
 20                                                   Model 1
 15                                                   Model 2
 10
  5
  0
          1985     1998        1985     1998       1985       1998
          -2007    -2019       -2007    -2019      -2007      -2019
           Equity prices        House prices        Interest rates

                            B. Consumption
   15
                                                     Model 1
   10                                                Model 2

      5

      0
           1985     1998       1985     1998      1985      1998
           -2007    -2019      -2007    -2019     -2007     -2019
            Equity prices       House prices       Interest rates


                            C. Investment
   15
                                                    Model 1
   10                                               Model 2

      5

      0
           1985     1998       1985     1998      1985      1998
           -2007    -2019      -2007    -2019     -2007     -2019
            Equity prices       House prices       Interest rates
Notes: These figures show spillovers from the global financial factors
(equity prices, house prices, and interest rates) to fluctuations in
macro variables through the global macro factor and the country-
specific macro factor. In Model 1, the financial factor spills over to the
global macro factor. In Model 2, the financial factor spills over directly
to country-specific macro factor.




                                  43
         Figure 4. Variance Decompositions:
 Spillovers From Financial Sector to Macroeconomy
             (Model 1&2; G-7 Averages)
                             A. Output
20
                      1985-2019        1985-2007       1998-2019

15

10

 5

 0
          Equity prices        House prices        Interest rates

                           B. Consumption
16
                      1985-2019        1985-2007      1998-2019

12

 8

 4

 0
          Equity prices        House prices        Interest rates

                           C. Investment
16
                      1985-2019        1985-2007      1998-2019

12

 8

 4

 0
           Equity prices       House prices        Interest rates
     Notes: These figures show spillovers from the global financial
     factors (equity prices, house prices, and interest rates) to
     fluctuations in macro variables, based on the combined Model
     1 and 2, which captures spillovers to the global macro factor
     (Model 1) and to country-specific macro factor (Model 2)
     through which the financial factor affects macro activity.




                                  44
                       Figure 5. Variance Decompositions:
               Spillovers From Financial Sector to Macroeconomy
                           (Model 1&2; G-7 Averages)
                                       A. Output
           60                                             Global
                                                          Spillovers
           40

           20

               0
                    1985     1998       1985    1998       1985        1998
                    -2007    -2019      -2007   -2019      -2007       -2019
                     Equity prices       House prices      Interest rates
                                     B. Consumption
         60
                                                             Global
         40                                                  Spillovers

         20

           0
                   1985     1998       1985      1998      1985         1998
                   -2007    -2019      -2007     -2019     -2007        -2019
                    Equity prices       House prices        Interest rates

                                     C. Investment
        60
                                                              Global
        40                                                    Spillovers

        20

          0
                   1985     1998       1985      1998       1985        1998
                   -2007    -2019      -2007     -2019      -2007       -2019
                    Equity prices       House prices         Interest rates

Notes: These figures show the variance decompositions for the global macro factor ("global")
and spillovers from financial factors (equity prices, house prices, and interest rates) to
fluctuations in macro variables ("spillovers"). The results are based on the combined Model
1 and 2, which captures spillovers to the global macro factor (Model 1) and to country-
specific macro factor (Model 2) through which the financial factor affects macro activity.




                                           45
       Figure 6. Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Financial Sector to Output
              (15-Year Rolling Windows; Model 1&2; G-7 Averages; 1985-2019)

                  A. Equity Prices                                           B. House Prices
100                                                         100
             Spillovers                                                 Spillovers
 80                                                          80
             Global                                                     Global

 60                                                          60


 40                                                          40

                                                             20
 20
                                                              0
  0
                                                                  2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
      2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018


                 C. Interest Rates
100
             Spillovers
 80
             Global
 60

 40

 20

  0
      2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018

Notes: These figures are based on variance decompositions from estimates over 15-year (trailing) rolling windows.
The bars show the average (for the G-7 countries) shares of output variance accounted for by the global macro
factor ("global") and spillovers from financial factors ("spillovers"). The results are based on the combined Model
1 and 2, which captures spillovers of the financial factor on output fluctuations through the global macro factor
(Model 1) and the country-specific macro factor (Model 2).




                                                       46
                                         APPENDIX
                             (not intended for publication)
                      Global Macro-Financial Cycles and Spillovers

              Jongrim Ha, M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad

                                          February 2020

  This appendix contains:

Table   A1.     Database
Table   A2.     Factor Loadings (Model 1&2; 1998-2019)
Table   A3.     Factor Vector-autoregressive Coefficients (1998-2019)
Table   A4.     Variance Decompositions for G-7 Countries (1998-2019)
Table   A5.     Confidence bands for Variance decompositions (Model 1&2)
Table   A6.     Confidence bands for Variance decompositions (Model 3&4)
Table   A7.     Variance Decompositions for G-7 Countries (HP filtered data)
Table   A8.     Variance Decompositions: Models With Only Macroeconomic Variables
                Variance Decompositions: Models with Macroeconomic and Financial variables
Table A9.
                (1985-2019)
Table A10.      Variance Decompositions: Models with Financial Variables
Table A11.      Variance Decompositions: Credit Growth as the Financial Variable (G-7 Averages)
Table A12.      Variance Decompositions: Long-term Interest Rates (G-7 Averages; Model 1&2 and
                Model 3&4)
Table   A13.    Variance Decompositions: Alternative House Price Indicator (G-7 Averages)
Table   A14.    Variance Decompositions: Dataset Excluding the U.S. (G-7 Averages)
Table   A15.    Variance Decompositions: Alternative Sub-Samples (G-7 Averages)
Table   A16.    Variance Decompositions: Monthly Industrial Production and Financial Variables
Table   A17.    Variance Decompositions: Spillover Model 1 with Industrial Production and
                Financial Variables
Table A18.      Variance decompositions: Spillover Model 3 with Industrial Production and
                Financial Variables
Figure A1.      Country-Specific Variance Decompositions: Spillovers from Financial Sector to
                Macroeconomy (Model 1&2; Output; 1998-2019)
Figure A2.      Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Macroeconomy to Financial Sector
                (15-Year Rolling Windows; Model 3&4; G-7 Averages; 1985-2019)
Figure A3.      Country-Specific Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Macroeconomy to
                Financial Sector (Model 3&4; 1998-2019)
Figure A4.      Dynamic Factor Estimation Results with Credit Growth




                                                47
                                             Table A1. Database

Variable         Definition                 Source                             Transformation
Output           Real GDP                 Haver Analytics                      Growth (in percent)
Consumption      Real private consumption Haver Analytics                      Growth (in percent)
Investment       Real gross fixed capital Haver Analytics                      Growth (in percent)
                 formation
Equity Prices    Equity price index         Haver Analytics                    Growth (in percent)
Housing Prices   Real housing price index   Haver Analytics, OECD              Growth (in percent)
Interest Rates   3-month treasury bill      Federal Reserve Economic Data,     Difference (in percentage points)
                 yields                     OECD
Credit           Domestic credit            Federal Reserve Economic Data,     Growth (in percent)
                                            Haver Analytics

Notes: Data series cover the 1985-2019 period. Macroeconomic aggregates and financial variables are all seasonally
adjusted. Financial variables are deflated by the CPI of each country. We use growth rates of all variables (except
interest rates) and, following Stock and Watson (2012), remove low-frequency movements using the Local Mean
method.




                                                        48
                                       Table A2. Factor Loadings
                                        (Model 1&2; 1998-2019)

                                                                                     Equity    House     Interest
             Factor                       Output   Consumption      Investment       Prices    Prices      Rates
Canada       Global Macro Factor            0.38           0.28          1.62
             Country-Specific Factor        0.24           0.11          0.22
             Financial Factor                                                         0.68      0.18       0.37
             Constant                      -0.08           -0.05         -0.36       -0.66      0.04       0.04

France       Global Macro Factor            0.40           0.14          0.73
             Country-Specific Factor        0.36           0.49          0.41
             Financial Factor                                                         0.90      0.27       0.56
             Constant                      -0.07           -0.02         -0.12       -0.88      0.09       0.01

Germany      Global Macro Factor            0.74           0.02          1.11
             Country-Specific Factor        0.35           0.33          0.97
             Financial Factor                                                         1.05      0.02       0.30
             Constant                      -0.14           -0.01         -0.23       -1.02      0.01       0.00

Italy        Global Macro Factor            0.53           0.12          0.73
             Country-Specific Factor        0.35           0.46          0.81
             Financial Factor                                                         0.81      0.56       0.54
             Constant                      -0.09           -0.01         -0.12       -0.81      0.07       0.01

Japan        Global Macro Factor            0.61           0.16          0.55
             Country-Specific Factor        0.58           0.61          0.62
             Financial Factor                                                         0.59     -0.18       0.06
             Constant                      -0.12           -0.04         -0.14       -0.60      0.01       0.00

United   Global Macro Factor                0.36           0.24          0.92
 Kingdom Country-Specific Factor            0.26           0.15          0.40
         Financial Factor                                                             0.58      0.21       0.60
         Constant                          -0.07           -0.05         -0.21       -0.55      0.17       0.01

United       Global Macro Factor            0.29           0.15          0.81
 States      Country-Specific Factor        0.56           0.38          1.28
             Financial Factor                                                         0.60      0.59       0.26
             Constant                       0.00           0.01          -0.04       -0.55      0.13       0.02

Notes: This table shows posterior medians of factor loadings based on the combined Model 1 and 2, which
captures spillovers to the global macro factor (Model 1) and to country-specific macro factor (Model 2) through
which the financial factor affects macro activity.




                                                      49
   Table A3. Factor Vector-autoregressive Coefficients
                     (1998-2019)

A. Global Macro and Country-Specific Factors (Model 1&2)

                                             Financial Factor
                           Own          Equity    House     Interest
                 Lags     Factor        Prices    Prices      Rates
Global Macro       1        0.55          0.04       0.09        0.10
 Factor            2       -0.13          0.00      -0.01        0.20
                   3       -0.03          0.02      -0.07       -0.01
Country-Specific Factor
 Canada            1        0.17          0.00       0.00       -0.05
                   2       -0.13          0.00       0.01        0.02
                   3       -0.02          0.00      -0.01       -0.01
 France            1       -0.28          0.01       0.00        0.05
                   2       -0.06         -0.01       0.02        0.07
                   3       -0.01          0.01      -0.02       -0.02
 Germany           1       -0.29          0.00      -0.04       -0.05
                   2       -0.12          0.00       0.03       -0.10
                   3        0.04          0.01       0.03       -0.02
 Italy             1        0.55          0.01       0.04       0.15
                   2       -0.07          0.00      -0.04       0.05
                   3        0.02          0.00       0.00       0.00
 Japan             1        0.02          0.01       0.04        0.06
                   2       -0.17         -0.01       0.01        0.10
                   3       -0.08          0.00      -0.06       -0.02
 United            1        1.03          0.00       0.04       -0.01
  Kingdom          2       -0.53          0.01       0.00       -0.05
                   3       -0.07          0.00      -0.01       -0.05
 United            1        0.24          0.01       0.01        0.08
  States           2        0.09          0.00       0.01       -0.14
                   3        0.03          0.00      -0.02        0.00




                                   50
                C. Financial Factors (Model 3&4)

                                            Global         U.S.
                                Own         Macro       Country
                    Lags       Factor       Factor       Factor
Financial Factor
 Equity Prices       1            0.36        -0.09         0.42
                     2           -0.07        -0.23         0.08
                     3           -0.03        -0.02         0.00
 House Prices        1            0.65         0.21         0.24
                     2            0.07        -0.43        -0.01
                     3           -0.05        -0.03         0.01
 Interest Rates      1            0.19         0.02         0.13
                     2           -0.12        -0.04        -0.02
                     3            0.02         0.07        -0.01
Notes: This table shows factor VAR coefficients (posterior
medians) for the global macro factor and country-specific factors,
based on the results of the combined Models 1 and 2 (in Panel
A). The corresponding coefficients for financial factors are based
on the results of the combined Model 3 and 4 (in Panel B).
Combined Model 1 and 2 captures spillovers to the global macro
factor (Model 1) and to country-specific macro factor (Model 2)
through which the financial factor affects macro activity.
Combined Model 3 and 4, which captures spillovers from the
global macro factor (Model 3) and from the U.S. country factor
(Model 4) through which the financial sector is affected.




                               51
                          Table A4. Variance Decompositions for G-7 Countries
                        (Model 1&2 and Model 3&4; Country-Specific; 1998-2019)


                                                      A. Canada
                          Output                    Consumption                 Investment                 Financial
                  W      C     SF      I      W       C    SF      I      W      C     SF      I     SR       F         I
                 Model 1&2
Equity prices    26.2   12.7   13.1   48.1   22.9    9.6   11.2   56.3   40.1    3.7   37.5   18.7           57.7      42.3
House prices     32.5   11.4   12.5   43.5   28.2    6.4   10.6   54.8   46.4    6.5   29.9   17.1           29.5      70.5
Interest rates   40.8    9.5    5.6   44.1   34.6    7.8    4.7   52.9   55.8    5.9   31.2    7.2           60.6      39.4
                 Model 3&4
Equity prices    38.4   16.6          45.0   34.0    6.3          59.7   56.4    6.8          36.7   1.3     56.5      42.2
House prices     39.4   14.7          45.9   33.4    6.6          60.0   56.8    9.6          33.6   5.3     24.1      70.6
Interest rates   38.1   19.2          42.7   33.3    6.4          60.3   56.0    6.6          37.4   9.2     54.9      35.9



                                                      B. France
                          Output                    Consumption                 Investment                 Financial
                  W      C     SF      I      W       C    SF      I      W      C     SF      I     SR       F         I
                 Model 1&2
Equity prices    48.3   15.5   24.1   12.1    6.8   30.5    6.7   56.0   36.4    5.5   40.6   17.5           60.6      39.4
House prices     55.3   13.3   20.6   10.8    8.9   33.2    5.2   52.7   47.9    4.4   30.3   17.4           17.3      82.7
Interest rates   66.2   14.0    8.9   10.9   10.9   30.8    3.3   55.0   57.7    4.8   30.1    7.3           32.4      67.6
                 Model 3&4
Equity prices    69.0   17.7          13.3    9.5   29.5          61.0   52.1    6.5          41.4   1.4     59.4      39.3
House prices     69.5   17.8          12.7    9.4   33.2          57.3   58.5    6.2          35.4   3.7     15.8      80.5
Interest rates   67.9   18.7          13.4    9.3   27.5          63.3   50.5    7.4          42.1   5.6     33.7      60.8




                                                     C. Germany
                          Output                    Consumption                 Investment                 Financial

                  W      C     SF      I      W       C    SF      I      W      C     SF      I     SR       F         I
                 Model 1&2
Equity prices    46.4   15.4   22.3   15.9    0.6   25.1    2.0   72.2   22.5   25.1   40.3   12.2           62.3      37.7
House prices     52.5   14.6   19.6   13.4    0.8   22.7    1.6   74.8   27.7   24.2   36.7   11.3            3.9      96.1
Interest rates   62.2   15.9    8.2   13.7    1.1   21.7    1.1   76.2   32.5   26.8   35.5    5.2           17.8      82.2

                 Model 3&4
Equity prices    64.7   18.5          16.9    0.8   22.7          76.5   30.0   31.7          38.3   1.4     59.4      39.3
House prices     65.0   19.3          15.7    0.9   22.2          77.0   30.5   30.3          39.2   1.0      4.5      94.6
Interest rates   63.3   19.5          17.2    0.8   24.4          74.8   28.4   31.8          39.8   4.0     24.4      71.6




                                                           52
                                                          D. Italy
                          Output                    Consumption                    Investment                 Financial
                  W      C     SF      I      W       C      SF       I      W      C     SF      I     SR       F         I
                 Model 1&2
Equity prices    46.0   16.2   22.4   15.4    5.8   53.2     6.8     34.3   15.4   14.5   61.8    8.3           45.5      54.5
House prices     52.2   14.2   20.1   13.5    8.7   50.2     8.2     32.8   19.5   14.2   57.8    8.5           42.1      57.9
Interest rates   62.4   14.5    8.9   14.2   11.3   49.9     6.1     32.7   23.7   14.3   57.7    4.3           13.7      86.3
                 Model 3&4
Equity prices    66.4   17.2          16.4   10.0   54.5             35.5   22.1   15.4          62.5   1.0     44.6      54.3
House prices     65.5   17.8          16.7    9.4   55.9             34.6   21.5   15.9          62.6   8.2     39.7      52.1
Interest rates   64.4   19.0          16.6    9.5   54.3             36.2   21.0   16.9          62.0   2.4     14.3      83.3




                                                       E. Japan
                          Output                    Consumption                    Investment                 Financial
                  W      C     SF      I      W       C      SF       I      W      C     SF      I     SR       F         I
                 Model 1&2
Equity prices    24.0   39.8   13.4   22.8    2.2   50.6     3.8     43.4    9.7   21.9   62.6    5.8           34.0      66.0
House prices     28.5   38.2   12.9   20.4    3.0   49.9     4.5     42.7   12.4   21.8   59.9    6.0           10.1      89.9
Interest rates   34.6   38.6    5.9   20.9    3.8   50.2     2.5     43.4   15.1   22.1   59.9    2.8           13.6      86.4
                 Model 3&4
Equity prices    33.9   42.8          23.3    3.5   53.1             43.4   13.4   24.6          62.0   0.8     33.5      65.7
House prices     34.1   43.0          22.9    3.5   53.3             43.2   13.6   24.3          62.2   2.4     11.0      86.6
Interest rates   33.9   42.5          23.6    3.7   52.0             44.3   13.6   23.9          62.6   1.9     11.1      87.0




                                                F. United Kingdom
                          Output                    Consumption                    Investment                 Financial
                  W      C     SF      I      W       C      SF       I      W      C     SF      I     SR       F         I
                 Model 1&2
Equity prices    27.8   32.8   15.4   24.0   10.3    9.5     5.5     74.7    6.4    3.3   87.0    3.3           79.2      20.8
House prices     35.5   27.7   16.2   20.5   14.3    7.7     6.1     72.0    8.8    3.2   84.4    3.6           32.3      67.7
Interest rates   43.5   28.4    6.9   21.2   17.2    7.8     2.6     72.4   11.2    3.4   83.8    1.6           13.8      86.2

                 Model 3&4
Equity prices    43.5   32.6          24.0   15.9    8.4             75.7    9.7    3.5          86.8   1.8     78.0      20.2
House prices     43.9   32.3          23.7   15.9    8.1             76.0    9.9    3.5          86.6   5.5     25.4      69.1
Interest rates   42.9   32.8          24.4   15.2    8.3             76.4    9.3    3.6          87.1   3.0     17.7      79.2




                                                            53
                                                     G. United States
                           Output                    Consumption                 Investment                   Financial
                   W      C     SF      I      W       C     SF     I      W      C      SF      I      SR       F         I
                  Model 1&2
 Equity prices    16.5   38.6   10.4   34.5    9.8    36.4   7.1   46.7   24.3   38.7   23.0   14.0             75.6      24.4
 House prices     22.1   33.6   10.6   33.8   14.5    32.2   7.8   45.5   31.1   33.6   21.5   13.8              4.6      95.4
 Interest rates   26.6   34.1    5.5   33.8   17.7    31.9   4.3   46.2   37.0   34.6   21.6    6.7             64.4      35.6
                  Model 3&4
 Equity prices    27.1   39.8          33.1   16.9    35.8         47.3   37.8   39.3          22.9     1.7     74.6      23.7
 House prices     29.0   37.2          33.8   18.8    32.7         48.5   39.9   37.5          22.6     1.1      5.1      93.8
 Interest rates   27.6   39.2          33.3   17.3    35.1         47.7   38.3   38.7          23.0     8.6     51.1      40.3
Notes: This table shows the country-specific variance shares attributable to spillovers from the financial (equity
prices, house prices, and interest rates) to macroeconomic aggregates (model 1&2) and from the macroeconomy to
financial sector (model 3&4). The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro factor), C (country-
specific macro factor), SF (spillovers from financial to macro factors), F (global financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic
factor) in the case of the combined Model 1 & 2, and W (global macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor),
SR (spillovers from macro to financial factors), F (global financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor) in the case of
the Model 3 & 4.




                                                             54
                   Table A5. Confidence bands for Variance decompositions
                              (Average across G-7 countries; Model 1&2)

                                             A. Equity Prices
                   Output                   Consumption                 Investment           Equity prices
        W          C   SF       I     W      C      SF     I      W      C     SF      I       F      I
       1985-2019
Mean   31.7   33.6      8.7   26.0    7.3   29.6    2.9   60.3   20.6   22.5    5.7   51.2   55.9   44.1
33%    27.9   29.5      6.4   23.1    5.4   24.9    1.9   56.5   17.4   17.9    4.0   49.0   53.4   41.3
66%    33.8   37.1      9.8   29.3    8.2   32.9    3.2   64.5   22.3   24.1    6.4   55.3   58.5   46.4

       1985-2007
Mean   21.5   39.0      6.5   33.0    6.8   29.5    3.0   60.6   17.0   23.0    4.8   55.2   50.4   49.6
33%    18.5   32.6      4.7   27.2    4.8   24.1    2.0   55.0   14.0   17.5    3.2   49.8   47.2   45.7
66%    26.2   42.1      8.3   34.8    8.9   32.8    3.8   64.1   20.7   24.6    6.1   58.5   54.1   52.5

       1998-2019
Mean   33.6   24.4     17.3   24.7    8.3   30.7    6.2   54.8   22.1   16.1   11.4   50.4   59.3   40.7
33%    29.7   19.6     13.7   21.2    6.0   24.7    4.2   49.9   18.8   12.3    8.6   46.6   56.0   36.8
66%    36.5   27.1     19.7   27.4    9.5   34.3    7.0   60.1   24.5   18.0   12.9   53.7   63.0   43.7



                                            B. House Price

                   Output                   Consumption                 Investment           House prices
        W          C   SF       I     W      C      SF     I      W      C     SF      I       F      I
       1985-2019
Mean   33.0   33.7      8.2   25.2    7.8   29.0    3.1   60.1   21.4   22.1    5.4   51.2   12.4   87.6
33%    29.3   29.4      5.0   21.5    5.8   24.5    1.8   56.9   18.2   18.0    3.1   48.0    2.6   85.6
66%    35.9   37.2      9.5   28.0    8.9   31.6    3.5   64.4   23.7   24.4    6.2   54.3   13.8   97.2

       1985-2007
Mean   19.2   41.8      5.9   33.2    5.5   30.2    3.2   61.0   16.3   25.2    4.2   54.3    9.6   90.4
33%    15.4   36.1      2.9   28.4    3.4   24.9    1.4   56.4   12.1   19.5    2.0   49.9    2.1   90.2
66%    22.1   46.0      6.2   36.7    6.3   34.0    3.3   66.1   19.0   28.1    4.4   58.8    9.4   97.7

       1998-2019
Mean   39.8   21.9     16.1   22.3   11.2   28.9    6.3   53.6   27.7   15.4   11.1   45.8   20.0   80.0
33%    50.1    8.1      8.0    8.9   14.8   18.5    3.9   36.3   36.8    6.9    6.1   23.7   14.2   76.3
66%    69.4   15.5     15.7   16.0   30.6   27.9    7.4   49.8   56.4   12.6   11.8   36.7   23.4   85.5




                                                   55
                                             C. Interest Rates

                    Output                   Consumption                  Investment           Interest rates
          W         C   SF      I      W      C      SF     I       W      C     SF      I       F       I
        1985-2019
Mean     38.9   32.6     3.0   25.5    9.9   27.6    1.6   61.0    25.6   22.9    2.1   49.5    24.6   75.4
33%      35.3   28.2     1.7   22.3    7.5   23.5    0.9   57.5    22.2   18.8    1.1   46.4    20.3   71.7
66%      42.0   35.9     3.2   28.3   11.3   30.5    1.7   64.6    28.1   25.4    2.2   53.2    28.0   79.4

        1985-2007
Mean     20.6   41.4     5.9   32.1    6.4   33.0    3.6   57.0    18.4   26.4    4.5   50.7    24.9   75.1
33%      16.9   35.7     3.0   26.6    4.2   27.1    1.7   51.1    14.7   20.8    2.4   45.8    19.3   70.8
66%      22.7   46.4     6.2   36.2    7.2   37.7    3.7   62.7    20.5   29.6    4.8   55.9    28.9   80.4

        1998-2019
Mean     48.0   22.2     7.1   22.7   13.8   28.6    3.5   54.1    33.3   16.0    5.0   45.7    30.9   69.1
33%      43.0   17.4     3.9   19.0    9.7   22.7    1.8   49.3    28.2   11.9    2.7   41.6    26.6   65.4
66%      51.9   24.8     8.0   25.5   15.5   31.8    3.8   59.7    36.5   17.9    5.5   49.8    34.3   73.2
Notes: In each cell, posterior median and 16 and 84 percentiles of the variance share attributable to the
relevant factor at a horizon of 30th quarter is reported. The variance contributions are attributed to: W
(global macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor), SF (spillovers from financial to macro factors), F
(global financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). Combined Model 1 and 2 captures spillovers to the
global macro factor and to country-specific macro factor through which the financial factor affects macro
activity.




                                                    56
                   Table A6. Confidence bands for Variance decompositions
                         (Average across G-7 countries; Model 3+4)

                                       A. Equity Prices

              Output              Consumption              Investment         Equity prices
        W          C     I      W      C        I    W         C        I   SR     F          I
       1985-2019
Mean   39.2   34.4     26.4     9.6   29.0   61.4   25.3     24.5   50.1    1.0   55.1   43.9
33%    35.7   30.1     23.0     7.2   24.7   58.1   21.9     20.4   46.9    0.4   52.6   41.1
66%    42.6   37.6     28.9    10.9   31.9   65.2   28.1     27.1   53.3    1.0   57.7   46.3

       1985-2007
Mean   25.3   41.1     33.6     8.0   30.4   61.6   19.0     25.5   55.4    0.8   50.4   48.8
33%    20.7   36.0     29.2     5.0   25.0   57.0   14.7     20.4   51.1    0.3   47.2   45.0
66%    28.2   45.4     36.9     9.1   34.4   66.3   21.6     28.5   59.7    0.8   53.9   51.8

       1998-2019
Mean   49.0   26.4     24.6    12.9   30.0   57.0   31.7     18.3   50.1    1.3   58.3   40.4
33%    45.1   21.3     20.9     9.7   24.6   52.6   27.6     14.0   46.3    0.6   55.1   36.6
66%    52.9   29.5     27.4    14.8   33.3   61.8   35.1     20.4   53.6    1.4   61.8   43.4




                                       B. House Prices

              Output              Consumption              Investment         House prices
        W          C     I      W      C        I    W         C        I   SR     F          I
       1985-2019
Mean   39.8   34.2     26.0     9.8   28.8   61.5   25.8     24.3   50.0    1.2   11.0   87.8
33%    36.2   29.9     22.8     7.4   24.6   58.1   22.3     20.3   46.6    0.2    2.3   84.1
66%    43.0   37.6     28.4    11.2   31.8   65.2   28.4     26.9   53.2    1.2   13.8   97.3

       1985-2007
Mean   23.2   42.2     34.7     7.0   30.3   62.7   17.7     25.6   56.6    0.9    8.5   90.7
33%    20.1   37.0     28.9     4.7   26.0   57.1   14.1     20.3   52.1    0.3    4.5   86.6
66%    27.6   46.5     36.7     8.6   34.8   66.1   20.8     28.4   60.5    0.9   11.9   94.7

       1998-2019
Mean   49.5   26.0     24.5    13.0   30.3   56.7   33.0     18.2   48.9    3.9   17.9   78.2
33%    20.1   37.0     28.9     4.7   26.0   57.1   14.1     20.3   52.1    0.3    4.5   86.6
66%    27.6   46.5     36.7     8.6   34.8   66.1   20.8     28.4   60.5    3.9   11.9   94.7




                                             57
                                               C. Interest Rates


                     Output               Consumption                 Investment           Interest rates
               W         C     I       W       C          I     W         C        I    SR       F          I
             1985-2019
   Mean       39.1   34.6     26.3     9.5    28.7    61.7     25.2     24.6   50.2      2.5   24.3    73.2
   33%        35.7   30.4     23.0     7.3    24.5    58.5     22.0     20.7   47.0      1.5   20.2    69.5
   66%        42.1   37.9     28.9    10.9    31.6    65.5     27.8     27.2   53.3      2.8   27.4    77.4

             1985-2007
   Mean       24.2   41.7     34.1     7.3    31.7    61.0     18.1     24.7   57.2      4.3   23.4    72.3
   33%        20.0   36.5     29.6     4.7    26.4    56.6     14.1     19.9   52.9      2.5   18.6    67.7
   66%        26.9   46.0     37.5     8.3    35.6    65.7     20.4     27.8   61.4      4.8   27.1    77.7

             1998-2019
   Mean       48.3   27.2     24.4    12.7    29.7    57.6     31.0     18.4   50.6      4.9   29.6    65.4
   33%        44.8   21.1     21.7     9.2    24.9    51.9     27.4     14.1   46.5      3.2   25.1    61.5
   66%        52.5   28.9     28.2    14.4    34.6    61.5     34.7     20.4   53.7      5.6   32.6    70.2

Notes: In each cell, posterior median and 16 and 84 percentiles of the variance share attributable to the
relevant factor at a horizon of 30th quarter is reported. The variance contributions are attributed to: W
(global macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor), SR (spillover from macro factors to global financial
factor), F (global financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). Combined Model 3 and 4, which captures
spillovers from the global macro factor and from the U.S. country factor through which the financial sector
is affected.




                                                     58
                                       Table A7. Variance decomposition
                                     (Average across G-7, HP filtered data)

                                                   A. Equity Price
                        Output                    Consumption                 Investment                Financial
             W         C     SF      I      W      C     SF      I      W      C     SF     I     SR       F         I
            Model 1
1985-2019   46.8      26.0    5.2   22.0   14.6   27.5   1.5    56.4   33.8   20.2   3.6   42.4           55.2      44.8
1985-2007   31.6      34.4    5.0   29.0   12.2   27.2   1.9    58.6   25.9   22.4   4.1   47.7           50.9      49.1
1998-2019   34.4      25.4   15.1   25.2    8.8   31.3   3.8    56.1   22.4   17.5   9.8   50.2           57.5      42.5
            Model 2
1985-2019   51.2      26.0    0.9   21.9   15.8   29.0   1.1    54.1   36.7   19.3   0.7   43.3           55.3      44.7
1985-2007   34.9      33.6    1.9   29.6   13.2   28.3   1.6    56.9   28.1   22.2   1.4   48.4           50.7      49.3
1998-2019   55.7      21.3    1.5   21.5   17.9   28.1   2.0    52.1   39.4   15.7   1.0   43.8           57.0      43.0
            Model 3
1985-2019   46.2      30.2          23.6   13.3   28.5          58.3   32.2   22.1         45.8   0.5     55.5      43.9
1985-2007   34.8      35.7          29.5   13.0   29.2          57.7   27.3   24.8         47.9   0.4     50.6      48.9
1998-2019   47.3      26.6          26.1   12.7   31.7          55.6   31.0   18.5         50.5   0.8     56.2      43.1
            Model 4
1985-2019   58.1      23.1          18.8   19.9   26.1          54.0   42.4   18.6         39.0   0.2     55.2      44.6
1985-2007   39.5      32.3          28.3   15.6   27.3          57.2   31.8   22.7         45.5   0.3     50.9      48.8
1998-2019   47.0      27.2          25.7   12.5   30.0          57.5   30.6   18.0         51.4   0.4     56.4      43.2




                                                    B. House price

                        Output                    Consumption                 Investment            House prices
             W         C     SF      I      W      C     SF      I      W      C     SF     I     SR       F         I
            Model 1
1985-2019   36.5      32.3    4.1   27.1    9.2   30.0   1.0    59.8   24.2   22.8   2.7   50.2            9.3      90.7
1985-2007   28.4      36.1    3.9   31.7   10.4   28.9   1.4    59.3   22.2   23.0   3.0   51.8            8.2      91.8
1998-2019   52.3      18.3   10.3   19.1   18.6   27.8   3.6    50.0   38.0   14.1   7.4   40.5           15.8      84.2
            Model 2
1985-2019   42.4      31.2    1.8   24.7   11.4   28.1   1.5    58.9   28.9   21.8   1.2   48.0           11.3      88.7
1985-2007   38.6      31.7    2.4   27.3   15.9   26.4   1.9    55.8   31.0   21.4   1.6   46.0            9.1      90.9
1998-2019   51.1      23.4    1.8   23.7   15.3   28.7   2.2    53.8   34.4   17.1   1.2   47.3           15.6      84.4
            Model 3
1985-2019   47.0      29.2          23.8   13.4   28.8          57.7   31.4   22.5         46.1   1.0     13.3      85.7
1985-2007   32.8      35.5          31.8   12.2   30.2          57.6   25.6   24.5         49.9   0.5     10.4      89.1
1998-2019   48.2      24.8          27.0   13.0   30.8          56.3   30.6   23.7         45.7   2.1     16.7      81.2
            Model 4
1985-2019   51.3      26.9          21.8   16.0   27.4          56.6   34.9   21.0         44.1   0.5     11.7      87.7
1985-2007   37.2      31.0          31.7   14.6   27.4          58.0   30.6   23.3         46.2   0.3      8.2      91.5
1998-2019   46.9      23.5          29.5   12.4   29.5          58.1   28.7   26.4         44.9   0.7     17.0      82.3




                                                          59
                                               Panel C. Interest Rates

                        Output                   Consumption                   Investment                   Financial
             W         C     SF     I      W      C      SF      I       W      C     SF      I       SR       F         I
            Model 1
1985-2019   50.1      26.4   1.9   21.6   15.9   27.2    0.6   56.3    36.0   20.0     1.3   42.6             24.5      75.5
1985-2007   27.6      37.5   2.7   32.3    9.5   29.3    1.0   60.2    21.8   24.8     2.1   51.4             24.1      75.9
1998-2019   62.2      15.9   6.7   15.2   23.7   26.0    2.6   47.7    46.4   13.0     5.0   35.5             30.8      69.2
            Model 2
1985-2019   58.9      22.2   2.3   16.6   21.3   25.5    0.8   52.4    44.1   17.2     1.7   37.0             24.5      75.5
1985-2007   43.0      29.5   1.6   25.9   18.3   26.3    1.4   53.9    35.0   19.9     1.2   43.9             24.2      75.8
1998-2019   51.7      22.8   2.0   23.5   16.0   29.3    0.6   54.1    35.4   16.7     1.3   46.6             30.7      69.3
            Model 3
1985-2019   38.2      34.7         27.1    9.5   29.5          61.1    25.2   24.4           50.4     0.9     25.1      74.0
1985-2007   27.4      40.2         32.4    9.1   29.6          61.3    21.2   25.2           53.6     2.4     24.4      73.2
1998-2019   48.2      27.0         24.8   12.9   30.9          56.2    31.8   18.0           50.3     2.4     30.8      66.8
            Model 4
1985-2019   49.8      27.6         22.7   15.5   27.4          57.1    35.3   20.4           44.3     1.1     23.8      75.0
1985-2007   44.7      29.8         25.5   19.5   25.7          54.7    35.1   22.1           42.8     1.6     23.4      75.0
1998-2019   52.5      24.5         23.0   15.6   28.7          55.7    35.5   17.0           47.6     1.8     30.2      68.0


 Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor at a horizon of 30th quarter is reported.
 The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor), SF
 (spillovers from financial to macro factors), SR (spillover from global financial factor), F (global financial factor),
 and I (idiosyncratic factor). Combined Model 1 and 2 captures spillovers to the global macro factor (Model 1)
 and to country-specific macro factor (Model 2) through which the financial factor affects macro activity.
 Combined Model 3 and 4, which captures spillovers from the global macro factor (Model 3) and from the U.S.
 country factor (Model 4) through which the financial sector is affected.




                                                          60
Table A8. Variance Decompositions: Models with Only Macroeconomic Variables

                                                    A. 1985-2019
                             Output                          Consumption                       Investment

                  Global   Variable Idiosyncratic   Global   Variable Idiosyncratic   Global   Variable Idiosyncratic
 Canada            39.4      0.2        60.4         40.4      18.7        40.9         8.3      55.8        35.9

 France            32.9      19.6       47.5         13.5      11.8        74.6        46.3       0.2        53.5

 Germany           43.8      0.3        55.9         26.9       0.3        72.8        11.6      13.8        74.6

 Italy             0.0       83.6       16.4         12.8       1.7        85.5         1.6       0.4        98.0
 Japan             31.5      0.1        68.4         34.9       0.3        64.9        31.7       0.5        67.8

 United Kingdom    38.9      15.9       45.2         5.4       59.5        35.1        12.1       8.6        79.3

 United States     7.6       6.0        86.4         13.9       0.6        85.5        38.7       0.3        61.0

 Average           27.7      18.0       54.3         21.1      13.3        65.6        21.5      11.4        67.2
 Median            32.9      6.0        55.9         13.9       1.7        72.8        12.1       0.5        67.8


                                                    B. 1985-2007
                             Output                          Consumption                       Investment

                  Global   Variable Idiosyncratic   Global   Variable Idiosyncratic   Global   Variable Idiosyncratic
 Canada            55.3      24.8       19.8         3.6        1.9        94.5        11.1       3.3        85.7

 France            63.8      0.4        35.9         0.1        1.0        98.9        0.3       35.5        64.2

 Germany           62.3      17.1       20.5         0.1        1.3        98.6        0.2        1.3        98.5
 Italy             42.2      40.7       17.1         1.2        5.2        93.6        0.2        2.9        96.9

 Japan             15.4      0.1        84.6         1.0       42.5        56.5        0.1        0.1        99.8

 United Kingdom    62.9      26.3       10.8         0.1        3.6        96.3        0.8        3.5        95.7
 United States     69.3      0.8        29.8         3.8       23.6        72.6        2.3        0.3        97.4

 Average           53.0      15.7       31.2         1.4       11.3        87.3        2.1        6.7        91.2
 Median            62.3      17.1       20.5         1.0        3.6        94.5        0.3        2.9        96.9


                                                    C. 1998-2019
                             Output                          Consumption                       Investment

                  Global   Variable Idiosyncratic   Global   Variable Idiosyncratic   Global   Variable Idiosyncratic
 Canada            37.4       4.3       58.3         23.6       3.7        72.7        37.5      7.1        55.4

 France            60.7       0.8       38.5         12.3       0.3        87.4        50.9      0.8        48.3

 Germany           50.9       5.7       43.4         0.1        1.4        98.5        27.2      0.6        72.2
 Italy             51.5       9.3       39.3         17.4       2.2        80.5        26.5      21.6       51.9

 Japan             25.3       0.7       74.0         0.8        1.0        98.1        17.8      1.4        80.8

 United Kingdom    45.5       1.2       53.3         14.8      42.2        42.9        17.4      0.3        82.3
 United States     40.0      18.9       41.1         33.0       4.8        62.2        41.1      11.3       47.6

 Average           44.5       5.8       49.7         14.6       8.0        77.5        31.2      6.1        62.7

 Median            45.5       4.3       43.4         14.8       2.2        80.5        27.2      1.4        55.4


  Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The variance
  contributions are attributed to: Global (global factor), Variable (variable-specific factor), and
  Idiosyncratic (idiosyncratic factor). The row marked "Average" represents unweighted averages of
  the variance contributions shown in each column.




                                                       61
                                       Table A9. Variance Decompositions:
                  Models with Macroeconomic and Financial variables (1985-2019)

                                                 A. Equity prices
                             Output               Consumption               Investment                Equity price
                    Global     Idiosyncratic   Global   Idiosyncratic   Global    Idiosyncratic    Global   Idiosyncratic
 Canada               4.6             95.4      12.0        88.0         12.7         87.3          68.3        31.7
 France               7.1             92.9      1.5         98.5         3.6          96.4          49.6        50.4
 Germany              3.0             97.0      0.1         99.9         0.4          99.6          53.1        46.9
 Italy                7.8             92.2      4.8         95.2         1.1          98.9          34.2        65.8
 Japan                5.0             95.0      0.8         99.2         0.1          99.9          33.6        66.4
 United Kingdom       9.9             90.1      5.2         94.8         0.1          99.9          72.0        28.0
 United States       16.2             83.8      14.4        85.6         15.1         84.9          76.5        23.5

 Average              7.6             92.4      5.5         94.5         4.7          95.3          55.3        44.7
 Median               7.1             92.9      4.8         95.2         1.1          98.9          53.1        46.9



                                                  B. House prices
                             Output               Consumption                  Investment              House prices
                    Global     Idiosyncratic   Global   Idiosyncratic   Global     Idiosyncratic   Global    Idiosyncratic
Canada               26.4          73.6         14.8        85.2         30.2          69.8          11.7        88.3
France               63.4          36.6         9.7         90.3         59.9          40.1          29.2        70.8
Germany              35.3          64.7         0.5         99.5         20.8          79.2          0.1         99.9
Italy                50.4          49.6         16.2        83.8         20.6          79.4          12.4        87.6
Japan                22.9          77.1         2.7         97.3         10.0          90.0          2.9         97.1
United Kingdom       29.7          70.3         10.9        89.1          9.2          90.8          16.6        83.4
United States        26.5          73.5         16.2        83.8         30.0          70.0          0.3         99.7

Average              36.4          63.6         10.1        89.9         25.8          74.2          10.5        89.5
Median               29.7          70.3         10.9        89.1         20.8          79.2          11.7        88.3




                                                          62
                                                 C. Interest Rates

                             Output               Consumption               Investment              Interest rates
                    Global     Idiosyncratic   Global   Idiosyncratic   Global   Idiosyncratic   Global   Idiosyncratic
 Canada              24.8          75.2         15.8        84.2         27.3        72.7         2.7         97.3
 France              23.6          76.4         13.2        86.8         28.2        71.8         2.6         97.4
 Germany             63.5          36.5         9.6         90.4         57.1        42.9         0.5         99.5
 Italy               34.9          65.1         0.6         99.4         20.9        79.1         1.1         98.9
 Japan               48.9          51.1         16.4        83.6         20.9        79.1         1.1         98.9
 United Kingdom      22.0          78.0         2.2         97.8         9.4         90.6         1.6         98.4
 United States       27.1          72.9         9.5         90.5         7.6         92.4         5.6         94.4

 Average             35.0          65.0         9.6         90.4         24.5        75.5         2.2         97.8

 Median              27.1          72.9         9.6         90.4         20.9        79.1         1.6         98.4

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The variance
contributions are attributed to: Global (global factor) and Idiosyncratic (idiosyncratic factor). The row marked
"Average" represents unweighted averages of the variance contributions in each column.




                                                          63
           Table A10. Variance Decompositions: Models with Financial Variables
                                                    A. 1985-2019
                            Equity prices                    House prices                    Interest rates

                    Global Country Idiosyncratic     Global Country Idiosyncratic   Global    Country Idiosyncratic
   Canada            61.0      26.2         12.8      0.0         70.6      29.3     0.0         0.1          99.9

   France             5.5       0.8         93.7      0.0         0.1       99.8     70.3       21.0          8.6

   Germany            2.0       5.8         92.2      47.1        40.9      12.0     4.7         1.1          94.3

   Italy             64.7       0.2         35.1      0.0         3.1       96.8     0.1         3.5          96.3
   Japan              0.6       0.9         98.5      0.1         2.4       97.6     71.9       19.5          8.6

   United Kingdom     0.1      48.0         51.9      29.6        54.8      15.6     1.1         1.1          97.8

   United States     65.0       0.4         34.6      0.9         0.0       99.0     4.1         0.3          95.6

   Average           28.4      11.8         59.8      11.1        24.6      64.3     21.7        6.7          71.6
   Median             5.5       0.9         51.9      0.1         3.1       96.8     4.1         1.1          95.6


                                                    B. 1985-2007
                            Equity prices                    House prices                    Interest rates

                    Global Country Idiosyncratic     Global Country Idiosyncratic   Global     Country Idiosyncratic
  Canada             55.3      24.8         19.8      0.1         1.3       98.6      0.1        0.1          99.8

  France             3.6       1.9          94.5      0.2         1.3       98.5     62.9        26.3         10.8

  Germany            11.1      3.3          85.7      42.2        40.7      17.1      0.1        3.6          96.3
  Italy              63.8      0.4          35.9      1.2         5.2       93.6      0.8        3.5          95.7

  Japan              0.1       1.0          98.9      0.2         2.9       96.9     69.3        0.8          29.8

  United Kingdom     0.3       35.5         64.2      15.4        0.1       84.6      3.8        23.6         72.6
  United States      62.3      17.1         20.5      1.0         42.5      56.5      2.3        0.3          97.4

  Average            28.1      12.0         59.9      8.6         13.4      78.0     19.9        8.3          71.8
  Median             11.1      3.3          64.2      1.0         2.9       93.6      2.3        3.5          95.7


                                                   C. 1998-2019

                            Equity prices                    House prices                    Interest rates

                    Global Country Idiosyncratic     Global Country Idiosyncratic   Global    Country Idiosyncratic

   Canada            66.4      2.7          30.9      0.6         49.3      50.1     1.0         1.6          97.4

   France             7.4      6.2          86.5      2.6         1.1       96.3     78.1        6.2          15.6

   Germany            1.3      69.8         28.8      51.4        1.4       47.2     5.2         4.3          90.5
   Italy             67.7      0.5          31.8      6.6         0.3       93.1     0.5         1.3          98.2

   Japan              4.6      1.9          93.5      0.1         57.9      42.0     76.2        3.5          20.3

   United Kingdom     3.3      63.3         33.4      49.1        35.6      15.3     0.2        40.7          59.1
   United States     67.9      0.5          31.6      0.1         0.7       99.2     5.8         0.5          93.6

   Average           31.2      20.7         48.1      15.8        20.9      63.3     23.9        8.3          67.8

   Median             7.4      2.7          31.8      2.6         1.4       50.1     5.2         3.5          90.5
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The variance
contributions are attributed to: Global (global factor), Country (country-specific factor), and
Idiosyncratic (idiosyncratic factor).



                                                             64
      Table A11. Variance Decompositions: Credit Growth as the Financial Variable
                                   (G-7 Averages)
                                                    A. Models 1, 2 and 1&2
                        Output                            Consumption                      Investment                    Credit
             W         C         SF         I       W       C      SF     I         W       C         SF     I        F           I
            Model 1
1985-2019   36.4      34.5       2.6       26.6     8.7    29.0    0.6   61.7      23.3    23.3       1.6   51.8     13.5    86.5
1985-2007   21.9      40.9       2.4       34.8     6.8    29.4    0.7   63.1      17.1    23.6       1.9   57.4     11.5    88.5
1998-2019   46.6      23.5       4.8       25.0    12.8    30.1    1.3   55.7      31.6    17.0       3.3   48.2      9.6    90.4

            Model 2
1985-2019   39.9      32.4       1.9       25.9    10.2    27.0    1.6   61.2      26.1    23.0       1.4   49.5     15.9    84.1
1985-2007   44.0      28.9       3.0       24.1    19.2    26.6    2.5   51.7      38.6    17.7       2.1   41.6     18.8    81.2
1998-2019   61.9      17.5       1.5       19.1    21.5    26.5    2.1   49.9      45.5    14.3       1.2   39.1     14.5    85.5

            Model 1&2
1985-2019   38.8      31.8       4.2       25.3    10.0    27.2    2.2   60.6      25.5    22.8       2.9   48.8     16.0    84.0
1985-2007   19.7      42.6       6.5       31.2     7.1    28.1    3.7   61.0      13.3    31.7       5.0   50.0     18.7    81.3
1998-2019   50.1      21.1       6.4       22.4    15.2    28.0    3.7   53.1      35.2    15.4       4.6   44.8     14.4    85.6
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged
across the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global
macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SF (spillovers from financial to
macro factors), and I (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 1, the financial factor spills over to the global macro
factor. In Model 2, the financial factor spills over directly to country-specific macro factor. Models 1 and 2
combined capture both channels through which the financial factor affects macro activity.

                                                       C. Models 3, 4 and 3&4

                       Output                        Consumption                  Investment                       Credit
               W             C         I           W       C       I          W       C           I         SR       F        I
             Model 3
1985-2019     31.7      37.9       30.4           13.7    41.3    44.9     19.8     41.9     38.2           0.5     6.0     93.5
1985-2007     13.8      52.7       33.4            6.8    31.2    62.1      8.0     48.4     43.6           0.5    11.1     88.4
1998-2019     42.4      30.9       26.7           12.1    32.0    55.8     27.0     29.3     43.7           0.6     8.3     91.1

             Model 4
1985-2019     35.2      33.0       31.9           13.9    31.4    54.7     21.3     37.8     40.9           0.8     9.4     89.7
1985-2007     13.6      48.0       38.4            6.6    36.4    57.0      7.8     46.6     45.6           0.5     5.7     93.9
1998-2019     13.6      48.0       38.4            6.6    36.4    57.0      7.8     46.6     45.6           0.5     5.7     93.9

             Model 3&4
1985-2019     33.9      36.3       29.8           12.9    31.8    55.3     20.0     38.3     41.7           0.5     5.8     93.7
1985-2007     14.6      50.8       34.6            8.0    31.0    61.1      8.8     46.9     44.3           0.6     5.6     93.8
1998-2019     43.0      31.8       25.2           12.4    27.9    59.7     27.1     28.3     44.6           0.8     7.4     91.8

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged
across the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W
(global macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SR (spillovers from
macro to financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 3, the global macro factor spills over to
the financial factor. In Model 4, the U.S. country factor spills over to the financial factor. Models 3 and 4
combined capture both channels through which the macro factors affect financial sector.


                                                                  65
                   Table A12. Variance Decompositions: Long-term Interest Rates
                             (G-7 Average; Model 1&2 and Model 3&4)


                      Output                    Consumption                   Investment              Interest rates
              W      C     SF      I      W      C      SF      I      W      C      SF      I      SR      F          I
            Models 1 & 2
1985-2019   38.7   32.4     2.5   26.4    9.8   27.8    1.4   61.0    25.3   23.5    1.8   49.4           32.6    67.4
1985-2007   25.2   37.9     4.6   32.3    8.4   29.3    2.5   59.8    20.9   22.0    3.5   53.7           31.0    69.0
1998-2019   47.7   21.1    10.1   21.0   14.1   28.2    4.6   53.1    33.7   15.1    7.3   43.9           40.7    59.3
            Models 3 & 4
1985-2019   34.4   41.7           23.8    8.0   44.1          47.9    22.2   34.2          43.6     2.3   22.6    75.1
1985-2007   27.6   46.4           26.0   18.1   33.6          48.3    23.2   36.6          40.3     1.9   19.8    78.3
1998-2019   40.7   36.0           23.3    9.9   41.2          48.9    27.0   27.6          45.4     7.7   31.0    61.2
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The shares are averaged across
the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro factor),
C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SF (spillovers from financial to macro factor), SR
(spillovers from macro to financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). The results in the upper panel are based on
the combined Model 1&2, which captures spillovers of the global financial factor to macro variables through both
the global macro factor and the country-specific macro factor. The results in the lower panel are based on the
combined Model 3&4, which captures spillovers of the global macro factor and the U.S. country factor onto the
global factor for long-term interest rates.




                                                         66
            Table A13. Variance Decompositions: Alternative House Price Indicator
                                      (G-7 Averages)

                                                            A. Model 1 and 2
                        Output                               Consumption                         Investment               House prices
              W        C       SF          I          W        C         SF     I          W      C       SF       I         F          I
            Model 1
1985-2019    35.6     33.8      4.1       26.5      8.7      28.6        1.0   61.7       22.8   23.0      2.6   51.5        9.1    90.9
1985-2007    22.9     40.5      3.4       33.2      7.7      29.0        1.2   62.2       17.0   25.2      2.6   55.2        8.5    91.5
1998-2019    41.0     24.9      8.1       26.1     10.4      31.3        2.1   56.3       27.2   17.4      5.4   50.0        9.8    90.2

            Model 2
1985-2019    39.2     32.8      1.7       26.3     10.1      27.7        1.4   60.8       25.3   23.4      1.2   50.2     12.7      87.3
1985-2007    24.1     40.4      1.8       33.7      7.7      30.2        0.6   61.5       19.6   23.0      1.5   55.9      6.3      93.7
1998-2019    52.2     23.0      2.0       22.8     15.5      27.6        2.3   54.6       36.3   16.6      1.3   45.9     16.3      83.7

            Model 1&2
1985-2019    34.8     31.8      5.8       27.6        8.5    28.3        2.2   61.0       22.3   24.4      3.9   49.4     15.6      84.4
1985-2007    19.1     40.4      6.4       34.1        5.6    29.9        3.2   61.3       14.9   22.1      4.4   58.7      9.8      90.2
1998-2019    36.6     22.8     16.7       23.8        9.7    30.2        6.4   53.7       25.0   16.0     11.4   47.6     16.6      83.4
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged across
the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro
factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SF (spillovers from financial to macro
factors), and I (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 1, the financial factor spills over to the global macro factor. In
Model 2, the financial factor spills over directly to country-specific macro factor. Models 1 and 2 combined capture
both channels through which the financial factor affects macro fluctuations.

                                                            B. Model 3 and 4

                      Output                        Consumption                         Investment                 House prices
                W          C          I           W          C       I              W       C         I          SR      F          I
             Model 3
1985-2019     35.2      37.6     27.2             7.7       40.2    52.1        21.8      31.0    47.1           1.2     9.1       89.7
1985-2007     24.1      43.5     32.5            10.6       35.2    54.2        21.4      28.3    50.3           1.5    10.0       88.6
1998-2019     44.6      31.0     24.4            10.3       35.9    53.8        28.2      23.6    48.2           1.6     9.3       89.0

             Model 4
1985-2019     43.0      34.9     22.1            12.4       40.4    47.2        29.1      30.7    40.2           1.0     9.8       89.2
1985-2007     24.0      42.5     33.5            14.9       26.5    58.6        13.6      39.9    46.6           1.0     9.7       89.3
1998-2019     44.7      29.8     25.4            10.3       34.9    54.7        27.7      23.1    49.2           0.8     7.5       91.7

             Model 3&4
 1985-2019     34.2 40.4 25.4               7.6 42.7 49.7           21.7 32.9 45.4               1.3      6.9 91.9
 1985-2007     28.5 40.4 31.1             15.1 32.8 52.0            26.6 25.2 48.2               1.0      5.9 93.1
 1998-2019     46.5 28.5 25.0             11.4 35.1 53.5            29.3 22.5 48.2               1.5      6.4 92.1
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged across
the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro
factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SR (spillovers from macro to financial
factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 3, the global macro factor spills over to the financial factor. In
Model 4, the U.S. country factor spills over to the financial factor. Models 3 and 4 combined capture both
channels through which the macro factors affect financial markets.


                                                                    67
               Table A14. Variance Decompositions: Dataset Excluding the U.S.
                                      (G-7 Averages)

                                                           A. Model 1
                        Output                             Consumption                            Investment                  Financial
              W        C          SF           I     W      C      SF       I           W          C          SF     I        F        I
            Equity prices
1985-2019    31.4     36.4        5.0     27.2       4.6   40.0    0.8     54.6        18.3       26.6        3.0   52.2     47.3   52.7
1985-2007    19.7     44.2        1.7     34.4       6.6   38.1    0.6     54.8        19.1       29.0        1.6   50.2     43.3   56.7
1998-2019    34.7     29.9       10.2     25.2       6.1   37.3    1.8     54.8        19.3       18.3        5.7   56.6     50.6   49.4
            House prices
1985-2019    34.3     35.1        2.8     27.8       5.6   39.5    0.5     54.4        19.9       25.6        1.6   52.9     11.6   88.4
1985-2007    20.6     43.4        1.9     34.1       7.3   36.7    0.7     55.3        20.2       26.7        1.9   51.3     12.9   87.1
1998-2019    41.5     28.8        4.4     25.3       8.2   34.3    0.9     56.6        22.5       18.4        2.4   56.6      6.6   93.4
            Interest rates
1985-2019    36.4     36.1        1.4     26.1       6.5   38.6    0.3     54.6        22.4       23.0        0.9   53.8     18.8   81.2
1985-2007    22.1     42.7        1.6     33.6       8.2   36.2    0.6     54.9        21.7       24.4        1.5   52.4     18.1   81.9
1998-2019    41.8     30.2        1.9     26.1       7.9   35.2    0.4     56.5        23.0       19.5        1.1   56.4     26.5   73.5
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The results
are based on Model 1, which captures spillovers from the financial sector to the macroeconomy
through the global macro factor. The dataset for this exercise comprises six of the G-7 countries;
the U.S. is excluded.


                                                            B. Model 3

                        Output                        Consumption                      Investment                          Financial
                  W          C           I          W       C          I          W           C           I          SR       F            I
              Equity prices
1985-2019      37.0        37.9         25.1        6.3    38.2    55.5         22.3        26.1         51.6        0.4     47.2      52.4
1985-2007      20.6        47.6         31.7        7.2    40.2    52.6         20.8        31.8         47.4        0.4     43.3      56.3
1998-2019      55.1        25.0         19.9       13.2    33.3    53.5         32.1        17.7         50.2        0.8     51.6      47.6
              House prices
1985-2019      37.7        35.7         26.6        6.6    40.4    53.0         23.1        24.5         52.4        0.6     11.2      88.2
1985-2007      20.3        47.6         32.1        7.2    38.8    54.0         20.3        31.9         47.8        0.5     11.9      87.6
1998-2019      46.2        30.2         23.6        9.1    36.0    54.9         26.2        19.5         54.2        0.5      8.2      91.3
              Interest rates
1985-2019      38.9        33.6         27.5        7.5    41.7    50.9         24.7        21.6         53.7        0.9     19.2      79.9
1985-2007      21.4        46.1         32.5        7.3    38.4    54.3         20.5        31.4         48.2        1.0     19.2      79.8
1998-2019      48.2        28.4         23.4        9.9    35.5    54.5         27.4        18.9         53.7        1.0     26.5      72.5
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged
across the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global
macro factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SR (spillovers from macro to
financial factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 3, the global macro factor spills over to the financial
factor.


                                                                  68
                      Table A15. Variance Decompositions: Alternative Sub-Samples
                                            (G-7 Averages)

                                                           A. Model 1&2
                        Output                          Consumption                         Investment                 Financial variable
              W        C          SF         I    W      C      SF          I         W      C     SF      I             F           I
            Equity prices
1985-2000    29.8     32.4      8.6      29.2    12.6   28.4     5.0       54.0     25.9    21.1    6.9   46.1            43.7       56.3
2001-2019    50.4     13.5     23.2      12.9    23.8   18.8    13.9       43.4     33.2    18.9   16.3   31.5            60.6       39.4

            House prices
1985-2000    17.8     39.2      7.7      35.4     7.8   27.8     4.7       59.7     13.2    28.7    6.0   52.1             9.8       90.2
2001-2019    40.5     21.8     18.9      18.7    12.7   26.3     7.7       53.3     27.9    16.9   13.1   42.1            20.3       79.7

            Interest rates
1985-2000    13.4     45.7        6.0    34.9     7.8   27.8     3.5       60.9      8.3    36.8    5.1   49.8            19.6       80.4
2001-2019    55.8     18.1        9.2    16.9    20.9   22.9     4.7       51.5     36.6    17.8    6.5   39.1            29.7       70.3
Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged across
the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro
factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SF (spillovers from financial to macro
factors), and I (idiosyncratic factor). The results are based on the combined Models 1 and 2, which capture
financial market spillovers to macro aggregates through the global macro factor and country-specific macro
factors.


                                                           B. Model 3&4

                        Output                        Consumption                     Investment               Financial variable
                  W           C          I        W       C            I          W         C       I            SR          F      I
              Equity prices
 1985-2000      25.2         45.4       29.4     15.6    33.9     50.5            16.9     38.3    44.8          1.1      37.9     61.1
 2001-2019      69.2         17.2       13.6     31.3    26.1     42.5            40.3     24.4    35.2          1.5      54.6     43.8

              House prices
 1985-2000      25.9         45.5       28.6     16.4    33.7     49.8            17.5     39.1    43.3          1.2         5.5   93.3
 2001-2019      67.4         18.2       14.5     32.7    24.0     43.3            37.3     27.6    35.1          0.4         3.6   96.1

              Interest rates
 1985-2000      31.6         41.4       27.1     22.7    29.4     47.8            21.1     37.6    41.3          2.6      12.4     85.1
 2001-2019      46.0         29.2       24.8     12.4    33.2     54.4            30.1     24.1    45.9          5.3      26.3     68.4

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The share is averaged across
the G-7 countries at a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: W (global macro
factor), C (country-specific macro factor), F (global financial factor), SR (spillovers from macro to financial
factor), and I (idiosyncratic factor). The results are based on the combined Models 3 and 4, which capture
spillovers of macro fluctuations onto financial markets through the global macro factor and the U.S. country
factor.




                                                                 69
                                                Table A16. Variance Decompositions:
                          (Monthly Industrial Production and Financial Variables; Percent)

                                        A. Models with Only Monthly Financial Variables

                                                Equity price                         House price                               Interest rate
                                        Global Idiosyncratic                  Global Idiosyncratic                       Global Idiosyncratic
            Canada                       47.8              52.2                     0.0            100.0                   0.4            99.6
            France                       93.0                  7.0                                 100.0                   3.4            96.6
            Germany                      84.3              15.7                                    100.0                   0.0          100.0
            Italy                        76.4              23.6                                    100.0                   0.0          100.0
            Japan                        45.3              54.7                     0.4             99.6                   1.1            98.9
            United Kingdom               72.8              27.2                     2.4             97.6                   0.1            99.9
            United States                69.2              30.8                     0.6             99.4                   0.8            99.2
            Average                      69.8              30.2                     0.8             99.5                   0.8            99.2


                            B. Models with Industrial Production and Financial Variables

                          IP               Equity prices                IP                  House prices                  IP               Interest rates

                 Global Idiosyncratic   Global Idiosyncratic    Global Idiosyncratic      Global Idiosyncratic   Global Idiosyncratic   Global   Idiosyncratic
Canada              0.1        99.9      46.1       53.9         6.5         93.5          10.6       89.4        9.4          90.6      0.2         99.8

France              1.1        98.9      96.6        3.4         12.7        87.3                                 16.7         83.3      0.1         99.9

Germany             0.9        99.1      86.7       13.3         22.1        77.9                                 22.5         77.5      3.1         96.9

Italy               0.6        99.4      78.1       21.9         14.3        85.7                                 17.5         82.5      1.4         98.6
Japan               0.4        99.6      44.5       55.5         22.3        77.7          1.0        99.0        24.2         75.8      0.2         99.8

United Kingdom      0.3        99.7      71.2       28.8         7.0         93.0          9.9        90.1        8.7          91.3      0.1         99.9

United States       1.5        98.5      65.1       34.9         12.6        87.4          3.8        96.2        12.5         87.5      1.5         98.5

Average             0.7        99.3      69.8       30.2         13.9        86.1          6.3        93.7        15.9         84.1      0.9         99.1
Median              0.6        99.4      71.2       28.8         12.7        87.3          6.9        93.1        16.7         83.3      0.2         99.8

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported. The variance contributions are
attributed to: Global (global factor) and Idiosyncratic (idiosyncratic factor).




                                                                             70
                Table A17. Variance Decompositions:
 Spillover Model 1 with Industrial Production and Financial Variables
                             (1998-2019)

                           A. Equity Price

                     Industrial Production            Equity prices

                 Global Spillover Idiosyncratic    Global Idiosyncratic

Canada             12.5      5.6        81.9        45.7       54.3

France             11.0      4.8        84.1        93.2        6.8

Germany            21.1      9.3        69.7        84.6       15.4

Italy              15.7      6.9        77.4        76.5       23.5
Japan              18.0      7.9        74.1        47.6       52.4

United Kingdom     8.4       3.7        87.8        73.4       26.6

United States      22.3      9.9        67.8        69.8       30.2

Average            15.6      6.9        77.6        70.1       29.9



                            B. House Price

                      Industrial Production          Interest rates

                  Global Spillover Idiosyncratic   Global Idiosyncratic

Canada             18.9      0.4        80.7        51.8       48.2

France             17.7      0.4        81.9        8.6        91.4

Germany            32.3      0.7        67.1        18.7       81.3

Italy              25.1      0.5        74.3        8.1        91.9
Japan              29.2      0.6        70.1        11.2       88.8

United Kingdom     14.3      0.3        85.4        13.5       86.5

United States      32.2      0.7        67.1        83.5       16.5

Average            24.2      0.5        75.2        27.9       72.1




                                   71
                                  C. Interest Rates

                              Industrial Production                House prices

                         Global Spillover Idiosyncratic         Global Idiosyncratic

    Canada                 16.7        2.6         80.7            2.1        97.9

    France                 15.6        2.4         82.0

    Germany                28.6        4.3         67.1

    Italy                  22.2        3.4         74.4
    Japan                  25.5        3.9         70.6          22.2         77.8

    United Kingdom         12.3        1.9         85.8          57.4         42.6

    United States          28.1        4.3         67.6            2.6        97.4

    Average                21.3        3.2         75.5           21.1        78.9

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported at a
horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: Global (global macro
factor), Financial (global financial factor), Spillover (spillovers from financial to macro
factors), and Idiosyncratic (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 1, the global financial factor
influences macroeconomic aggregates through its spillover onto the global macro factor.




                                             72
                Table A18. Variance decompositions:
Spillover Model 3 with Industrial Production and Financial Variables
                            (1998-2019)

                                 A. Equity Price

                    Industrial Production                Equity prices
                     Global    Idiosyncratic    Global    Spillover Idiosyncratic
  Canada              19.1         80.9          44.0       1.3          54.7
  France              18.0         82.0          90.7       2.7           6.6
  Germany             32.5         67.5          82.0       2.4          15.6
  Italy               25.3         74.7          74.2       2.2          23.6
  Japan               29.6         70.4          45.5       1.3          53.2
  United Kingdom      14.7         85.3          71.1       2.1          26.8
  United States       33.0         67.0          67.5       2.0          30.6

  Average             24.6         75.4          67.9       2.0          30.1



                                 B. House Price

                   Industrial Production                 House prices
                   Global     Idiosyncratic    Global    Spillover Idiosyncratic
Canada              18.8          81.2          3.2         0.3          96.5
France              17.8          82.2
Germany             33.0          67.0
Italy               25.4          74.6
Japan               29.8          70.2          1.3         0.1          98.5
United Kingdom      14.4          85.6         59.4         4.3          36.3
United States       32.9          67.1          0.3         0.0          99.7

Average             24.6          75.4          16.0        1.2          82.8




                                         73
                                  C. Interest Rates

                       Industrial Production                  Interest rates
                        Global    Idiosyncratic     Global     Spillover Idiosyncratic
 Canada                  19.9         80.1           47.9         3.1          49.0
 France                  18.9         81.1             7.7        0.5          91.7
 Germany                 33.9         66.1           16.8         1.1          82.1
 Italy                   26.5         73.5             7.3        0.5          92.2
 Japan                   30.2         69.8           10.8         0.7          88.5
 United Kingdom          14.9         85.1           12.8         0.8          86.4
 United States           34.2         65.8           79.7         5.2          15.0

 Average                 25.5         74.5            26.1        1.7          72.1

Notes: In each cell, the variance share attributable to the relevant factor is reported at
a horizon of 30 quarters. The variance contributions are attributed to: Global (global
macro factor), Financial (global financial factor), Spillover (spillovers from macro to
financial factors), and Idiosyncratic (idiosyncratic factor). In Model 3, the global macro
factor spills over to the global financial factor.




                                             74
                                   Figure A1. Country-Specific Variance Decompositions:
                                    Spillovers From Financial Sector to Macroeconomy
                                              (Model 1&2; Output; 1998-2019)

                          A. Equity Prices                                                                          B. House Prices
 100                                                                                       100

                                                       Global       Spillovers                                                                   Global      Spillovers
  80                                                                                        80


  60                                                                                        60


  40                                                                                        40


  20                                                                                        20


   0                                                                                         0
       Average   Canada   France    Germany   Italy   Japan        United        United          Average   Canada   France   Germany   Italy   Japan       United     United
                                                                  Kingdom        States                                                                   Kingdom     States


                          C. Interest Rates
 100

                                                         Global        Spillovers
  80

  60

  40

  20

   0
       Average   Canada   France    Germany   Italy   Japan        United        United
                                                                  Kingdom        States


Notes: The bars show the shares of output variance in each country accounted for by the global macro factor
("global") and spillovers from financial factors ("spillovers"). The results are based on the combined Model 1 and
2, which captures spillovers of the financial factor on output fluctuations through the global macro factor (Model
1) and the country-specific macro factor (Model 2).




                                                                                      75
 Figure A2. Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Macroeconomy to Financial Sector
            (15-Year Rolling Windows; Model 3&4; G-7 Averages; 1985-2019)

                  A. Equity Prices                                           B. House Prices
100                                                         100
             Spillovers                                                 Spillovers
 80                                                          80
             Global                                                     Global
 60                                                          60

 40                                                          40

 20                                                          20

  0                                                           0
      2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018                2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018


                  C. Interest Rates
100
             Spillovers
 80
             Global
 60

 40

 20

  0
      2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
Notes: These figures are based on variance decompositions from model estimates over 15-year (trailing) rolling
windows. The bars show the average (for the G-7 countries) shares of the variance in fluctuations of financial
variables accounted for by the global financial factor ("global") and by spillovers from macroeconomic aggregates.
The results are based on the combined Model 3 and 4, which captures spillovers of macro fluctuations onto
financial markets through the global macro factor (Model 3) and the U.S. country factor.




                                                       76
 Figure A3. Country-Specific Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Macroeconomy to
                       Financial Sector (Model 3&4; 1998-2019)

                        A. Equity Prices                                                             B. House Prices
 100                                                                             100
                                     Global       Spillovers
                                                                                                                                Global      Spillovers
  80                                                                              80


  60                                                                              60


  40                                                                              40


  20                                                                              20


   0                                                                               0
       Average Canada   France Germany    Italy       Japan      United United         Average Canada France Germany   Italy   Japan      United United
                                                                Kingdom States                                                           Kingdom States

                        C. Interest Rates
100

                                                       Global      Spillovers
 80

 60

 40

 20

  0
       Average Canada   France Germany   Italy      Japan       United United
                                                               Kingdom States

Notes: In each panel, the bars show the country-specific shares of the variance of the relevant financial variable
that is accounted for by the global financial factor ("global") and spillovers from macro variables to financial
factors ("spillovers"). The results are based on the combined Model 3 and 4, which captures spillovers from the
macroeconomy onto financial markets through the global macro factor (Model 3) and the U.S. country factor
(Model 4).




                                                                         77
                  Figure A4. Dynamic Factor Estimation Results with Credit Growth

                                                  A. Global Credit Factor
                                                        (1985-2019)
              4


              2


              0


             -2
                                  Posterior mean
                                  16-84 percentile
             -4
                   85             90            95         00          05            10             15             19
Notes: The factors shown as solid lines are posterior medians based on the combined Model 3&4 estimated over the
full sample (1985-2019). The dashed lines represent the 16 and 84 percent posterior quantile bands. In Model 3, the
global macro factor spills over to the financial factor. In Model 4, the U.S. country factor spills over to the financial
factor. Models 3 and 4 combined capture both channels through which the macro factors affect the financial sector.


          B. Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Financial Sector to Macroeconomy
                                            (1998-2019)

                  100

                                                                               Global        Spillovers
                   80


                   60


                   40


                   20


                    0
                        Average        Canada    France   Germany    Italy   Japan         United         United
                                                                                          Kingdom         States
Notes: These figures show the variance decompositions for the global macro factor ("global") and spillovers from
the credit factor to fluctuations in macro variables ("spillovers"). The results are based on the combined Model 1
and 2, which captures spillovers to the global macro factor (Model 1) and to country-specific macro factor (Model
2) through which the financial factor affects macro activity.




                                                                78
          C. Variance Decompositions: Spillovers From Macroeconomy to Financial Sector
                                           (1998-2019)

             100

                                                                           Global     Spillovers
               80


               60


               40


               20


                0
                    Average Canada       France Germany        Italy     Japan    United United
                                                                                 Kingdom States
Notes: These figures show the variance decompositions for the global financial factor ("global") and spillovers from
macro to financial factors ("spillovers"). The results are based on the combined Model 3 and 4, which captures
spillovers from the global macro factor (Model 3) and from the U.S. country factor (Model 4) through which the
financial sector is affected




                                                        79
