                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  21ST CENTURY MACRO

                                   Narayana R. Kocherlakota

                                      Working Paper 26791
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26791


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




I thank participants at a number of seminar presentations for their comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Narayana R. Kocherlakota. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
21st Century Macro
Narayana R. Kocherlakota
NBER Working Paper No. 26791
February 2020
JEL No. E12,E31,E52

                                            ABSTRACT

In the 21st century, many key macroeconomic variables in the developed world have been
persistently low, including inflation, output, growth, interest rates (both real and nominal), and
labor share. I consider a class of standard representative agent rational expectations models in
which fundamentals are deterministic and constant over time. I show that for any level of nominal
frictions (no matter how small) and for any monetary policy rule (regardless of how active), there
is a large set of stochastic equilibria that exhibit permanently low inflation, low output, low labor
share, and low nominal interest rates. If the Phillips curve is sufficiently flat, then these equilibria
also exhibit low growth and real interest rates.


Narayana R. Kocherlakota
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
202 Harkness Hall
P.O. Box 270156
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
nkocherl@ur.rochester.edu
                                 21st Century Macro

                                  Narayana R. Kocherlakota

                                          February 2020



                                              Abstract

          In the 21st century, many key macroeconomic variables in the developed world have

       been persistently low, including inflation, output, growth, interest rates (both real and

       nominal), and labor share. I consider a class of standard representative agent rational

       expectations models in which fundamentals are deterministic and constant over time. I

       show that for any level of nominal frictions (no matter how small) and for any monetary

       policy rule (regardless of how active), there is a large set of stochastic equilibria that

       exhibit permanently low inflation, low output, low labor share, and low nominal interest

       rates. If the Phillips curve is sufficiently flat, then these equilibria also exhibit low

       growth and real interest rates.



1      Introduction

In the 21st century, many key macroeconomic variables in the developed world have been
persistently low for a number of years, including:

    · inflation (both expected and realized)

    · output (both expected and realized)
    
   University of Rochester and NBER. I thank participants at a number of seminar presentations for their
comments.


                                                   1
   · growth

   · interest rates (both real and nominal)

In this paper, I consider a class of representative agent rational expectations models in which
fundamentals are deterministic and constant over time. I show that, as long as there are
any nominal frictions (no matter how small), then any monetary policy rule (regardless of
how active) gives rise to a large set of stochastic equilibria that exhibit the above proper-
ties. Real determinacy of equilibrium (which is assumed in nearly all academic and policy
macroeconomic analyses) is a property of a knife-edge set of models: those with zero pricing
frictions.
   The class of models that I study has two important features. First, I use a broader
specification of nominal frictions than the standard one of costly price adjustment. The
formulation of nominal frictions implies that, as long as they are non-zero, any level of real
output is consistent with firm optimization. Second, I assume that firms can enter or exit
by paying a finite cost. I show that the possibility of firm exit imposes an upper bound on
output, but the possibility of firm entry fails to put a lower bound on (logged) aggregate
output. Together, these two model elements give rise to my core result: it is impossible for
central banks to eliminate the possibility of self-fulfilling stochastic equilibria with undesirably
low levels of inflation and economic activity.
   There is a large 20th century literature on sunspots and real indeterminacy in monetary
economies that dates back at least to the classic work of Azariadis (1981) and Cass and Shell
(1983). Benhabib and Farmer (1999)'s essay in volume 1 of the Handbook of Macroeconomics
provides a thorough survey of the 20th century literature. In contrast, the thousands of pages
of Volume 2 of the Handbook of Macroeconomics (Taylor and Uhlig, 2016) have only scattered
and short references to equilibrium indeterminacy. The small number of references, as well
as their substance, suggest that macroeconomists now view real indeterminacy as a problem
that is being successfully avoided by wise governments through the use of appropriate policy



                                                 2
rules.1
       This paper extends the 20th century indeterminacy research in an important way. That
prior literature typically focused on showing that real indeterminacy is a property of a generic
class of models. This paper goes further and demonstrates the converse: real determinacy is a
property of a non-generic class of economic models - namely, those without nominal frictions.2
It follows that the conventional wisdom among 21st century macroeconomists - that real
indeterminacy and sunspots can be (and has been) eliminated by sagacious government
policy - is theoretically grounded in a knife-edge set of models.
       Cochrane (2011, 2017) is also a skeptic of the 21st century consensus. He shows that in
log-linearized Calvo models, as long as fiscal policy is passive (in the sense of Leeper (1991)),
any monetary policy rule admits an enormous set of equilibria in which inflation and output
may either grow or fall explosively. There are two key differences between my analysis and
his. First, as is standard in Calvo models, he implicitly rules out the possibility of firm exit.
I show that the possibility of (costly) firm exit allows the central bank to eliminate unduly
high self-fulfilling inflation through active monetary policy rules. Second, I use a broader
notion of nominal frictions which allows for the possibility that equilibrium inflation stays
within a tight range, even though equilibrium output does not.3
       The indeterminacy result in this paper can be seen as a generalization of Benhabib,
Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2001). They show that the existence of a lower bound on the
nominal interest rate necessarily gives rise to an equilibrium in which inflation is constant at
a negative rate and perpetually below the central bank's target level. Like them, I assume
that there is a lower bound on the nominal interest rate. However, the formulation of nominal
   1
      Farmer (2019a, 2019b) is an important exception to this consensus view. He describes a research agenda
("Keynesian Search Theory") with indeterminate steady-states. Unlike this paper, he dismisses the role of
nominal frictions and offers no explanation of the 21st century behavior of nominal variables like inflation.
    2
      See Kocherlakota (2016) for a similar argument.
    3
      More conjecturally, I suspect that Cochrane and I also differ in how we interpret our findings. I would
say: almost all macro models imply that there is (downwardly biased) real indeterminacy, and so this is an
important policy problem. I read Cochrane as instead saying: the New Keynesian models imply that there
is equilibrium indeterminacy, and that means that they are deficient models which should not be used for
policy purposes. But, as I say, this reading of Cochrane's work is more tentative.



                                                     3
frictions in this paper implies that the low-inflation steady-state identified by Benhabib, et.
al. may fail to exist. My main result shows that, even in these cases, there is a plethora of
equilibria in which inflation and output are perpetually below target levels.



2     Model Elements

In this section, I describe the elements of the class of models that I use in the paper. The
basic elements of the models (representative agent, Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition,
and monetary policy formulated in terms of an interest rate rule) are standard. However, I
allow firms to enter or exit by paying a (large) finite cost. In the next section, I explain what
I mean by "nominal frictions" and why entry/exit costs imply that logged output is bounded
from above, but not from below.


2.1    Households

Consider an economy with a unit measure of households who live forever. Time is discrete
and the households maximize the expected value of:

                               
                                     t-1 (u(Ct ) - v (Nt )), 0 <  < 1
                              t=1


where Ct is the consumption of a composite good in period t and Nt is labor in period t.
Here, I assume that:


                                      u , -u , v , v > 0

                                            limc0 u (c) = 

                                           limc u (c) = 0


and that the functions u, v are bounded from below by zero and from above by a finite
number.

                                                 4
   The composite good consists of a measure  of consumption goods, indexed by j , and is
defined as:
                                                               
                                Ct = (          (c(j )1-1/ dj ) -1 ,  > 1
                                         0

Each household's consumption of each good j is bounded from below by zero.


2.2    Firms

Each consumption good j is produced in date t by a monopolistically competitive firm that
lasts for one period. (Their one-period nature means that entry/exit decisions are static.) A
typical firm j has a technology at each date t that converts x units of labor into Ax units
of consumption good j, for any x  0, where A is a positive constant. The households own
equal shares of all firms.
   Labor markets are competitive, and so, at each date, firms all hire workers at the same
wage Wt (denominated in terms of dollars). Given that wage, firms simultaneously set prices
for their consumption goods in terms of dollars. The firms' problems are identical, and so
they each choose the same price Pt in equilibrium; that price is also the aggregate price level.
I define the gross inflation rate t as Pt /Pt-1 .
   Firms can exit (rather than producing) by paying a goods cost kEXIT > 0. A firm can
enter (as a monopolist in a new good) by paying a goods cost kEN T ER > 0. In the New
Keynesian literature, it is standard to set kEXIT and kEN T ER equal to infinity. I instead let
kEXIT and kEN T ER be large but finite, and focus on equilibria in which existing firms find it
optimal to not exit, and potential firms find it optimal to not enter.


2.3    Policy
                                                                           ¯ 0 dollars. Like
Monetary policy works as follows. Each household is initially endowed with M
reserves at many central banks, money is interest-bearing. Specifically, at the beginning of
period (t + 1), a household that has Mt dollars is paid (R(t , Yt ) - 1)Mt dollars. Here, the


                                                      5
interest rate rule R is an exogenous weakly increasing continuous function thats map period
t inflation and period t output into a period t gross nominal interest rate.
    Finally, fiscal policy works as follows. The government's only liability is interest-bearing
            ¯ t }
money. Let [M    t=1 be an arbitrary (exogenous) sequence of positive real numbers. At each

date (t + 1), the government levies a lump-sum tax, in dollars, equal to:


                                                          ¯ t + (M
                            t (t , Yt ) = (R(t , Yt ) - 1)M      ¯t - M
                                                                      ¯ t+1 )


This (residually determined) tax ensures that the per-household level of nominal government
                                                     ¯ t+1 .
liabilities at the end of period (t + 1) is equal to M
    There is an additional linkage between monetary and fiscal policy. I assume that the
(gross!) interest rate rule R is bounded from below by Rmin > 0, and that the time path of
                               ¯ satisfies:
nominal government liabilities M


                                            ¯ T +1 /(Rmin )T = 0.
                                      limT  M                                                              (1)


Note that, if the nominal interest rate lower bound Rmin is below 1, then this restriction
requires the time path of nominal government liabilities to converge to zero exponentially.4



3     Equilibrium Conditions
                                                                             ¯ ). Given this
In this economy, the exogenous monetary and fiscal policy are defined by (R, M
specification of policy, the endogenous equilibrium objects are (possibly stochastic) processes
(Y, W, P,  ) that describe output, wages, prices, and inflation. In this section, I describe the
relevant equilibrium conditions with and without nominal frictions.
   4
     Throughout, I abstract from the existence of physical currency as a non-interest-bearing liability in
positive supply that provides liquidity services. Adding currency would have two effects on the analysis.
First, assuming that it is costless to store currency, its existence means that the nominal interest rate lower
bound Rmin cannot be lower than 1. Second, the welfare costs associated with inefficient provision of liquidity
would affect the choice of the government's desired output and inflation.



                                                      6
   The first three restrictions are independent of firm pricing. Inflation and prices are linked
by the usual definitional relationship:


                                           t+1 = Pt+1 /Pt


Households choose to supply labor at each date so as to satisfy the marginal condition:


                                      U (Yt )Wt = V (Yt /A)Pt .                              (2)


Finally, their choices of consumptions at each date satisfy a sequence of Euler equations:


                            U (Yt ) = R(t , Yt )Et (U (Yt+1 )/t+1 ).                         (3)


   Equilibrium processes must also satisfy a (necessary and sufficient) transversality con-
dition, which restricts the long-run present value of the households' holdings of nominal
government liabilities to be zero. But this condition is automatically satisfied in equilibrium
through the joint restriction (1) on monetary and fiscal policy. In the language of Leeper
(1991), (1) implies that fiscal policy is passive. In the language of Woodford (1995), it implies
that fiscal policy is Ricardian.


3.1    Pricing Restriction without Nominal Frictions

At this point, we have three restrictions on four processes. To find the fourth restriction,
we need to turn to firm optimality (in terms of their pricing decisions). Suppose all firms
simultaneously choose their prices from the positive reals. Then, in any period t, firm j 's
price choice must maximize:


                                   pj (pj /Pt )- - Wt (pj /Pt )- /A.




                                                  7
where Pt is the choice of all other firms and:

                                                      v (Yt /A)
                                               Wt =             Pt
                                                       u (Yt )

Firm j s optimal choice is:
                                               (1 - 1/ )-1 v (Yt /A)
                                        pj =              Pt
                                                    A        u (Yt )

Since all firms are solving the same problem, the fourth equilibrium restriction takes the
form:
                                                   Yt = Y f lex

where:
                                   v (Y f lex /A)/u (Y f lex ) = A( - 1)/


3.2       Nominal Frictions

We have seen that, in the absence of nominal frictions, the level of output is pinned down
by firm optimality. In the remainder of the paper, I instead consider the class of nominal
frictions that give rise to an equilibrium condition of the form:


                                                 t = P C (Yt )                                  (4)


where P C is a weakly increasing and continuous function, with a domain equal to the
positive reals.5 In the rest of this subsection, I describe two simple justifications for (4):
money illusion and level-k firm thinking (Nagel (1995)). However, it is essential to keep in
mind that these are only two of many possible rationalizations for (4), and that the results
in the following section are valid for any of them. At the end of the subsection, I explain
why Calvo and other forms of price adjustment frictions are not sufficient to deliver (4).
  5
      In Section 5, I describe the impact of incorporating empirically relevant lags into (4)




                                                        8
3.2.1     Money Illusion

In this subsection, I suppose that every firm j behaves suboptimally by setting its price
equal to a geometric weighted average of the best response to the prevailing nominal wage
an indexed version of last period's price level:

                                                     Wt 1-
                              Pjt = ((1 - 1/ )-1       ) (¯ Pt-1 )
                                                     A

Here, ¯ is an exogenous indexation parameter. If all firms choose their prices in this way,
then:
                         1 = (A-1 (1 - 1/ )-1 Wt /Pt )1- (¯
                                                           Pt-1 /Pt ))

and so:
                                       v (Yt /A)              1-
                               t = (             (1 - 1/ )-1 )   ¯.
                                       Au (Yt )

The firms' price-setting behavior implies that inflation is an increasing function of output Yt .
When  is near zero, inflation is highly responsive to the current level of output. However, for
any positive value of , all positive values of Yt are consistent with this model of firm pricing.
Hence, the slightest deviation from purely optimal firm behavior gives rise to a "Phillips
curve" on inflation and output.


3.2.2     Level k Firm Thinking

In the previous subsection, all firms behave suboptimally. In this subsection, all firms behave
optimally but believe that other firms are not behaving optimally.
   Suppose firm j assumes that all other firms set their period t prices equal to ¯ Pt-1 , where
¯ is an exogenous parameter, and the level of output is Yt . ,Then firm j believes that the
nominal wage depends on output as follows:

                                          v (Yt /A)
                                                    ¯ Pt-1
                                           u (Yt )


                                                 9
and its optimal pricing response is to set Pjt equal to:

                                                   v (Yt /A)
                                     (1 - 1/ )-1             ¯ Pt-1 .
                                                   u (Yt )A

If every firm have these same beliefs about other firms, then inflation is:

                                                        v (Yt /A)
                                 t = ((1 - 1/ )-1                 )¯
                                                                   .
                                                        u (Yt )A

   The above is a description of level 1 thinking. Now suppose each firm believe that all
other firms engage in level 1 thinking. Then each firm's optimal price is:

                                                v (Yt /A) 2
                                 ((1 - 1/ )-1            )  ¯ Pt-1 .
                                                u (Yt )A

This is an example of level 2 thinking. We can keep iterating in this fashion, so that if firms
engage in level k thinking:

                                                        v (Yt /A) k
                                t = ((1 - 1/ )-1                 )  ¯.
                                                        u (Yt )A

As long as there is any deviation from common knowledge of rationality (so that k is finite
rather than infinite), there is a "Phillips curve" like relationship between inflation and output.
For high values of k, inflation is highly sensitive to output (so that the slope of the Phillips
curve is large in absolute value).


3.2.3   Why Not Calvo?

The restriction (4) is not consistent with the standard Calvo sticky price formulation. In the
Calvo model, the degree of price flexibility affects the set of outputs that is consistent with
firm optimality. In particular, if almost all firms can change their prices at each date, then




                                                   10
they choose prices that give rise to aggregate demand that is close6 to Y f lex. . By way of
contrast, in what follows, near-frictionless pricing only affects the responsiveness of inflation
to output. It does not affect the set of outputs that are attainable in equilibrium.
       What happens if we add Calvo elements (or other forms of price adjustment frictions) to
the above models of firm behavior described in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2? The distribution
of lagged prices would affect current inflation. But it would still be true that firm pricing
behavior would not restrict the set of possible aggregate outputs. It is in this sense that (4)
represents a generalization of costly price adjustment frictions.


3.3       Asymmetric Effects of Entry and Exit

In this subsection, I describe the asymmetric effects of potential entry and exit on equilibrium
output. This asymmetry plays a key role in the results in Section 4.
       The first observation is that potential exit generates a natural upper bound on output.
A firm's equilibrium nominal profit, in any period t, is given by:


                                                Pt Yt - Wt Yt /A
                                                           Wt
                                             = Pt Yt (1 -      )
                                                          APt
                                                     v (Yt /A)
                                        = Pt Yt (1 -           )
                                                     Au (Yt )

Note that:
                                                    v (Y /A)
                                  limY  Y (1 -               ) = -.
                                                    Au (Y )

The basic idea here is that, to generate high levels of output, firms must pay high real wages
and so must earn highly negative profits.
       Recall that firms can exit production in date t by paying a cost kEXIT > 0 in terms of
goods. Then, it is impossible for equilibrium output to exceed Y U B , where Y U B is the largest
   6
     I thank Ivan Werning for explaining this feature of the Calvo model to me. Note that this property is
lost when the model is log-linearized.



                                                   11
value of Y that satisfies:
                                        v (Y /A)
                                 (1 -            )Y  -kEXIT .
                                        Au (Y )

For this reason, I focus on equilibria that are uniformly bounded from above by Y U B . (As we
shall see, we can choose kEXIT and Y U B to be arbitrarily large, without affecting the results.)
   It may seem like a similar argument should imply that the entry cost would ensure that
equilibrium output must be bounded away from zero. But that intuition turns out not to be
correct. It is true that:
                                                v (Y /A)
                                  limY 0 (1 -            ) = 1.
                                                u (Y )A

so that firm profit share is close to one when aggregate output is near zero. But firm profits,
when aggregate output is near zero, are given by:

                                                 v (Y /A)
                                 limY 0 Y (1 -            ) = 0.
                                                 u (Y )A

Firms are (naturally enough) making profits near zero when output is near zero. Throughout,
I assume that:
                                                         v (Y /A)
                              kEN T ER > maxY 0 Y (1 -            )
                                                         u (Y )A

so that there is no entry in equilibrium.




                                                12
3.4     Summary

To sum up, an equilibrium is a stochastic process (Y, , W, P ) that satisfies the following
restrictions for t = 1, 2, 3, ... :


                                      u (Yt )Wt = v (Yt /A)Pt ,                             (5)
                                                                  u (Yt+1 )
                                         u (Yt ) = R(t , Yt )Et                             (6)
                                                                    t+1
                                             t = P C (Yt )                                  (7)

                                             t = Pt /Pt-1 , P0 = 1                          (8)

                                             Yt  Y U B                                      (9)



4     Results

In this section, I provide characterizations of equilibrium outcomes in the above class of
models. The main point of the analysis is that there is an asymmetry associated with mon-
etary policy. Active policy rules can eliminate above-target inflation equilibrium outcomes.
However, no monetary policy rule, active or passive, can keep beliefs from giving rise to
arbitrarily low equilibrium output.
    Throughout the section, I consider a class of interest rate rules that satisfy the following
restriction:
    Restriction 1: There exists a target level of output Y T AR < Y U B such that:



                                        R(P C (Y T AR ), Y T AR )
                                                                  =1                       (10)
                                          P C (Y T AR )

This restriction ensures that there is an equilibrium in which output is constant at the desired
target level.

Proposition 1. Suppose that the interest rate rule R satisfies Restriction 1. Then, there is

                                                      13
an equilibrium in which:


                                       Yt = Y T AR

                                       t = P C (Y T AR )
                                      Wt   v (Y T AR /A)
                                         =
                                      Pt    u (Y T AR )
                                       Pt = t Pt-1 , P0 = 1


with probability one for all t  1.

Proof. It is readily verified that (Y, , P, W ) satisfy the equilibrium conditions.


4.1     The Lesson of the 1970s

In the 1970s, inflation was high in much of the developed world. Clarida, Gali, Gertler (2000)
present evidence that, in the United States, these outcomes were associated with the use of
passive monetary policy rules (in which the nominal interest rate responds less than one-for-
one with inflation). They also present evidence that the adoption of active monetary policy
rules was associated with the post-Volcker elimination of high-inflation outcomes. In this
subsection, I show that these characterizations of US monetary policy and macroeconomic
outcomes are consistent with this model.


4.1.1   Above-Target Inflation

I show first that interest rate rules that satisfy restriction 1 may admit many equilibria with
above-target inflation if those rules are passive in a neighborhood of the target level of output.

Proposition 2. Consider any interest rate rule R that satisfies restriction 1 such that:

                                        R(P C (Y ), Y )
                                          P C (Y )



                                               14
is strictly decreasing as a function of Y in a neighborhood of Y T AR . Then, there exists a set
of equilibria such that P r(t >  T AR ) = 1 for all t.

Proof. In Appendix B.


4.1.2   Getting Rid of High Inflation

We can rule out equilibria with above-target inflation if the interest rate rule is active when
output is above target.
                     R(P C (Y ),Y )
   Restriction 2:      P C (Y )
                                      is strictly increasing for all Y  Y T AR .
   Restriction 2 says that the interest rate rule is active for output at or above Y T AR . The
following proposition shows that, because of the upper bound on output, the requirement of
activeness implies that equilibrium output and inflation cannot exceed the target level.

Proposition 3. Suppose that the interest rate rule R satisfies Restrictions 1 and 2. Then,
in any equilibrium, P r(Yt  Y T AR ) = P r(t   T AR ) = 1 for all t  1. As well, in any
equilibrium in which P r(Yt = Y T AR ) > 0:


                    P r(Yt+s = Y T AR |Yt = Y T AR ) = 1 w.p. 1 for all s  1

                    P r(t+s =  T AR |t =  T AR ) = 1 w.p. 1 for all s  1.


Proof. In Appendix B.

   The key to the proof of this proposition is that, if Yt > Y T AR , the active interest rate
rule implies that there is a positive probability path along which the marginal utility of
consumption shrinks exponentially. But this implication violates the upper bound on output
- that is, it would lead firms to exit production.


4.2     Low Output Equilibria

In this subsection, I prove the main result in the paper: any interest rate rule that satisfies
Restriction 1 admits a large class of equilibria in which output is persistently below target.

                                                  15
The next proposition establishes the existence of deterministic equilibria with this property.
(Note that the proposition applies to all interest rate rules that satisfy Restriction 1, including
those that do not satisfy Restriction 2.)

Proposition 4. Consider any interest rate rule R that satisfies Restriction 1 and consider
    ¯  (0, Y T AR ). Then, there is a deterministic equilibrium in which Y1 = Y
any Y                                                                         ¯ and Yt <

Y T AR for all t  2.

Proof. The function:
                                     f (Y ) = u (Y )/P C (Y )

is strictly decreasing in Y. Hence, f is invertible; the domain of its inverse consists of the
positive reals.
   Now define:
                                                    u (Yt )
                                  Yt+1 = f -1 (                     )
                                                  R(P C (Yt ), Yt )

Suppose Yt < Y T AR . Then:

                                                u (Yt )
                              Yt+1 = f -1 (                    )
                                            R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                                              u (Y T AR )
                                   < f -1 (                    )
                                            R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                                                   u (Y T AR )
                                    f -1 (                            )
                                            R(P C (Y T AR ), Y T AR )
                                            u (Y T AR )
                                   = f -1 ( P C T AR )
                                             (Y         )
                                   = Y T AR .


The penultimate step relies on the assumption that R and P C are both weakly increasing.
Since Y1 < Y T AR , by induction all elements of the sequence (Yt )t=1 are less than Y
                                                                                       T AR
                                                                                            .




                                                   16
   The sequence (Yt )t=1 satisfies the Euler equation:




                             u (Yt ) = f (Yt+1 )R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                                        u (Yt+1 )
                                    =               R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                                        P C (Yt+1 )

We can complete the definition of the equilibrium using:


                                        t = P C (Yt )

                                        Pt = Pt-1 t , P0 = 1
                                             Pt v (Yt /A)
                                      Wt =                .
                                                u (Yt )




   The basic idea of Proposition 4 is that, given any period t aggregate demand Yt < Y T AR ,
there is some belief about future Yt+1 < Y T AR that justifies that level of period t demand.
   The above proposition may remind some readers of the classic result of Benhabib, Schmitt-
Grohe, and Uribe (2001). For a wide class of models, those authors show that if the nominal
interest rate rule is bounded from below, then there are necessarily multiple steady-state
inflation rates. However, the formulation of nominal frictions in this paper implies that their
necessity result need not be valid. In particular, suppose the Phillips curve is sufficiently flat
that:
                                      R(P C (Y ), Y )
                                                      <1
                                        P C (Y )

for all Y < Y T AR . (Note that this case, in which money pays a low real rate of return,
is currently the empirically relevant one in much of the developed world.) Then, there is
no steady-state in which inflation is constant and below target. Instead, the deterministic
equilibrium in Proposition 4 is characterized by inflation that is declining to an asymptotic
rate of limY 0 P C (Y ).
   If the interest rate rule R is active in a neighborhood of Y T AR , then Proposition 4 can be

                                                17
strengthened to show that there is a continuum of low-output equilibria that are perpetually
bounded away from Y T AR .

Corollary 1. Let R be any interest rate rule such that:

                                             ^ ), Y
                                      R(P C (Y    ^)
                                                     1
                                             ^)
                                        P C (Y

         ^ < Y T AR . Consider any Y
for some Y                         ¯  (0, Y
                                          ^ ). Then, there is a deterministic equilibrium in
           ¯ and Yt < Y
which Y1 = Y          ^ for all t  2.

                                                                 ^ substituted for Y T AR .
Proof. The proof is the same as the proof of Proposition 4, with Y

   We can generalize Proposition 4 to show that, given any interest rate rule that satisfies
Restriction 1, there is a large class of stochastic equilibria in which output is always below
target.

                                                                                      ¯ 
Proposition 5. Consider any interest rate rule R that satisfies Restriction 1 and any Y
(0, Y T AR ). Let   (s )s=2 be any stochastic process that satisfies the restrictions:




                         E (t+1 | t ) = 1 for all t and almost all  t
                                         u (Y T AR )R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                           P r(t+1 >                                  )=1
                                             P C (Y T AR )u (Yt )

where Yt is defined recursively as a function of the history  t = (2 , ..., t ):

                               u (Yt )      u (Yt-1 )
                               P C
                                       =                      t
                                (Yt )    R( C (Yt-1 ), Yt-1 )
                                           P


                                             ¯
                                        Y1 = Y


Then the output process Y is part of an equilibrium and P r(Yt < Y T AR ) = 1 for all t  1.

Proof. In Appendix B.



                                                 18
   It is straightforward to show that, under mild conditions on the interest rate rule and
the Phillips curve, below target equilibrium output also implies that equilibrium inflation,
nominal interest rates and labor share are below target.

Proposition 6. Suppose that the interest rate rule R and the Phillips curve P C are both
strictly increasing in a neighborhood of Y T AR . In an equilibrium (Y, , P, W ) such that P r(Yt <
Y T AR ) > 0, it is also true that:


                                        P r(t <  T AR ) > 0
                                              Wt   A( - 1)
                                       P r(      <         )>0
                                              Pt     
                        P r(R(P C (Yt ), Yt ) < R(P C (Y T AR ), Y T AR )) > 0


Proof. The first two implications are immediate from the definition of equilibrium. The
last implication follows from the supposition that R(P C (Y ), Y ) is strictly increasing as a
function of Y in a neighborhood of Y T AR .


4.3     Example Stochastic Equilibrium

In this subsection, I describe an example of a stochastic equilibrium in which output is
persistently below target. A key feature of the equilibrium is that the conditional downside
risk to output is larger when output is further below target.
   I define min = limY 0 P C (Y ) and assume that Rmin = limY 0 R(min , Y ). Suppose
that the interest rate rule R satisfies:

                                      R(P C (Y ), Y ))      Y
                                        P C
                                                       =h( T AR )
                                         (Y )             Y

where h is strictly increasing, h(1) = 1, and h(0) = Rmin /min < 1. Then, let p be in (0, 1),




                                                    19
and define the following Markov chain, assuming that Y1 < Y T AR :


                                      ¯ |Yt = Y
                           P r(Yt+1 = Y       ¯) = p

                                                ¯ )|Yt = Y
                                  P r(Yt+1 = Y (Y        ¯) = 1 - p


Here, Y (Y¯) is chosen so that:


                          1                        u (Y (Y¯)) P C (Y
                                                                   ¯)
                       ¯ /Y T AR ) = (p + (1 - p )      ¯ ) P C (Y (Y¯ )) ).
                     h(Y                             u (Y

           ¯ /Y T AR ) < 1 when Y
   Since h(Y                    ¯ < Y T AR , Y (Y
                                                ¯) < Y
                                                     ¯ . In this Markov chain equilibrium,

output either remains the same or transits to a new lower level. The size of the downward
step in output depends on Yt . If Yt is near Y T AR , then the conditional variance of Yt+1 is
relatively small (because h(Yt /Y T AR ) is near 1). In contrast, if Yt is near zero, then the
                                            Rmin
conditional variance of Yt+1 is shaped by   min
                                                 .


4.4    Low Growth and Low Real Interest Rates

Propositions 4 and 5 show that there is a host of equilibria characterized by perpetually low
output. In this subsection, I show how a sufficiently high lower bound on the Phillips curve
implies that these results about levels translate into results about growth.

Proposition 7. Suppose that for all Y > 0, P C (Y )  min > Rmin . Suppose too that
there exists Y  < Y T AR such that the interest rate rule R satisfies


                                   R(P C (Y  ), Y  )  min




                                               20
Consider a deterministic equilibrium (Y, , P, W ). If Yt < Y  in period t,


                                             Yt+1 /Yt < 1
                                           u (Yt )    1
                                                     < .
                                           u (Yt+1 )  

Proof. The hypothesis is that, in period t, R(P C (Yt ), Yt ) < min . It follows that:

                              u (Yt )     R(P C (Yt ), Yt ) u (Yt+1 )
                                        =                              .
                              P C (Yt )      P C (Yt )     P C (Yt+1 )
                                          u (Yt+1 )
                                        < PC        .
                                           (Yt+1 )

and so Yt > Yt+1 , which implies the proposition.

      The key to this proposition is an assumption about the slope of the Phillips curve: as Y
falls to zero, the Phillips curve is sufficiently flat that that the minimal attainable inflation
rate is higher than Rmin .


4.5       Summary

The propositions in this sections can be viewed as a sketch of the history of US monetary
policy and macroeconomic outcomes over the past fifty years (since the end of the Bretton
Woods monetary system). In the 1970s, US monetary policy was passive. The result was
unduly high inflation (Proposition 2). By following active monetary policy, the US has
eliminated high-inflation outcomes (Proposition 3).
      However, there is no monetary policy rule that can eliminate the possibility of self-fulfilling
equilibria in which output is persistently low (Propositions 4 and 5). In these equilibria, the
nominal interest rate, inflation, and labor share are also persistently low (Proposition 6). If
the slope of the Phillips curve is near zero (as appears to be true empirically), then the real
interest rate and output growth are also low in these (deterministic) equilibria (Proposition
7).

                                                  21
        Section 4.3 provides an example of a stochastic low-output equilibrium in which the
conditional variance of output is low when it is close to target, and high when it is well below
target. We can use this example to interpret the Great Moderation (1985-2007) as a long
period of time in which output was both close to target and displayed little volatility.7



5         Comments

In this section, I comment on five aspects of the above analysis: adding lags to the Phillips
curve that links output and inflation, incorporating capital in the model, the exclusion of
expectations from the monetary policy rules under consideration, the testability of macroe-
conomic models with multiple equilibria, and the passive nature of fiscal policy.


5.1        Phillips Curve with Lags

In the model considered in this paper, the Phillips curve relationship between inflation and
output is static. Most estimated Phillips curves incorporate lagged inflation. This kind
of relationship can be motivated using the reasoning in Section 3.2 by assuming that the
benchmark inflation rate (¯
                           ) in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 depends on last period's inflation.
        More formally, suppose that we replace the firm optimality restriction (4) with:


                                      t = ^ P C (Yt )¯
                                                      (t-1 ), t > 1                                    (11)

                                      1 = ^ P C (Y1 )¯
                                                      ( T AR )


where ^ and ¯ are both weakly increasing and continuous functions. Suppose too that the
    7
     In the 1970s, much of the developed world experienced high unemployment in conjunction with high
inflation. As is true of most models of that period, the framework in this paper can only account for these
"stagflationary" episodes by adding shifters of some kind (such as mark-up shocks) to P C . However, it is
worth noting that the only restriction on P C is weak monotonicity. Hence, inflation can be highly sensitive
to output when output is above Y T AR (as seemed to be true in the 1970s) while simultaneously being highly
insensitive to output when Y < Y T AR (as seems to be true today).




                                                    22
target inflation rate  T AR and target output satisfy the consistency condition:

                                      T AR     ^ P C (Y T AR )
                                              =
                                   ¯ ( T AR )
                                   

Then, we can prove the following version of Proposition 4.

Proposition 8. Suppose that the interest rate rule R satisfies the restriction that:

                                       R( T AR , Y T AR )
                                                          =1
                                            T AR

and suppose too that:
                                            R(, Y )
                                                    1
                                             ¯ ( )

if    T AR and Y  Y T AR . Then, in an economy with a lagged Phillips curve (11), and for
    ¯  (0, Y T AR ), there is a deterministic equilibrium in which Y1 = Y
any Y                                                                   ¯ and:


                                            Yt < Y T AR

                                            t   T AR


for all t = 1, 2, ....

Proof. In Appendix B.


5.2     Incorporating Capital

In Appendix A, I extend the class of models to include capital. The extension is a standard
one: I allow households to substitute consumption for capital on a one-to-one basis, and I
assume the firms' production function is Cobb-Douglas in capital and labor. I treat the case
in which the monetary policy rule specifies a constant and low real interest rate r0  1/
when output is low. Under this assumption, I show that if the initial level of capital is
sufficiently low, there is a deterministic equilibrium in which output, capital, labor, and

                                                23
consumption all have the same constant non-positive growth rate.
       The non-positivity of growth is a consequence of the assumption that there is no techno-
logical growth. With positive technological growth, we can re-state this result as saying that
there is a continuum of balanced growth paths. Along any of these paths, all real aggregate
variables (including labor input) have a constant growth rate that is no higher than the rate
of growth of the technological frontier.8


5.3        Rules with Expectations

It is common in macroeconomics to assume that central banks follow forward-looking interest
rate rules. For example, suppose that, at date t, the central bank knows that next period
output is governed by the random variable Yt+1 . Suppose too that it sets the nominal interest
rate according to the rule9


                                                                    u (Yt+1 )
                              R(Yt , Yt+1 ) = u (Y T AR ) -1 (Et                    )-1 .
                                                                   P C (Y   t+1 )

Then, the Euler equation implies that the households' period t consumption must equal
Y T AR .
       But the key presumption underlying these rules seems misplaced. How exactly is the
central bank supposed to know the households' future choices (since they have not committed
to those choices)? Presumably, the households could respond to a survey of some kind (which
would be akin to allowing them to send messages to the central bank). However, the central
bank faces the usual problem with surveys (or messages to social planners for that matter):
there is nothing to ensure that the households' responses about the conditional distribution
of future choices would align with their actual choices.
   8
       It would be useful to also endogenize technological development, as in Benigno and Fornaro (2018).
   9
       Adao, Correia, and Teles (2011) use these kinds of rules to ensure uniqueness.




                                                      24
5.4    Testability

It is often argued that models that exhibit indeterminacy of equilibria lack empirical content.
That claim is not true of the models in this paper. For example, in any equilibrium, the
household labor supply condition:
                                          Wt   v (Nt )
                                             =
                                          Pt   u (Ct )

is satisfied in every date and state. This (strong) restriction is falsifiable (with data on
wages, prices, consumption, and labor), even without imposing the usual assumptions on
(u, v ). Similarly, the model implies that:


                                          t = P C (Yt )


so that there is a nonlinear monotonic deterministic relationship between output and inflation.
The existence of such a relationship is again falsifiable using data on inflation and output.
   This argument can be readily generalized. A model is a set of restrictions on observables.
These restrictions may not jointly isolate a unique equilibrium for each specification of exoge-
nous parameters. Nonetheless, as the above discussion illustrates, the restrictions typically
still have (a great deal of) evaluable empirical content.


5.5    Fiscal Theory of the Price Level?

In the class of models in this paper, the limiting present value of government liabilities
is assumed to be zero for any sequence of inflation rates. The intertemporal government
budget constraint (or equivalently the household transversality condition) plays no role in
the determination of equilibrium outcomes.
   Can governments eliminate the low-inflation and low-output outcomes of the 21st century
through an active fiscal regime? Cochrane (2019) would say yes. Buiter and Sibert (2018)
would say no (because, in their view, active fiscal regimes are mis-specified). I remain firmly
agnostic. However, it is worth noting that the relevant commitment about fiscal policy has to

                                               25
do with its limiting behavior (at the end of time itself). It is not clear to me how governments
are supposed to make such long-term commitments credible.


5.6    Highly Persistent Effects of Monetary Policy?

In recent papers, Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) and Jorda, Singh, and Taylor (2020) find
evidence that monetary policy has long-run effects on the economy. Proposition 5 in this
paper suggests an explanation for their findings: agents could be using monetary policy
shocks as a co-ordination device among sunspot equilibria. According to this view, if the
central bank deviates in a surprising fashion from its rule, then the private sector could
respond by co-ordinating on a different continuation equilibrium.



6     Conclusions

Since the collapse of the Bretton Woods monetary system in 1971, the monies of the developed
world have been unbacked by any formal promise of convertibility. It might have been thought
that this lack of backing would lead to overly high inflation and inflation expectations. Indeed,
many countries experienced exactly this problem throughout the 1970s and 1980s. But
governments and academic economists learned a key monetary policy lesson in the last part
of the 20th century: even if currencies are unbacked, self-fulfilling bouts of unduly high
inflation can be eliminated through the use of active monetary policy rules.
    The main message of this paper is that this monetary policy lesson does not work in the
opposite direction. I consider a large class of model economies that have a broader notion of
nominal frictions than costly price adjustment. In these economies, there is an upper bound
on logged output (imposed by the possibility of exit) but no lower bound. I show that, except
in the knife-edge case of zero nominal frictions, any monetary policy rule admits a wide class
of stochastic equilibria in which output and inflation are both perpetually below their desired
levels. The result provides a robust explanation for why much of the developed world has


                                               26
been marked by persistently low output and low inflation in the 21st century.
   As I discussed in the introduction, the current consensus among macroeconomists is that
governments can (and do!) eliminate real indeterminacy through their choice of policy rules.
That consensus means that, as Lucas (2003) argued, macroeconomic policy should focus
mainly on the elimination of long-run supply-side distortions. The analysis in this paper
calls that consensus into question. The robustness of downwardly biased real indeterminacy
means that macroeconomic policymakers and macroeconomic researchers should be seeking
answers to the following question: How can governments use communication and their other
tools to ensure that economic actors co-ordinate beliefs and actions on desirable equilibria?
Answering this question is essential to ensuring better macroeconomic outcomes than those
experienced so far in the 21st century.




                                             27
Appendix A

In this appendix, I sketch what happens if we add capital to the models in Section 3. More
specifically, I assume that there is an accumulation technology of the form:

                                                          
                                            1-1/
                          Ct + Kt+1 = (    yjt        dj ) -1 + Kt (1 -  )

                                      ¯1
                                 K1 = K


Firm j 's production technology takes the Cobb-Douglas form:


                                                      -
                                    yjt = A(kjt ) (n1
                                                    jt ).




Here:
                                           kjt dj = Kt .

   It is no longer true that consumption and output are equal. Hence, the equilibrium
restriction implied by the firms' pricing behavior takes the form:


                                        t = P C (t )


where t  (1 - 1/ )-1 v (Nt )/u (Ct ) is the correct measure of the output gap in this model
with capital and P C is weakly increasing and continuous. Similarly, I define the interest
rate rule R as a weakly increasing and continuous function of (t , t ) rather than (t , Yt ).
The upper bound on output in the earlier model now becomes an upper bound on t .




                                                 28
   In this extended model, the deterministic equilibrium conditions are:


                                 t = v (Nt )/u (Ct )                                      (12)
                                                   u (Ct+1 )
                             u (Ct ) = R(t , t )                                          (13)
                                                     t+1
                             u (Ct ) = u (Ct+1 )((1 -  ) + Yt /Kt )                       (14)
                                                                   ¯1
                          Ct + Kt+1 = AKt Nt1- + (1 -  )Kt ), K1 = K                      (15)

                                 t = P C (t )                                             (16)

                             t Pt-1 = Pt                                                  (17)

                                Wt = Pt t                                                 (18)

                                 t   U B                                                  (19)


   We can use these equilibrium conditions to prove the following proposition for the case
of logarithmic utility:

Proposition 9. Suppose u(c) = ln(c), and that there exists ¯ such that, for all   ¯,

P C ( ) = min and R(min ,  ) = Rmin . Suppose too that

                                                  Rmin
                                      (1 -  ) <        1
                                                  min

                   ¯ such that if initial capital K1  [0, K
Then, there exists K                                      ¯ ], then there is an equilibrium in

which output, capital, labor, and consumption share a constant nonpositive growth rate.

Proof. Define:
                                           r0 = Rmin /min .

and define g = r0 . In a constant-growth equilibrium, the capital-output ratio and consumption-
output ratio are constant at:




                                                  29
                                      ^=        
                                      k
                                            r0 - 1 + 
                                                     ^+1
                                      ^ = (1 -  - g )k
                                      c


respectively. (The former relationship is an implication of the capital Euler equation, and
the second is an implication of the aggregate capital accumulation equation.) Pick the initial
                 ¯ 1 so that:
level of capital K

                                                 1     1
                                   ^ )K
                                 c/k
                                (^            ^) -
                                      ¯ 1 v ((k           ¯ 1)  
                                                   1 A -1 K     ¯


                             ¯ 1 . Now, let:
and define Kt+1 = gKt , K1 = K


                                       Ct = (^ ^)Kt
                                             c/k
                                                ^
                                       Yt = Kt /k
                                               1     1
                                            ^) -
                                      Nt = (k    1 A -1 K
                                                          t




Then, it is readily verified that:
                                       (Ct , Kt+1 , Yt , Nt )t=1


                                                                         ¯ 1 , the nominal interest
satisfy the various equilibrium conditions with initial capital equal to K
rate equal to Rmin , and inflation equal to min .



Appendix B

In this appendix, I collect the remaining proofs (of Propositions 2, 3, 5, and 8).




                                                  30
Proof of Proposition 2

There exists    such that:
                                          P C (Y )
                                                        >1
                                        R(P C (Y ), Y )

for all Y in (Y T AR , Y T AR + ). Pick any Y1 in (Y T AR , Y T AR + ) and, given that Y1 , recursively
define a sequence {Yt+s }s=1 :



                             u (Yt+1 )     P C (Yt )    u (Yt )
                             P C
                                       =                          .
                              (Yt+1 )    R( (Yt ), Yt ) P C (Yt )
                                           P C



                                                  P C (Yt )
   Suppose Yt  (Y T AR , Y T AR + ). Since      R(P C (Yt ),Yt )
                                                                   < 1, Yt+1 < Yt . As well:

                              u (Yt+1 )         u (Yt )
                                          =
                              P C (Yt+1 )   R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                                                     u (Yt )
                                          
                                            R( (Y T AR ), Y T AR )
                                                 P C

                                            u (Y T AR )
                                          < P C T AR
                                             (Y         )

and so Yt+1 > Y T AR . By induction, we can conclude that all elements of the sequence are in
(Y T AR , Y T AR + ).
   For each sequence, we can construct an equilibrium:


                                      t = P C (Yt ), t = 1, 2, ...

                                      Pt = t Pt-1 , t = 1, 2, ...
                                            v (Yt /A)Pt
                                     Wt =               .
                                               u (Yt )

In this equilibrium, t > P C (Y T AR ), because Yt > Y T AR .




                                                  31
Proof of Proposition 3

Suppose Yt > Y T AR with positive probability. Then, Restrictions 1 and 2 imply that:

                                     R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                                                       >1
                                       P C (Yt )

in the event that Yt > Y T AR . It follows that there is a positive probability event in which:

                           u (Yt+1 )    P C (Yt )    u (Yt )
                           P C
                                                               .
                            (Yt+1 )   R( (Yt ), Yt ) P C (Yt )
                                        P C



This implies that Yt+1 > Yt in this event.
   By induction, and using Restriction 2, we can show that for any s > 0, there is a positive
probability such that:

                          u (Yt+s )      P C (Yt )      u (Yt )
                          P C
                                     (   P C
                                                     )s P C     .
                           (Yt+s )     R( (Yt ), Yt )  (Yt )

But there exists some s such that:

                          u (Y U B )      P C (Yt )      u (Yt )
                          P C    U B
                                     >(   P C
                                                      )s P C     ,
                           (Y )         R( (Yt ), Yt )  (Yt )

which implies that there is a positive probability that Yt+s > Y U B . The first part of the
proposition follows from this contradiction.
   Now suppose that there is a positive probability event in which Yt = Y T AR . In that event:

                                 u (Y T AR )         u (Yt+1 )
                                               = E t             .
                                 P C (Y T AR )       P C (Yt+1 )

and Yt+1  Y T AR . Together, these imply that Yt+1 = Y T AR . The second part of the proposi-
tion then follows from induction.




                                                32
Proof of Proposition 5

We construct (, Y ) inductively, starting with the assumption that Y1 < Y T AR . Note that if
Yt < Y T AR with probability one, then:

                                      u (Y T AR )R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                                                                   )
                                          P C (Y T AR )u (Yt )
                              u (Y T AR )R(P C (Y T AR ), Y T AR )
                                                                   )
                                      P C (Y T AR )u (Yt )
                              u (Y T AR )R(P C (Y T AR ), Y T AR )
                            <                                      )
                                     P C (Y T AR )u (Y T AR )
                                                                 =1


with probability one. Hence, if Yt < Y T AR with probability one, it is possible to find t+1
such that E (t+1 | t ) = 1 and:

                                       u (Y T AR )R(P C (Yt ), Yt )
                              t+1 > 
                                           P C (Y T AR )u (Yt )

with probability one. As well, the upper bound on t+1 implies

                                  u (Yt+1 )     u (Y T AR )
                                              >
                                  P C (Yt+1 )   P C (Y T AR )

and Yt+1 < Y T AR with probability one.
   Given the above process Y, we can define (, P, W ) as:


                                         t = P C (Yt )

                                       Pt = t Pt-1
                                              Pt v (Yt /A)
                                       Wt =                .
                                                 u (Yt )




                                               33
We can verify that (Y, , P, W ) is an equilibrium by checking that the Euler equation holds:

                                                            u (Yt+1 )
                                 R(P C (Yt ), Yt )Et (                  )
                                                            P C (Yt+1 )
                                                         = u (Yt )Et t+1

                                                               = u (Yt ).


and noting that, since P r(Yt < Y T AR ) with probability one, the upper bound on Y is also
satisfied.


Proof of Proposition 8

Since Y1 < Y T AR , it follows that:


                                 1 = ^ P C (Y1 )¯
                                                 ( T AR )   T AR .


Consider any period t in which Yt < Y T AR and t   T AR . The Euler equation in period t
implies:
                                       u (Yt )¯
                                               (t )    u (Yt+1 )
                                                    =               .                         (20)
                                       R(t , Yt )     ^ P C (Yt+1 )
                                                      

   The left-hand side of (20) satisfies:

                                u (Yt )¯
                                        (t )   u (Y T AR )¯ ( T AR )
                                             >
                                R(t , Yt )     R( T AR , Y T AR )
                                                u (Y T AR )
                                             =
                                               ^ P C (Y T AR )
                                               

The right-hand side of (20) is strictly increasing in Yt+1 . Hence, there is a unique Yt+1 < Y T AR
that satisfies the period t Euler equation. Because t   T AR , this level of output implies:


                                t+1 = ^ P C (Yt+1 )¯
                                                    (t )   T AR .




                                                    34
By induction, we can construct an equilibrium in which Yt < Y T AR in all dates and inflation
t   T AR in all dates.



References

 [1] Adao, B., Correia, I., and Teles, P., 2011, Unique monetary equilibria with interest rate
    rules, Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 432-442.

 [2] Azariadis, C., 1981, Self-fulfilling prophecies, Journal of Economic Theory 25, 380-396.

 [3] Benhabib, J., and Farmer, R., 1999, Indeterminacy and sunspots in macroeconomics,
    Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, Part A, ed. Taylor, J., and Woodford, M., 387-448.

 [4] Benhabib, J., Schmitt-Grohe, S., and Uribe, M., 2001, The perils of Taylor rules, Journal
    of Economic Theory 96, 40-69.

 [5] Benigno, P. and Fornaro, L, 2018, Stagnation traps, Review of Economic Studies 85,
    1425-1470.

 [6] Buiter, W., and Sibert, A., 2018, The fallacy of the fiscal theory of the price level ­
    one last time, Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 12 (2018-48),
    1­56.

 [7] Cass, D., and Shell, K., 1983, Do sunspots matter?, Journal of Political Economy 91,
    193-227.

 [8] Clarida, R., Gali, J., and Gertler, M., 2000, Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic
    stability: Evidence and some theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147-180.

 [9] Cochrane, J., 2011, Determinacy and identification with Taylor Rules, Journal of Polit-
    ical Economy 119, 565-615.




                                             35
[10] Cochrane, J., 2017, Michelson, Morley, Fisher, and Occam: The radical implications
    of stable quiet inflation at the zero bound, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2017, ed.
    Eichenbaum, M. E., and Parker, J. A., 113-226.

[11] Cochrane, J. 2019, The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level, draft book.

[12] Farmer, R., 2019a, The indeterminacy agenda in macroeconomics, NBER working paper
    25879.

[13] Farmer, R., 2019b, The importance of beliefs in shaping macroeconomic outcomes,
    NBER working paper 26557.

[14] Jorda, O., Singh, S., and Taylor, A., 2020, The long-run effects of monetary policy,
    NBER working paper 26666.

[15] Kocherlakota, N. 2016, Fragility of purely real macroeconomic models, NBER working
    paper 21866.

[16] Leeper, E., Equilibria under "active" and "passive" monetary policies, Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics 27, 129-147.

[17] Lucas, R. E., Jr., 2003, Macroeconomic priorities, American Economic Review 93, 1-14.

[18] Nagel, R., 1995, Unraveling in guessing games: An experimental study, American Eco-
    nomic Review 85, 1313-1323.

[19] Nakamura, E., and Steinsson, J., 2018, High-frequency identification of monetary non-
    neutrality: The information effect, Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 1283-1330.

[20] Taylor, J., and Uhlig, H., ed., 2016, Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2.

[21] Woodford, M., Price level determinacy without control of a monetary aggregate,
    Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43, 1-46.



                                            36
