                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                UNCOVERED INTEREST PARITY, FORWARD GUIDANCE,
                           AND THE EXCHANGE RATE

                                             Jordi Galí

                                       Working Paper 26797
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26797


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2020




I acknowledge financial support from the CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalunya and the
Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26797.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Uncovered Interest Parity, Forward Guidance, and the Exchange Rate
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 26797
February 2020
JEL No. E43,E58,F41

                                           ABSTRACT

Under uncovered interest parity (UIP), the size of the effect on the real exchange rate of an
anticipated change in real interest rate differentials is invariant to the horizon at which the change
is expected. Empirical evidence using US, euro area and UK data points to a substantial deviation
from that invariance prediction: expectations of interest rate differentials in the near (distant)
future are shown to have much larger (smaller) effects on the real exchange rate than is implied
by UIP. Some possible explanations are discussed.


Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
    Recent research in monetary economics, using a closed economy New Keynesian model as
a reference framework, has emphasized the powerful e¤ects of anticipated changes in interest
rates on current output and in      ation.1 That analysis has drawn a lot of attention given its
relevance for the assessment of the e¤ectiveness of forward guidance policies, i.e. the attempt
to in  uence current macroeconomic outcomes in an environement where the zero lower bound
(ZLB) is binding by managing expectations about the future path of the policy rate. On the
other hand, the implausible size of the macroeconomic e¤ects of anticipated changes in the short
term nominal interest rate implied by the standard New Keynesian model and, in particular, its
prediction of a positive relation between the horizon of those anticipated changes and the size
of their immediate e¤ects, has come to be known as the forward guidance puzzle, and has led
many researchers to explore modi...cations of the assumptions of the standard model in order
to get around such implausible implications.
    In the present paper I study, both theoretically and empirically, the e¤ects of anticipated
interest rate changes in an open economy, focusing on their impact on the exchange rate.
When doing so, I take the assumption of uncovered interest parity (UIP, henceforth) and its
implications as a theoretical benchmark. This is of particular interest since most open economy
models in the literature generally assume UIP.2 On the other hand, the fact that UIP has
been empirically rejected in the literature does not render the exercise without interest, since
it is not clear what are the implications, if any, of the empirical failure of UIP on the e¤ects
of anticipated interest rate changes on the exchange rate.3 The analysis below allows for a
comparison between the predictions of UIP and the empirical evidence with regard to the
exchange rate e¤ects of anticipated variations in interest rates.
    As discussed below, UIP makes the current exchange rate depend, to a ...rst-order approx-
imation, on the undiscounted sum of expected future interest rate di¤erentials. Importantly,
that relation relies only a relatively weak assumption: the existence at each point in time of
some deep pocket investors with unconstrained access to both domestic and foreign bonds.
    In the ...rst part of the paper I analyze the e¤ects of anticipated interest rate di¤erentials
on the exchange rate, under the assumption of constant prices (i.e. ignoring any induced
e¤ects on in    ation). In that environment, the combination of UIP with the long run neutrality
of monetary policy yields a strong implication: the impact on the current exchange rate of an
anticipated future adjustment of the nominal rate is invariant to the timing of that adjustment.
    Next I revisit the analysis of the e¤ect of anticipated changes in interest rate di¤erentials
while allowing for feedback e¤ects on output and prices, using a simple New Keynesian model of
a small open economy. I show how, in that environment, the e¤ect of a given anticipated change
in the short-term nominal rate on the current exchange rate is larger the longer is the horizon of
implementation. A similar prediction applies to the e¤ect on output and in    ation. As discussed
below, both results are closely connected to the so called forward guidance puzzle uncovered in
the recent literature, though that literature has invariably focused on closed economy models
   1
     See the section below on the background literature for a more detailed discussion and references.
   2
     The present paper is not, by any means, the ...rst to study, from a theoretical point of view, the impact of
anticipated monetary policies on the exchange rate and other variables. Early work addressing that question
includes Wilson (1979), Dornbusch and Fischer (1980) and Mussa (1982). In contrast with the present paper,
however, that work, however, made use of not-fully-microfounded models. Most importantly, it did not examine
the role played by the horizon of anticipated policies, which is the focus of the present paper.
   3
     See, e.g., Bacchetta (2013) and Engel (2014) for a survey of the empirical literature on UIP.


                                                       1
and has thus ignored the real exchange rate channel.4
    Having analyzed the theoretical implications of UIP on the link between anticipated interest
rates and the exchange rate, in the second part of the paper I turn to the data. In particular, I
provide some empirical evidence on the exchange rate e¤ects of anticipated future interest rate
di¤erentials at di¤erent horizons. An open question, which is the focus of the present inquiry,
is what the empirical failure of UIP implies with regard to the link between the current real
exchange rate and anticipated real interest rate di¤erentials at di¤erent horizons. Thus, a key
objective of the empirical analysis below is to characterize the potential empirical deviations
from the horizon-invariance property implied by the UIP.5
    Using data for the US, UK and euro area on bilateral real exchange rates and market-
based proxies for anticipated real interest rate di¤erentials at di¤erent horizons, I test the
horizon-invariance property linking those variables, as implied by the UIP. The evidence points
to a strong rejection of that property. Perhaps more interestingly, it suggests a simple char-
acterization of the empirical deviations from horizon-invariance: expectations of interest rate
di¤erentials in the near (distant) future appear to have much larger (smaller) e¤ects than pre-
dicted under UIP. As far as I know, this particular dimension of the empirical failure of UIP,
which I refer to as the forward guidance exchange rate puzzle, has not been uncovered in the
existing literature.
    The third part of the paper discusses possible interpretations of the empirical ...ndings. In
particular, I argue that some of the solutions to the forward guidance puzzle proposed in the
closed economy literature are unlikely to apply to the exchange rate channel emphasized in the
present paper. Instead I propose a simple behavioral model that is shown to be consistent with
the key qualitative ...ndings uncovered in the empirical section.
    The remainder of the paper is organized a follows. Section 1 brie   y describes the forward
guidance puzzle in a closed economy setting. Section 2 discusses the e¤ects of forward guidance
on the exchange rate in a partial equilibrium framework. Section 3 revisits that analysis in gen-
eral equilibrium, using a small open economy New Keynesian model as a reference framework.
Section 4 presents the empirical evidence. Section 5 discusses possible interpretations of the
evidence. Section 6 summarizes and concludes.


1       Background: The Forward Guidance Puzzle in the
        Closed Economy
In the present section I brie   y review the literature on the forward guidance puzzle. The
analysis in that literature has been invariably conducted using a closed economy framework.
    The e¤ectiveness of forward guidance and its role in the design of the optimal monetary
policy under a binding ZLB was analyzed in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Jung et al.
(2005), using a standard New Keynesian model. Those papers emphasized the high e¤ectiveness
of forward guidance as a stabilizing instrument, as implied by the theory, at least under the
maintained assumption of credible commitment.
    4
    See Carlstrom et al. (2015), Del Negro et al. (2015), and McKay et al. (2016, 2017), among others,
    5
    Several recent papers have analyzed the response of the exchange rate to news about future monetary policy,
but with a di¤erent focus from the one adopted here. See below for discussion and references.


                                                      2
   More recently, the contributions of Carlstrom et al. (2015), Del Negro et al. (2015), and
McKay et al. (2016, 2017), among others, have traced the strong theoretical e¤ectiveness of
forward guidance to a "questionable" property of one of the key blocks of the New Keynesian
model, the Euler equation, which in its conventional form implies that future interest rates are
not "discounted" when determining current consumption. Formally, the standard dynamic IS
equation (DIS) of the New Keynesian model can be solved forward and written as:6
                                               1 P
                                                 1
                                        bt =
                                        y                  bt+k g
                                                       Et fr
                                                 k=0

where yt is (log) output and rt it Et f t+1 g is the real interest rate. The "^" symbol denotes
deviations of a variable from steady state.
    Two predictions of the model stand out. Firstly, the e¤ect on output of a given anticipated
change in the real interest rate is invariant to the horizon of implementation of that change.
Secondly, when combined with a forward-looking New Keynesian Phillips curve, the previous
property implies that the anticipation of a future nominal rate adjustment of a given size and
duration is predicted to have a stronger e¤ect on current output and in     ation the longer the
horizon of implementation. This is so because the implied change in in        ation and, hence,
in the real rate (with the consequent ampli...cation on the e¤ects on output and in       ation)
depends on the discounted sum of expected output variations, which is larger the longer is the
implementation horizon. The previous two predictions stand at odds with conventional wisdom,
and as such they have been (jointly) labeled the forward guidance puzzle.
    Several potential "solutions" to the forward guidance puzzle have been proposed in the
literature, in the form of modi...cations of the benchmark model that generate some kind of
discounting in the Euler equation. Those modi...cations include the introduction of ...nite lives
(Del Negro et al. (2015)), incomplete markets (McKay et al. (2016, 2017), Werning (2015),
Farhi and Werning (2017)), lack of common knowledge (Angeletos and Lian (2017)), and behav-
ioral discounting (Gabaix (2019)). The proposed solutions typically generate an approximate
"discounted" DIS equation of the form
                                                             1
                                     bt = Et fy
                                     y        bt+1 g                 bt g
                                                                 Et fr

where    2 (0; 1), leading to the forward-looking representation
                                               1 P
                                                 1
                                                       k
                                      bt =
                                      y                        bt+k g
                                                           Et fr
                                                k=0

which implies that the e¤ect of future interest rate changes on current output is more muted
the longer is the horizon of their implementation. Interestingly, and as discussed in section 5
below, several of those solutions would not seem to be relevant to the exchange rate channel
emphasized in the present paper.
   Next I show that, under the assumption of uncovered interest parity, a phenomenon analo-
gous to the forward guidance puzzle applies to the real exchange rate in an open economy.
  6
   I am implicitly assuming the most basic version of the model, with consumption as the only aggregate
demand component and limT !+1 Et fybt+T g = 0. See, e.g., chapter 3 in Galí (2015).


                                                  3
2       Anticipated Interest Rate Di¤erentials and the Ex-
        change Rate in Partial Equilibrium
Consider the asset pricing equations
                                       1 = (1 + it )Et f          t;t+1 (Pt =Pt+1 )g                            (1)
                                  1 = (1 + it )Et f        t;t+1 (Et+1 =Et )(Pt =Pt+1 )g                        (2)
for all t, where it denotes the yield on a nominally riskless one-period bond denominated in
domestic currency purchased in period t (and maturing in period t + 1). it is the corresponding
yield on an analogous bond denominated in foreign currency. Pt is the price index for consump-
tion goods. Et is the nominal exchange rate, expressed as the price of foreign currency in terms
of domestic currency. t;t+1 is the (real) stochastic discount factor for a (domestic) investor
with unconstrained access to the two bonds in period t.
    Combining (1) and (2) we have
                          Et f   t;t+1 (Pt =Pt+1 ) [(1   + it )      (1 + it )(Et+1 =Et )]g = 0                 (3)
   In a neighborhood of a perfect foresight steady state, and to a ...rst-order approximation,
we can rewrite the previous equation as:
                                                   it = it + Et f et+1 g                                        (4)
for all t, where et log Et . This is the familiar uncovered interest parity (UIP) condition.
    Letting qt pt + et pt denote the (log) real exchange rate, one can write the "real" version
of UIP as:
                                      qt = rt rt + Et fqt+1 g                                (5)
where rt     it Et f t+1 g is the real interest rate and t    pt pt 1 denotes (CPI) in ation,
both referring to the home economy. rt and with t are de...ned analogously for the foreign
economy. Assume for simplicity that limT !+1 Et fqT g is well de...ned and bounded.7 In that
case, (5) can be solved forward and, after taking the limit as T ! 1, rewritten as:
                                          P
                                          1
                                   qt =         Et frt+k      rt+k g + lim Et fqT g                             (6)
                                          k=0                            T !1

   Equation (6) is a straightforward implication of uncovered interest parity, combined with the
assumptions of rational expectations and a bounded long run real exchange rate.8 It determines
    7
     Note that the previous assumption is weaker than long-run purchasing power parity (PPP). In the empirical
section below, when taking the model to the data, I relax that assumption by allowing for a time trend, possibly
resulting from long term productivity growth rate di¤erentials.
   8
     Strictly speaking, the assumption of rational expectations can be relaxed in much of the analysis below and
replaced instead with subjective expectations E  e t f g as long as they satisfy the law of iterated expectations as
well as the transversality condition for the real exchange rate assumed in each case. In that case one can write:
                                             P
                                             1
                                               e t fr                      e t fqT g
                                      qt =     E      t+k     rt+k g + lim E
                                             k=0                        T !1

  I am grateful to an anonymous referee for the previous observation.
  By contrast, in section 6 I discuss an alternative model with a type of nonrational expectations that violate
the law of iterated expectations.

                                                              4
the real exchange rate as a function of (i) current and expected real interest rate di¤erentials
and (ii) the long run expectation of the real exchange rate. Forward-looking real exchange rate
equations similar to (18) have often been used in the empirical exchange rate literature, though
not in connection to forward guidance.9 For the purposes of the present paper a key property
of (6) must be highlighted, namely, the lack of discounting of expected future real interest rate
di¤erentials. This property is analogous to the one featured by the dynamic IS equation of the
New Keynesian model and which is at the root of the forward guidance puzzle, as discussed
above.
    In what follows I discuss some of the implications of that property for the real exchange
rate and its connection to forward guidance policies, and explore its empirical support.

2.1       A Forward Guidance Experiment
Assume that at time t the central bank of a small open economy credibly announces an increase
of the nominal interest rate of size , starting T periods from now and of duration D (i.e.,
from period t + T to t + T + D 1). Interest rates and prices in the rest of the world are
assumed to remain unchanged in response to that announcement and its subsequent implemen-
tation. Furthermore, assume that the path of domestic prices also remains unchanged (this
assumption is relaxed below). Under the assumption of long run neutrality of monetary policy,
limT !1 Et fqT g should not change in response to the previous announcement. It follows from
(6) that the real exchange rate will vary in response to the announcement by an amount given
by
                                            bt = D
                                            q
i.e. the exchange rate appreciation at the time of the announcement is proportional to the
duration and the size of the announced interest rate increase, but is independent of its planned
timing (T ). Thus, a D-period increase of the real interest rate 10 years from now is predicted
to have the same e¤ect on today'    s real exchange rate as an increase of equal size and duration
to be implemented immediately.
    Once the interest rate increase is e¤ectively implemented in period t + T , the exchange rate
depreciates at a constant rate per period, i.e. qt+T +k = for k = 1; 2; ::D and stabilizes at
its initial level once the intervention concludes, i.e. qt+T +k = qt for k = D + 1; D + 2; :::
    Figure 1 illustrates the implied path of the interest rate and the exchange rate when an
interest rate rise of 1% (in annual terms) is announced at t = 0, to be implemented at T = 4
and lasting for D = 4 periods.
  9
      See, e.g., Engel and West (2005) and Engel (2016), among many others.




                                                      5
3     Anticipated Interest Rate Di¤erentials and the Ex-
      change Rate in General Equilibrium
Consider the (log-linearized) equilibrium conditions of a standard small open economy model
with Calvo staggered price-setting, law of one price (producer pricing), and complete markets.10

                                       H;t    = Et f    H;t+1 g      + yt           !qt                      (7)

                                              yt = (1          )ct + #qt                                     (8)
                                                           1
                                    ct = Et fct+1 g            (it        Et f     t+1 g)                    (9)
                                                              1
                                                    ct =          qt                                        (10)

where H;t pH;t pH;t 1 denotes domestic in        ation, yt is (log) output and ct is (log) consump-
tion. Equation (7) is a New Keynesian Phillips curve for the small open economy. Coe¢ cients
                                               (    1) (2 )
and ! are de...ned as        ( + ') and !          1
                                                            where 2 [0; 1] is an index of openness
(equal the share of imported goods in domestic consumption in the steady state), > 0 is the
(inverse) elasticity of intertemporal substitution, > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between
                                          (1 )(1    )
domestic and foreign goods, and                        > 0 is inversely related to the Calvo price
stickiness parameter . (8) is the goods market clearing condition, with #              1 + 1 1 > 0.
(9) is the consumption Euler equation, with t pt pt 1 denoting CPI in             ation. (10) is the
international risk sharing condition, derived under the assumption of complete markets. The
above speci...cation of the equilibrium conditions assumes constant output, prices and real inter-
est rates in the rest of the world, normalized to zero for notational ease (i.e. rt = yt = pt = 0,
all t). Also for simplicity I abstract from any non-policy shocks, with the analysis focusing
exclusively on the e¤ects of exogenous monetary policy changes.
    Note that (9) and (10) imply the real version of UIP introduced in the previous section:11

                                     qt = Et fqt+1 g       (it           Et f     t+1 g)                    (11)

   Furthermore, under the maintained assumption of full pass through, CPI ination and
domestic ination are linked by

                                          t        (1         )    H;t   +         et
                                               =    H;t   +                  qt                             (12)
                                                               1
   In order to close the model, a description of monetary policy is required. I assume the
simple rule
                                        it =     H;t                                  (13)
  10
     Detailed derivations of the equilibrium conditions can be found in Galí and Monacelli (2005) and Galí (2015,
chapter 8) With little loss of generality I assume an underlying technology that is linear in labor input.
  11
     The assumption of complete markets at the international level is su¢ cient (though not necessary) to derive
the uncovered interest parity equation. As discussed in section 2 above that equation can be derived as long as
there are some investors each period with unconstrained access to both domestic and foreign one-period bonds.


                                                          6
where     > 1. It can be easily checked that in the absence of exogenous shocks the equilibrium
in the above economy is (locally) unique and given by H;t = yt = qt = it = 0 for all t.12
    Consider next a forward guidance experiment analogous to the one analyzed in the previous
section, but allowing for an endogenous response of in       ation to the anticipated change in the
interest rate. More speci...cally, assume that at time 0, the home central bank credibly announces
a one-period increase in the nominal interest rate of 0:25 (i.e. one percentage point in annualized
terms), to be implemented in period T . Furthermore, the central bank commits to keeping the
nominal interest rate at its initial level (normalized to zero in the impulse responses) between
periods 0 and T 1, independently of the evolution of in         ation. At time T + 1 it restores the
interest rate rule (13) and, with it, the initial equilibrium.
    Figure 2 displays the response of interest rates, the exchange rate, output, and in      ation, to
the above experiment under three alternative time horizons for implementation: T = f1; 2; 4g.
The parameters of the model are calibrated as follows: = 0:99, = 0:4, = ' = 1, = 2; and
  = 0:75. Note that a version of the forward guidance puzzle for the open economy emerges:
the longer is the horizon of implementation, the larger is the impact of the announcement on
the real and nominal exchange rates as well as on output and in           ation. As emphasized by
McKay el al. (2016), the reason for the ampli...cation has to do with the fact that in           ation
depends on current and expected future output, combined with the property that the longer is
the implementation of a given interest rise the more persistent the output response. It follows
that the longer is the implementation horizon of a given change in the nominal rate the larger
will be the response of the real rate ­ and hence of output and the real exchange rate­between
the time of the announcement and that of policy implementation.
    Figure 3 illustrates more explicitly the forward guidance puzzle as applies to the nominal
and real exchange rates. It displays the percent response of those two variables on impact
when a one-period increase in the nominal rate is announced, to be implemented at alternative
horizons represented by the horizontal axis. As the Figure makes clear the percent appreciation
of the home currency, both in real and nominal terms, increases exponentially with the horizon
of implementation. Note also that the appreciation of the nominal exchange rate is substantially
larger than that of the real exchange rate, with the gap between the two increasing with the
horizon of implementation. That gap, which corresponds to the percent decrease in the CPI
in response to the forward guidance announcement, is also increasing in the horizon due to the
forward-lookingness of the New Keynesian Phillips curve. The fall in in       ation, in turn, leads to
a further rise in current and future real interest rates (given an unchanged path for the nominal
rate), thus generating an additional appreciation of the real exchange rate.
    An alternative perspective on the previous experiment can be obtained by focusing on the
determination of the nominal exchange rate. Consider an announcement of an interest rate
increase of size and duration D, to be implemented T periods ahead. Iterating forward
equation (4) we can express the nominal exchange rate at the time of the policy announcement
  12
     All of the results below carry over unaltered if we assume that the central bank responds to other variables
(e.g. output or the exchange rate) in addition to domestic in      ation. The reason is twofold: (i) the rule is
assumed to be "suspended" between the announcement and the end of the implementation, and (ii) that once
the intervention comes to an end (and in the absence of other shocks) the economy immediately jumps to the
steady state, independently of the precise form of the rule (as long as equilibrium uniqueness is guaranteed).




                                                       7
as:

                                        et =     D + Et fet+T +D g
                                           =     D + Et fpt+T +D g                                      (14)

    The ...rst term on the right hand side of (14) captures the dependence of the nominal
exchange rate on anticipated changes in nominal interest rate di¤erentials. As discussed in
section 2 that e¤ect is a function of the size ( ) and duration (D) of the anticipated policy
intervention, but not of its timing. This captures the partial equilibrium dimension of the
forward guidance exchange rate puzzle. The second term, Et fpt+T +D g, which reinforces the
e¤ect of the ...rst term, is the result of general equilibrium e¤ects working through (i) the
impact on aggregate demand and output of the changes in consumption and the real exchange
rate induced by the anticipation of higher future nominal interest rates (given prices), and (ii)
their subsequent e¤ects on in   ation and the price level, which depend on the duration of the
output e¤ects and, hence, on the timing of the policy implementation.
    The strength of some the general equilibrium e¤ects at work in the previous simulations is,
from an empirical perspective, a controversial subject. This is true, in particular, with regard to
the degree of forward-lookingness of in     ation, i.e. that variable'
                                                                     s sensitivity to expected future
output developments. An empirical analysis of the role played by the response of in       ation (and,
hence, of real interest rates) to anticipated changes in nominal interest rates in the determination
of the exchange rate is beyond the scope of the present paper.13 Instead, in the remainder of
the paper I turn to an empirical exploration of the (partial equilibrium) link between the real
exchange rate and anticipated real interest rate di¤erentials, with a focus on the role played by
the horizon of anticipated interest rate changes, and having as a benchmark the relationship
between those variables implied by the real version of UIP shown in (6).


4      Anticipated Interest Rate Di¤erentials and the Ex-
       change Rate: Does the Horizon Matter?
Next I provide some evidence on the extent to which   uctuations in the real exchange rate can be
accounted for by variations in expected interest rate di¤erentials at di¤erent horizons. Several
recent papers have analyzed the response of the exchange rate to news about future monetary
policy, but with a di¤erent focus from the one adopted here, i.e. the role of the horizon. Thus,
Curcuru et al. (2018) study the di¤erences in the response of the exchange rate and foreign
yields to expected short term rates and term premia in the U.S., with the aim of understanding
the di¤erences between QE and conventional policies on the exchange rate. Glick and Leduc
(2018) estimate the response of the dollar exchange rate against a number of currencies in
response to surprises in the policy rate, as well as to changes in short-term and longer-term
rates around policy announcements. Both papers point to a substantial increase in the response
of the exchange rate to expected interest rates during the period of unconventional monetary
  13
    See, e.g. Mavroeidis et al. (2014), Rudd and Whelan (2005) and Galí et al. (2005), as well as other
contributions to the special issue of the Journal of Monetary Economics (vol. 52, issue 6) on the empirics of
the New Keynesian Phillips curve for a discussion of some the issues in that controversy.


                                                     8
policies. but no attempt is made to compare the size of those responses to those implied by the
theory, which is the focus of the present inquiry.
    The starting point of my empirical analysis is the relation between the real exchange rate
and expected future real interest rate di¤erentials implied by the UIP condition. The exact
form of the equation to be taken to the data depends on the maintained assumption regarding
the long run properties of the real exchange rate. Next I discuss three alternative assumptions
regarding those properties.
    In the ...rst case considered, purchasing power parity (PPP) is assumed to hold in the long
run, so that fqt g is stationary around a constant mean q , and limT !+1 Et fqT g = q . In that
case one can rewrite (6) as
                                             P
                                             1
                                    qt = q +    Et frt+k rt+k g                            (15)
                                                   k=0

   I assume that for a su¢ ciently long horizon m the following approximation is valid:
                                        P
                                        1
                                               Et frt+k       rt+k g ' 0
                                        k =m

   In the empirical implementation below, I assume m = 360, which corresponds to 30 years.
This seems a conservative assumption.
   Note that the in...nite sum on the right hand side of (15) can be decomposed as the sum of
two terms:

                                  P
                                  n 1                             P1
                                                                  m
                       qt ' q +       Et frt+k           rt+k g +      Et frt+k     rt+k g    (16)
                                  k=0                             k =n
                                  |         {z                } |           {z           }
                                          S (n)
                                         Dt                                 L (n)
                                                                           Dt

                                           S            L
for any horizon n 2 f1; 2; 3; :::; m 1g. Dt  (n) and Dt   (n) capture the anticipated real interest
rate di¤erentials at "short" and "long" horizons, respectively, with n being the (arbitrary)
horizon that de...nes the boundary between the two. The empirical strategy pursued below
consists of using measures of the (log) real exchange rate, together with empirical proxies for
  S
          P
          n 1
                                     L
                                             mP1
Dt  (n)       Et frt+k rt+k g and Dt   (n)       Et frt+k rt+k g, to estimate equation
         k=0                                       k =n

                                                      S               L
                                  qt =         +   S Dt (n)    +   L Dt (n)                   (17)

    In what follows I refer to (17) as the baseline speci...cation. Note that the joint null of UIP
and long run PPP implies S = L = 1, which can be tested. Most interestingly, one may
want to examine the size and sign of the estimated deviations from that null, as well as its
dependence on the horizon. Before discussing the details of the empirical implementation, I
brie  y describe two alternative representations of the exchange rate equation that relax the
assumption of long run PPP underlying the above speci...cation.
    Consider the case of a (log) real exchange rate that is stationary around a deterministic trend
  + t. This could be the result of di¤erent trend productivity growth rates in the tradable
sectors of the two economies considered. Note that in that case limT !+1 Et fqT g is unbounded,
so that representation (6) is not well de...ned (and (15) is invalid). Nevertheless, combining the


                                                          9
previous assumptions with the arbitrage condition (5) (which remains valid, independently of
the long run properties of qt ) one can derive:
                                   P
                                   1
                            bt =
                            q            Et frt+k       rt+k                  bT g
                                                                  g + lim Et fq                  (18)
                                   k=0                                  T !1


where qbt qt ( + t) is the detrended (log) real exchange rate and where becomes the un-
conditional mean of the real interest rate di¤erential. Under the trend stationarity assumption
                        bT g = 0. Accordingly, (18) can be rewritten as
made here, limT !+1 Et fq
                                                    P
                                                    1
                              qt =        + t+            Et frt+k      rt+k      g              (19)
                                                    k=0

   Again, I assume that for a su¢ ciently long horizon m the following approximation holds:
                                         P
                                         1
                                              Et frt+k     rt+k         g'0                      (20)
                                     k =m

i.e., real interest rate di¤erentials are expected to return to their unconditional mean       within
a horizon of m months. It follows from (19) and (20), that

                                                               P1
                                                               m
                           qt '           + (t       m) +           Et frt+k rt+k g
                                                               k=0
                                                                 S          L
                               '          + (t       m) +      Dt  (n) + Dt   (n)                (21)

which motivates the estimation of the empirical equation
                                                            S              L
                               qt =       0   + t+       S Dt (n)   +   L Dt (n)                 (22)
                               S           L
given empirical proxies for Dt   (n) and Dt  (n). Below I refer to (22) as the time trend speci...ca-
tion.
    Finally, I consider the case in which the (log) real exchange rate is an I (1) stochastic process,
possibly with a deterministic component (i.e., qt is stationary with mean ). This would be a
likely implication of (log) productivity di¤erentials in the tradable sector being themselves I (1)
processes. In that case equation (18) remains valid, and can be rewritten under assumption
(20) as
                                            P1
                                            m
                     qt ' + (t m) +              Et frt+k rt+k g + lim Et fq bT g
                                                  k=0                          T !1

   Taking ...rst di¤erences, we can write
                                                     S               L
                                   qt ' +           Dt (n) +        Dt (n) + "t                  (23)

where "t limT !1 (Et Et 1 )fqT g, i.e. the period t innovation in the expected long-run real
exchange rate.
   Motivated by the previous considerations, below I also report estimates of the empirical
equation
                                          S             L
                           qt = + S Dt      (n) + L Dt    (n) + "t                      (24)

                                                         10
henceforth referred to as the ...rst-di¤erence speci...cation.
    As in the baseline representation, the absence of discounting in (6) implies that, ceteris
                         S               L
paribus, a change in Dt    (n) (given Dt   (n)) should have the same e¤ect on the real exchange
                                        L               S
rate as a commensurate change in Dt (n) (given Dt         (n)). Furthermore, under UIP that e¤ect
should be "one-for-one" in both cases, i.e. S = L = 1, which can be tested. Also, estimates of
 S and L can help characterize the deviations from that null, with S measuring the sensitivity
of the real exchange rate with respect to changes in expected interest rate di¤erentials at shorter
run horizons (i.e. over the next n periods), while L captures the corresponding e¤ect at longer
horizons (i.e. beyond n periods).

4.1       Baseline Empirical Strategy
                                                                                        S
In order to estimate (17), (22) and (24) I need to construct empirical counterparts to Dt (n) and
  L
Dt (n). I use (zero coupon) yields on government debt at di¤erent maturities to approximate
expectations of future short term rates. Taking the time unit to be a month (so that it , t
and rt have the interpretation of monthly rates), and letting it (n) denote the (annualized) zero
coupon yield on a government bond maturing in n months, I assume a version of the expectation
hypothesis of the form
                                                 P
                                              12 n  1
                                     it (n) '         Et fit+k g                             (25)
                                              n k=0
with an analogous relation holding for the foreign economy.14
   Secondly, I use (average) monthly data on in   ation swaps at di¤erent maturities to approxi-
mate in  ation expectations at di¤erent horizons.15 Letting et (n) denote (annualized) expected
in ation between month t and month t + n, one can rewrite (25) as

                                   P
                                   n 1                    n                e
                                         Et frt+k g =        [(it (n)      t (n)]                       (26)
                                   k=0                    12

with an analogous relation holding for the foreign economy.
   The previous relation is used below in order to compute, for each month, an empirical
counterpart to the sum of expected real rate di¤erentials over the subsequent n months, given
data on government bond yields, in   ation expectations for the home and foreign economies.
More speci...cally,

                           S
                                         P
                                         n 1
                          Dt (n)               Et frt+k     rt+k g
                                         k=0
                                         n                  e                       e
                                   =       [(i (n)              (n))    (it (n)     t (n))]             (27)
                                         12 t               t

                                                                              L
       Finally, and given the assumptions above, one can obtain a measure of Dt (n), the antici-
  14
     The results discussed in this section carry over in a straightforward way to the case of a constant term
premium. In the robustness section below I allow for a time-varying term premium.
  15
     I thank Philippe Andrade and Hervé le Bihan for helping me obtain the in  ation expectations data. Below
I pursue an alternative approach to approximate in   ation expectations.




                                                          11
pated real interest rate di¤erentials at "long" horizons, using

                                       L
                                                     P1
                                                     m
                                      Dt (n)               Et frt+k rt+k g
                                                     k =n
                                                        S          S
                                                =    Dt   (m) Dt     (n)                                      (28)
                       S          S
and given measures of Dt (m) and Dt (n) constructed using (27).16

4.2      Data
I use monthly data on (zero coupon) yields for German, US and UK government bonds with
1; 2; 5; 10 and 30 year maturities. Monthly measures of expected in       ation over the same ...ve
horizons are based on the corresponding in      ation swap contracts. I construct monthly time
series for the real exchange rate, using data on the euro-dollar, pound-dollar, and pound-
euro nominal exchange rates, and the CPI indexes for the US, euro area and UK economies.
Constraints on data availability on in   ation swap contracts force me to start the sample period
in 2004:8. As noted above I assume a "long horizon" m equal to 360 months (corresponding to
                                                    S           L
a 30 year horizon). I construct time series for Dt    (n) and Dt  (n) using the relations (27) and
(28) above, for n = 12; 24; 60; 120; 360.

4.3      Empirical Findings
Tables 1A-1C report the main empirical ...ndings of the paper, based on data for the US and
the euro area (Table 1A), US and the UK (Table 1B) and euro area and UK (Table 1C). Each
table contains three panels, displaying respectively the OLS estimates of S and L for each
of the three speci...cations introduced above. In each case, estimates are reported for horizons
                                                                                           L
n 2 f12; 24; 60; 120g. In the case of n = 360 I only report the estimate for S since Dt      (360) ' 0
under the assumptions made. The sample period is 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors, reported
in brackets, were computed using the Newey-West adjustment for serial correlation, with a 12
lag window.
    I start by describing the evidence for the euro-dollar exchange rate, based on US and euro
area data, and reported in Table 1A. Note that most of the estimated coe¢ cients are positive
and highly signi...cant. Thus, the evidence con...rms the link between the real exchange rate
and current and expected real interest rate di¤erentials, with the sign of the relation consistent
with the theory. The associated R2 is very high for the baseline and time trend speci...cations,
regardless of the horizon; perhaps not surprisingly it is lower for the ...rst di¤erence speci...cation,
given the amount of exchange rate "noise" at high frequencies. In particular the reasonably
good ...t of the equation linking the real exchange rate to the sum of anticipated real interest
rate di¤erentials at all horizons (i.e up to 30 years ahead), shown in the last row of each panel,
  16
     Again, as noted in footnote (8), the analysis would go through if bond yields and swap contracts re        ect
investors'subjective (i.e. nonrational) expectations of future short term rates and ination rates, as long as those
                                                                                      S
                                                                                              P1 e
                                                                                              n
expectarions satisfy the law of iterated expectations. In that case we would have Dt    (n)       Et frt+k rt+k g
                                                                                              k=0
       L
               P
               m
                 e t fr
and   Dt (n)     E      t+k   rt+k g, with the empirical analysis below unchanged.
               k=n



                                                        12
provides clear evidence against any notion of "decoupling" between the exchange rate and
anticipated interest rates, and would seem to be consistent with a literature that uncovers a
much weaker rejection of UIP at long horizons.17
     On the other hand, the null S = L = 1 is easily rejected for all speci...cations (p values
are extremely low and not reported). Most interestingly, the estimates for S are in all cases
much larger than those of L , by an order of magnitude. In words: changes in expected real
interest rate di¤erentials in the near future are associated with much larger variations in the real
exchange rate than commensurate changes anticipated to take place in the more distant future.
Furthermore, and consistent with that interpretation, a look at the pattern of S estimates
across di¤erent values of n suggests that the exchange rate elasticity with respect to expected
interest rate di¤erentials diminishes monotonically with the horizon. In particular, for all the
speci...cations, S is larger than one ­  the value implied by the UIP theoretical benchmark­for
horizons up to two years. In general the point estimates for both S and L are smaller in the
...rst di¤erence speci...cation. For the baseline and time trend speci...cations the S estimate is
also signi...cantly above one for n = 60, corresponding to a horizon of ...ve years, and for shorter
horizons it is more than twice the size implied by the benchmark model. On the other hand,
the elasticity of the real exchange rate with respect to expected real interest rate di¤erentials at
long horizons, given by L , is systematically less than one, and signi...cantly so. The previous
...ndings imply that, relative to the UIP benchmark, exchange rates tend to overreact to changes
in expected interest rate di¤erentials at short horizons, while they tend to underreact to similar
expected changes at long horizons. I refer to this apparent disconnect between theory and
empirics as the forward guidance exchange rate puzzle.18
     The evidence for the pound-dollar exchange rate, based on US and UK data, is summarized
in Table 1B. that evidence is qualitatively very similar to that for the euro-dollar exchange
rate. In particular, the estimates for S systematically decrease with the horizon, and are
signi...cantly larger than one at short horizons. Similarly, the estimates for L are smaller than
one uniformly and, with one exception, insigni...cantly di¤erent from zero at long horizons in
some cases (with some point estimates being slightly negative).
     Table 1C reports the evidence for the pound-euro exchange rate. Again, most of the main
qualitative ...ndings emphasized above also obtain when data for the UK and the euro area are
used. The only discrepancy in that regard are given by the estimates corresponding to the ...rst
di¤erence speci...cation, which are mostly insigni...cant in the case of the pound-euro evidence.

4.4     Robustness
Next I examine the robustness of the above empirical ...ndings to two alternative empirical
strategies. The ...rst one allows for time-varying term premia. The second one uses an alternative
proxy for in ation expectations.
  17
     See, e.g., Chinn and Meredith (2004), Chinn (2006), and Chinn and Quayyum (2013) for a discussion of
long horizon UIP.
  18
     Note that this interpretation of the evidence is valid even if expectations are not rational, as long as they
satisfy the law of iterated expectations.




                                                       13
4.4.1    Time-Varying Term Premia
I relax the expectations hypothesis maintained above by allowing for a time-varying term pre-
mium. Thus, for a (zero coupon) bond maturing in n months I assume

                                                      P
                                                   12 n 1
                                        it (n) =          Et fit+k g + vt (n)
                                                   n k=0
where vt (n) denotes the corresponding (annualized) term premium. An analogous relation holds
for the foreign economy.
    Below I use the estimates of the term premium at di¤erent maturities in Adrian et al.
(2019) to measure vt (n), obtained using the approach developed in Adrian et al. (2013).19
Given an estimate for vt (n) I construct a measure of the expected real rate di¤erentials at
                     S
"short" horizons, Dt   (n), as follows:


                  S
                                P
                                n 1
                 Dt (n)               Et frt+k     rt+k g
                                k=0
                                n                  e                              e
                           =      [(i (n)              (n)    vt (n))   (it (n)   t (n)   vt (n))]           (29)
                                12 t               t

                                                                                              L
    The construction of measures of expected real rate di¤erentials at "long" horizons, Dt      (n),
as well as the rest of the empirical implementation proceeds as above. Tables 2A-2C report the
corresponding estimates using data for the US and the euro area (Table 2A), US and the UK
(Table 2B) and euro area and UK (Table 2C). While the size and signi...cance of the estimates
for S are generally weakened relative to the baseline estimates above (especially for the euro-
pound), the UIP-implies null of S = L = 1 is rejected in all cases at conventional signi...cance
levels. For all speci...cations the estimated response of the real exchange rate to interest rate
di¤erentials at "long" horizons is well below one, and often insigni...cant. By contrast, for most
speci...cations, the corresponding response to interest rate di¤erentials at "short" horizons, S ,
is estimated to be "more than one-for-one," although it is sometimes less precisely estimated
than in the baseline evidence above. All in all, it seems safe to conclude that the main ...ndings
above are not due to the biases generated by time-varying term premia.

4.4.2    Alternative Proxy for Ination Expectations
In the present subsection I report the results from an alternative speci...cation based on a
"statistical" proxy for expected in ation. Assume, for simplicity, a stationary real exchange
rate (and, hence, a zero unconditional mean for the real interest rate di¤erential).20 Under the
                  P1
assumption that       Et frt+k rt+k g ' 0 for su¢ ciently large m, one can write the exchange
                    k =m
rate equation (6) as follows:
  19
     Their method uses the ...rst ...ve estimated principal components of Treasury yields as pricing factors. Lags
and innovations of those pricing factors are used to estimate risk exposures of di¤erent bond returns, with
a cross-sectional regression of exposures to lagged factors on exposires to innovations shown to identify the
parameters to determine the market price of risk. See Adrian et al. (2013) for a detailed description of their
approach. That approach has been often adopted in empirical applications. See, e.g., Curcuru et al. (2018).
  20
     The analysis can be easily generalized to the case of a non-zero mean for real interest rate di¤erentials.

                                                             14
                                P1
                                m                                       P1
                                                                        m
                    qt ' q +          Et fit+k     it+k           g            Et f   t+1+k        t+1+k     g            (30)
                                k=0                                      k=0

where     is the unconditional mean of the in   ation and nominal interest rate di¤erentials.
Here I assume that in   ation di¤erentials can be approximated by an AR(1) process, with
autoregressive coe¢ cient . Thus, we can rewrite the real exchange rate equation (30) as
follows:
                                         mP1
                 qt ' q + [ (n) m] +         Et fit+k it+k g  (n)( t     t)
                                                           k=0

                         m                       P
                                                 n 1                                           P1
                                                                                               m
where       (n)      1
                             . Let ItS (n)             Et fit+k        it+k g and ItL (n)             Et fit+k   it+k g denote,
                                                 k=0                                           k=0
respectively, the sum of expected nominal interest rate di¤erentials at short and long horizons.
I estimate the regression equation
                                                     S                   L
                                   qt =      +    S It (n)   +        L It (n)   + (    t     t)                          (31)
                                          n
for horizons n 2 f12; 24; 60; 120g, using 12 [(it (n) it (n)] as an empirical proxy for ItS (n), and the
           L        S          S
fact that It (n) = It (m) It (n), with m = 360. Again, I take the UIP null of S = L = 1 as
a benchmark relative to which one may assess the response of the exchange rate to anticipated
interest rate di¤erentials. Similarly to the baseline model above, I also estimate a version of
(31) allowing for a time trend as well as a speci...cation in ...rst di¤erences. As above I focus on
the estimates for S and L , which are reported in Tables 3A-3C, respectively based on data
for the US and euro area, US and UK, and euro area and UK. Note that for all country pairs,
the main patterns uncovered in our baseline empirical model also emerge here. In particular,
the exchange rate response to expected interest rate di¤erentials at short horizons is much
stronger than its counterpart at long horizons (i.e. S                L ). More speci...cally, there is
strong evidence of excess sensitivity of the exchange rate to changes in nominal interest rate
di¤erentials expected in the near future (i.e. S           1 for low n), but excess smoothness with
respect to corresponding changes at longer horizons (i.e. L           1).


5        Discussion and Possible Explanations
The empirical analysis of the dynamic relation between the exchange rate and anticipated in-
terest rate di¤erentials described in the previous section has taken as a benchmark the UIP
condition (5). It is that UIP condition which, combined with rational expectations and alterna-
tive assumptions on the long run properties of the real exchange rate, yields the forward-looking
"undiscounted" exchange rate representations (16), (21) and (23) that have been taken to the
data in the previous section.
    From that perspective, the empirical rejection of the undiscounted exchange rate equations
reported above can be seen as pointing to an additional implication of UIP which is shown
to be at odds with the evidence.21 The question remains as to what alternative model can
account for the relationship between the exchange rate and expected interest rate di¤erentials
  21
       See, e.g. Bacchetta (2013) and Engel (2014) for surveys of the empirical literature on UIP.



                                                                  15
at di¤erent horizons uncovered in the previous section, and which I have labeled the forward
guidance exchange rate puzzle.
   Let t rt rt + Et f qt+1 g de...ne the deviation from the UIP condition. Under rational
expectations, t has a natural interpretation as the (foreign exchange) risk premium, i.e. the
expected excess return on foreign bonds relative to home bonds required by investors. We can
generalize (5) and write it as:

                                           qt = r t   rt + Et fqt+1 g    t                                    (32)

    Note that (32) holds by construction, since it involves no more than the de...nition of the
risk premium. With little loss of generality, assume that the risk premium f t g is stationary
with a zero unconditional mean.22 Assuming a stationary real exchange rate for expositional
convenience, we can iterate (32) forward to obtain:
                                                    S        L
                                          qt ' q + Dt (n) + Dt (n)       vt
               P
               1
where vt            Et f   t+k g   is the expected cumulative risk premium. Under the null hypothesis
              k=0
that the risk premium is orthogonal to interest rate di¤erentials at all leads and lags, OLS
estimates of S and L in (17) should be consistent and thus converge asymptotically to one,
even though UIP (in a strict sense) no longer holds due the presence of a time-varying risk
premium. The evidence reported above is thus in con       ict with the hypothesis of uncorrelated
 uctuations in the risk premium (at least when the latter is de...ned under the assumption of
rational expectations).23
    When thinking about possible explanations for the above evidence it is worth noting that
some of the solutions to the closed economy forward guidance puzzle found in the literature are
unlikely to apply to the case at hand. Those solutions involve a "downward adjustment" in the
elasticity of individual expected future marginal utility with respect to aggregate consumption
as a consequence of a variety of assumptions, including the risk of death (Del Negro et al.
(2015)) or the risk of lower future consumption (relative to aggregate consumption) in the
presence of idiosyncratic shocks, incomplete markets, and borrowing constraints (e.g. McKay
et al. (2016)). Angeletos and Lian (2017), on the other hand, consider an economy where, in
the absence of common knowledge, each individual consumer "discounts" the response of others
to anticipated changes in interest rates. The resulting mitigation in the anticipated response of
aggregate consumption and output leads to a dampened response of individual consumption.24
    In the previous models, aggregate consumption often becomes less sensitive to interest rates,
especially future ones.25 In some simple examples of those models (e.g. McKay et al. (2017),
  22
     The generalization to a risk premium with a nonzero unconditional mean is straightforward.
  23
     This is also the case for other empirical rejections of UIP found in the literature, including the rejection of
H0 : = 1 in the regression equation et+1 = + (it it ) + t .
  24
     See also Farhi and Werning (2019), who study a model with incomplete markets and bounded rationality,
emphasizing the interaction between the two factors in accounting for the mitigated e¤ects of monetary policy
at long horizons.
  25
     As argued by Werning (2015) that "discounting" of future interest rates is not a general consequence of the
presence of incomplete markets, depending critically on the cyclicality of household income risk in response to
changes in interest rates.



                                                         16
the aggregate consumption Euler equation can be written, up to a ...rst order approximation,
as
                                                 1
                                ct = Et fct+1 g    Et frt g

where 2 (0; 1), thus implying the geometric discounting of anticipated future interest rates.
    The interest parity condition (5), on the other hand, should hold (to a ...rst order approxima-
tion) independently of the properties of the discount factor, the presence of incomplete markets,
or the possibility of no common knowledge, as long as there are some deep pocket investors
with rational expectations and costless access to both home and foreign riskless bonds. In other
words, (5) is little more than an "arbitrage" equation between two assets which should hold,
conditional on the anticipated path of real interest rate di¤erentials, independently of other
factors determining the economy'   s aggregate behavior.
    Next I brie  y discuss other candidate explanations for the forward guidance exchange rate
puzzle, starting with some that maintain the assumption of rational expectations.
    As emphasized in the literature, a possible reason for the observed deviations from UIP is
that (5) may be an inadequate approximation to the arbitrage condition (3), since it ignores
potentially important higher-order terms that may account for the joint comovement of the
risk premium and interest rate di¤erentials needed to explain the empirical ...ndings above. I
view as a challenge for future research to come up with a model of risk premium determination
which can reconcile the frictionless arbitrage condition (3) with the evidence reported in the
previous section, while preserving the assumption of rational expectations.
    In a recent paper, Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2019) analyze a two-country overlapping
generations model with convex portfolio adjustment costs.26 The presence of those costs poses
a limit to arbitrage and leads to the emergence of a time-varying risk premium in response to
changes in interest rate di¤erentials. In particular, the authors show that in the equilibrium of
their model the following representation for the (log) real exchange rate holds:
                                                      P
                                                      1
                                                            k
                                   qt = 'qt   1   +             Et frt+k   rt+k g                         (33)
                                                      k=0

where coe¢ cients     2 [0; 1) and ' 2 [0; 1) are, respectively, increasing and decreasing in
the parameter that indexes the importance of portfolio adjustment costs. The fact that the
dependence on anticipated interest rate di¤erentials declines with the horizon leads the authors
to suggest that their model may potentially account for the forward guidance exchange rate
puzzle uncovered in the present paper. While (33) seems consistent with the evidence of a
dampened e¤ect of anticipated interest rate changes at long horizons, it is far from clear how
that model may generate the overreaction to anticipated interest rate changes at short horizons
uncovered above.
  26
    In addition to the forward guidance exchange rate puzzle, the authors show that their model can potentially
account for other ...ve exchange rate puzzles: delayed overshooting, forward discount puzzle, predictability
reversal, the Engel puzzle, and the Lustig-Stathopoulos-Verdelhan puzzle.




                                                          17
5.1     A Simple Behavioral Model
Alternatively, one may seek to account for the forward guidance exchange rate puzzle by allow-
ing for some deviation from rational expectations. Consider the alternative UIP condition:
                                          qt = rt                  e t fqt+1 g
                                                              rt + E                                        (34)

where Ee t f g denotes the subjective expectations operator. As in the behavioral model of Gabaix
(2019), I assume that subjective expectations involve some discounting relative to rational
expectations, in particular, when applied to future deviations of the real exchange rate from
                         e t fq
its long run value, i.e. E    bt+1 g = Et fq
                                           bt+1 g, for 2 [0; 1). Under the assumption of long run
PPP (for convenience), we can thus rewrite
                                               P
                                               1
                                                          k
                                        bt =
                                        q                     Et frt+k     rt+k g
                                               k=0

with anticipated changes in real interest rate di¤erentials in the distant future predicted to
have a more muted e¤ect on the real exchange rate than those anticipated over a shorter
horizon.27 Note, however, that such an assumption would not be able to account for the seeming
overreaction of the real exchange rate to anticipated changes in interest rate di¤erentials in the
near future, as implied by the estimates reported above. That shortcoming could in principle
be overcome by a simple variation on the previous behavioral model, which I brie       y describe
next. Suppose that the relevant no arbitrage condition is given instead by
                                                       e t f qt+1 g
                                           rt = rt + { E
where { 0 is the weight that investors attach to exchange rate changes when forming expecta-
tions about returns on the foreign asset. Note that { = 1 under UIP, as consistent with rational
behavior. Under the assumption made above that E       e t fq
                                                            bt+1 g = Et fq
                                                                         bt+1 g with 2 [0; 1), we
have
                                        1 P
                                          1
                                              k
                                  bt =
                                  q             Et frt+k rt+k g                              (35)
                                       { k=0
   Thus, if { is smaller than one, i.e. if investors downweigh the contribution of exchange rate
changes when forming expectations about future returns on foreign assets, (35) can potentially
account for the evidence reported above: relative to the UIP benchmark, exchange rates will
tend to overreact to changes in (rationally) expected interest rate di¤erentials at short horizons,
while they will tend to underreact to similar expected changes at long horizons. To illustrate
that point, assume that the real interest rate di¤erential follows the stationary process:
                                               rt         rt = ut + vt
  27
    Note that the type of subjective expectations assumed here do not satisfy the law of iterated expectations,
thus preventing one from writing an exchange rate equation of the form
                                                    P
                                                    1
                                                      e t fr
                                            bt =
                                            q         E      t+k         rt+k g
                                                    k=0

which, as discussed earlier, would have implied invariance to the nature of expectations if the latter applied to
all markets. For simplicity, the analysis of the example below proceeds as if only exchange rate expectations
deviate from the rational expectations benchmark (i.e. I assume that bond yields and in    ation swap contracts
re  ect rational expectations of future short term interest rates and ination rates).

                                                               18
where fut g and fvt g are AR(1) processes with autoregressive coe¢ cients                                   u   and   v,   respectively,
with 0 < v < u < 1.28 In that case (35) implies
                                                   1                              1
                                     qt =                     ut +                             vt
                                            { (1         u)             { (1              v)

       In addition, we have

                                       S
                                                       P
                                                       n 1
                                      Dt (n)                   Et frt+k           rt+k g
                                                        k=0
                                                                   n                      n
                                                        1          u          1           v
                                                   =                   ut +                   vt
                                                        1          u          1           v

and
                                       L
                                                        P
                                                        1
                                      Dt (n)                   Et frt+k           rt+k g
                                                        k =n
                                                               n                      n
                                                               u                      v
                                                   =                   ut +                   vt
                                                        1          u          1           v

                                                                                                     S                    L
   It can easily checked that, for any given horizon n, qt =                                   S (n)Dt (n)      +   L (n)Dt (n)   holds
exactly, where S (n) and L (n) satisfy the linear relation:
                                                        " 1                                             #
                                  n   n                                                        u
                            1                   (n )
                                  u
                                  n
                                      u
                                      n
                                              S
                                                      = { (1  1
                                                                                                   u)
                                                                                                                                   (36)
                            1     v   v       L ( n )      { (1
                                                                                               v
                                                                                                   v)


   Given ( u ; v ; ; { ) one can use (36) to determine the implied values of S (n) and L (n) for
any horizon n. Table 4 reports the values for S (n) and L (n) at horizons n = 12; 24; 60; 120
based on the settings for ( u ; v ; ; { ) that minimize the distance function
                                              X
                                                     f (n)
                                                   n=12;24;60;120

                                                1 u                                   1 v
where f (n) [(1 n                 n
                       u )bS (n)+ u bL (n)   { (1
                                                       ]2 +[(1 n          n
                                                               v )bS (n)+ v bL (n)           ]2 , where
                                                    u)                             { (1   v)
bS (n) and bL (n) the OLS estimates for bS and bL corresponding to each horizon considered, and
drawn from Tables 1A-1C corresponding to US-Euro Area, US-UK and Euro Area-UK evidence,
respectively, with the corresponding settings for ( u ; v ; ; { ) given by (0:99; 0:98; 0:99; 0:73),
(0:99; 0:98; 0:98; 0:43) and (0:99; 0:98; 0:99; 0:60). As the Table makes clear, the simple behav-
ioral model is capable of accounting for the qualitative patterns observed in the empirical
evidence reported above. In particular, the calibrations considered generate values for coe¢ -
cient S that systematically decrease with the horizon, and are substantially larger than one at
short horizons, while the implied values for L are smaller than one uniformly (and smaller than
their S counterparts). It is worth noting that this is attained with a relatively small departure
from the rational model, with the subjective discount factor being very close to one, and
the chosen settings for { implying a downweighing of anticipated exchange rate movements of
between 23% and 67% in investors'computation of the expected return on foreign assets.
  28                                                                                       S          L
       A two-component structure is assumed in order to avoid perfect colinearity between Dt (n) and Dt (n).

                                                            19
6    Concluding Comments
The present paper has explored the the theory and evidence on the exchange rate e¤ects of
anticipated changes in interest rate di¤erentials. Under the theoretical benchmark of uncovered
interest rate parity (UIP) the current exchange rate is shown to be determined by current and
expected future interest rate di¤erentials, undiscounted. Accordingly, in partial equilibrium (i.e.
ignoring the feedback e¤ects on in    ation) the e¤ect on the current exchange rate of a given
anticipated change in the interest rate does not decline with the horizon of its implementation.
Using a New Keynesian model of a small open economy as a reference framework, I show that
when prices are allowed to respond endogenously, the size of the e¤ect of anticipated changes
in the nominal rate on the current exchange rate, as well as on output and in      ation, is larger
the longer is the horizon of implementation of the announced policies.
    Using data on real exchange rates and market-based forecasts of real interest rate di¤erentials
for the US, UK and the euro area, I have provided evidence that con       icts with the prediction
of undiscounted e¤ects of anticipated real interest rate di¤erentials. In particular, my ...ndings
suggest that expectations of interest rate di¤erentials in the near (distant) future appear to
have much larger (smaller) e¤ects than is implied by the theory, an observation which I refer
to as the forward guidance exchange rate puzzle. Finally, I have discussed the merits of several
hypotheses as explanations to that puzzle.




                                                20
   REFERENCES
    Adrian, Tobias, Richard K. Crump, and Emanuel Moench (2013): "Pricing the Term Struc-
ture with Linear Regressions," Journal of Financial Economics, 110, 110-138.
    Adrian, Tobias, Richard K. Crump, Benson Durham and Emanuel Moench (2019): "Sov-
ereign Yield Comovements," work in progress.
    Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian (2017): "Forward Guidance without Common
Knowledge," American Economic Review 108(9), 2477-2512.
    Bacchetta, Philippe (2013): "Explaining Deviations from Uncovered Interest Rate Parity,"
in G. Caprio (ed.), Handbook of Safeguarding Global Financial Stability: Political, Social, Cul-
tural, and Economic Theories and Models, Vol. 2, 209-212.
    Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2018): "Exchange Rates, Interest Rates and
Gradual Portfolio Adjustment," work in progress.
    Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst, Matthias Paustian (2015): "In  ation and Output
in New Keynesian Models with a Transient Interest Rate Peg," Journal of Monetary Economics
76, 230-243
    Chinn, Menzie D. (2006): "The (Partial) Rehabilitation of Interest Parity in the Floating
Era: Longer Horizons, Alternative Expectations, and Emerging Markets," Journal of Interna-
tional Money and Finance 25, 7-21.
    Chinn, Menzie D. and Guy Meredith (2004): "Monetary Policy and Long-Horizon Uncovered
Interest Rate Parity," IMF Sta¤ Papers 51(3), 409-430.
    Chinn, Menzie D. and Saad Quayyum (2013): "Long Horizon Uncovered Interest Parity
Revisited," unpublished manuscript.
    Cook, David and Michael Devereux (2013): "Exchange Rate Flexibility under the Zero
Lower Bound: The Need for Forward Guidance," mimeo.
    Curcuru, Stephanie E., Steven B. Kamin, Canlin Li, and Marius Rodriguez (2018): "Inter-
national Spillovers of Monetary Policy: Conventional Policy vs. Quantitative Easing," Interna-
tional Finance Discussion Papers 1234. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
    Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer (1980): "Exchange Rates and the Current Ac-
count," American Economic Review 70(5), 960-971.
    Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003): "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1, 139-211.
    Engel, Charles (2014): "Exchange Rates and Interest Parity," Handbook of International
Economics vol. 4, 453-522.
    Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West (2015): "Exchange Rates and Fundamentals," Journal
of Political Economy 113(3), 485-517.
    Engel, Charles (2016): "Exchange Rates, Interest Rates and the Risk Premium," American
Economic Review 106(2), 436-474.
    Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning (2019): "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality and
Incomplete Markets," American Economic Review 109(11), 3887-3928.
    Gabaix, Xavier (2019): "A Behavioral New Keynesian Model," mimeo.
    Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, David López-Salido (2005): "Robustness of the Estimates of
the Hybrid New Keynesian Phillips Curve," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52, issue 6,
1107-1118.



                                              21
    Galí, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli (2005): "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility
in a Small Open Economy," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 72, issue 3, 2005, 707-734
    Galí, Jordi (2015): Monetary Policy, Ination and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
the New Keynesian Framework, Second edition, Princeton University Press (Princeton, NJ),
chapter 8.
    Glick, Reuven and Sylvain Leduc (2018): "Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Dollar:
Conventional Signs, Unconventional Magnitudes," International Journal of Central Banking,
103-152.
    Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Christina Patterson (2015) "The Forward Guid-
ance Puzzle," mimeo.
    Jung, Taehun, Yuki Teranishi, and Tsutomo Watanabe, (2005): "Optimal Monetary Policy
at the Zero Interest Rate Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37 (5), 813-835.
    Mavroeides, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Moller, and James H. Stock (2014): "Empirical
Evidence on In    ation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve," Journal of Economic
Literature 52(1), 124-188.
    McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson (2016): "The Power of Forward Guid-
ance Revisited," American Economic Review, 106(10), 3133-3158,
    McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson (2017): "The Discounted Euler Equa-
tion: A Note," Economica 84, 820-831.
    Mussa, Michael (1982): "A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political Econ-
omy 90(1), 74-104.
    Rudd, Jeremy and Karl Whelan (2005): "New Tests of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52, issue 6, 1167-1181.
    Werning, Iván (2015): "Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand," mimeo.
    Wilson, Charles A. (1979): "Anticipated Shocks and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
Political Economy 87(3), 639-647.




                                             22
                            Table 1A
                   U.S. - Euro Area Evidence
                                bS      bL                  R2
            Baseline
                     n = 12   2:91    0:36                 0:77
                                    (0:92)     (0:05)
                       n = 24       1:90       0:33        0:77
                                    (0:60)     (0:05)
                       n = 60       1:27       0:25        0:77
                                    (0:31)      (0:06)
                      n = 120       0:95       0:19        0:75
                                    (0:22)     (0:08)
                      n = 360       0:41                   0:50
                                    (0:04)
            Time trend
                     n = 12         2:76       0:53        0:80
                                    (0:85)     (0:07)
                       n = 24       1:83       0:50        0:80
                                    (0:53)     (0:08)
                       n = 60       1:26       0:43        0:80
                                    (0:27)     (0:10)
                      n = 120       0:94       0:41        0:78
                                    (0:20)     (0:14)
                      n = 360       0:61                   0:76
                                    (0:07)
            First di¤erences
                      n = 12        2:20       0:17        0:18
                                    (0:41)     (0:04)
                       n = 24       1:07       0:16        0:16
                                    (0:48)     (0:05)
                       n = 60       0:51       0:16        0:14
                                    (0:27)     (0:06)
                      n = 120       0:41        0:12       0:13
                                    (0:13)      (0:05)
                      n = 360       0:19                   0:12
                                    (0:04)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                                Table 1B
                          U.S.- U.K. Evidence
                                   bS       bL              R2
            Baseline
                        n = 12     4:34        0:23         0:72
                                   (0:58)      (0:06)
                        n = 24     3:09        0:11         0:77
                                   (0:27)      (0:05)
                        n = 60     1:85           0:04      0:75
                                   (0:21)       (0:05)
                       n = 120     1:22           0:14      0:67
                                   (0:16)       (0:08)
                       n = 360     0:39                     0:55
                                   (0:06)
            Time trend
                     n = 12        3:80         0:18        0:73
                                   (0:74)       (0:06)
                        n = 24     3:05        0:13         0:77
                                   (0:40)      (0:05)
                        n = 60     1:86           0:04      0:75
                                   (0:34)       (0:05)
                       n = 120     0:93          0:13       0:68
                                   (0:25)       (0:07)
                       n = 360      0:17                    0:63
                                    (0:09)
            First di¤erences
                      n = 12       1:45         0:00        0:04
                                   (0:56)       (0:04)
                        n = 24     1:13           0:02      0:07
                                   (0:25)       (0:05)
                        n = 60     0:55           0:04      0:05
                                   (0:19)       (0:04)
                       n = 120     0:28           0:07      0:03
                                   (0:14)       (0:05)
                       n = 360      0:01                    0:01
                                    (0:05)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                            Table 1C
                   Euro Area - U.K. Evidence
                                bS      bL                  R2
            Baseline
                     n = 12   3:91    0:30                 0:41
                                    (0:92)     (0:10)
                       n = 24       2:51       0:30        0:44
                                    (0:46)     (0:09)
                       n = 60       1:57       0:25        0:44
                                    (0:28)     (0:10)
                      n = 120       1:21        0:14       0:40
                                    (0:20)      (0:11)
                      n = 360        0:30                  0:15
                                     (0:11)
            Time trend
                     n = 12         4:02       0:30        0:41
                                    (1:09)     (0:09)
                       n = 24       2:92       0:30        0:45
                                    (0:62)     (0:09)
                       n = 60       2:10       0:24        0:47
                                    (0:43)     (0:09)
                      n = 120       1:68        0:05       0:44
                                    (0:31)      (0:10)
                      n = 360        0:30                  0:24
                                     (0:10)
            First di¤erences
                      n = 12         0:42      0:16        0:10
                                     (0:66)    (0:03)
                       n = 24       0:53       0:15        0:11
                                    (0:11)     (0:03)
                       n = 60        0:38       0:15       0:11
                                     (0:31)     (0:04)
                      n = 120        0:14      0:17        0:10
                                     (0:21)    (0:06)
                      n = 360        0:16                  0:10
                                     (0:02)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                        Table 2A
   U.S.-Euro Area Evidence: Term Premium Adjustment
                     bS       bL           R2
   Baseline
            n = 12 1:77     0:37          0:80
                          (0:78)      (0:04)
              n = 24      1:12        0:36                 0:79
                          (0:48)      (0:05)
              n = 60      0:86        0:33                 0:80
                          (0:28)      (0:06)
            n = 120       0:78        0:27                 0:75
                          (0:20)      (0:07)
            n = 360       0:41                             0:78
                          (0:03)
   Time trend
            n = 12        1:37        0:51                 0:83
                          (0:67)      (0:05)
              n = 24      0:91        0:51                 0:82
                          (0:39)      (0:06)
              n = 60      0:75        0:49                 0:82
                          (0:22)      (0:08)
            n = 120       0:71        0:06                 0:82
                          (0:16)      (0:02)
            n = 360       0:55                             0:82
                          (0:03)
   First di¤erences
             n = 12       1:65         0:11                0:11
                          (0:40)       (0:08)
              n = 24       0:77        0:11                0:09
                           (0:43)      (0:07)
              n = 60       0:39        0:11                0:08
                           (0:27)      (0:07)
            n = 120       0:36         0:09                0:08
                          (0:17)       (0:07)
            n = 360        0:14                            0:07
                           (0:08)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                          Table 2B
      U.S.- U.K. Evidence: Term Premium Adjustment
                         bS        bL       R2
      Baseline
               n = 12  4:34      0:22      0:70
                             (0:72)      (0:08)
                 n = 24       3:25        0:11             0:78
                             (0:32)       (0:06)
                 n = 60       1:71        0:09             0:81
                             (0:14)       (0:05)
                n = 120       1:07        0:11             0:77
                             (0:11)       (0:07)
                n = 360       0:43                         0:57
                             (0:07)
      Time trend
               n = 12         3:68        0:12             0:72
                             (0:88)       (0:06)
                 n = 24       3:10        0:09             0:78
                             (0:50)       (0:05)
                 n = 60       2:19       0:16              0:82
                             (0:24)      (0:04)
                n = 120       1:46        0:16             0:79
                             (0:18)       (0:06)
                n = 360       0:21                         0:63
                              (0:06)
      First di¤erences
                n = 12        1:56       0:07              0:09
                             (0:58)      (0:03)
                 n = 24       1:07        0:05             0:10
                             (0:25)       (0:03)
                 n = 60       0:66        0:05             0:11
                             (0:15)       (0:04)
                n = 120       0:56        0:01             0:13
                             (0:12)       (0:04)
                n = 360        0:07                        0:04
                              (0:03)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                         Table 2C
  Euro Area - U.K. Evidence: Term Premium Adjustment
                     bS       bL           R2
  Baseline
           n = 12   2:12    0:20          0:36
                          (1:33)     (0:08)
            n = 24       1:49        0:19                  0:38
                         (0:62)      (0:07)
            n = 60       1:02        0:20                  0:40
                         (0:29)      (0:06)
           n = 120       0:82        0:18                  0:42
                         (0:18)      (0:17)
           n = 360       0:27                              0:31
                         (0:05)
  Time trend
           n = 12          0:11      0:30                  0:42
                          (1:47)     (0:07)
            n = 24        0:23       0:29                  0:42
                          (0:83)     (0:06)
            n = 60        0:45       0:27                  0:42
                          (0:53)     (0:06)
           n = 120        0:54       0:24                  0:42
                          (0:41)     (0:07)
           n = 360       0:28                              0:42
                          (0:04)
  First di¤erences
            n = 12        0:50        0:01                 0:01
                          (0:53)      (0:07)
            n = 24        0:55        0:01                 0:01
                          (0:31)      (0:07)
            n = 60        0:38        0:00                 0:02
                          (0:23)      (0:07)
           n = 120        0:02        0:00                 0:01
                          (0:07)      (0:06)
           n = 360        0:02                             0:01
                          (0:07)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                         Table 3A
       U.S.-Euro Area Evidence: Nominal Speci...cation
                         bS       bL         R2
       Baseline
                n = 12 2:61     0:33        0:72
                              (1:09)      (0:09)
                  n = 24      1:74        0:29             0:73
                              (0:58)      (0:09)
                  n = 60      0:87        0:21             0:79
                              (0:24)      (0:05)
                n = 120       0:58        0:24             0:75
                              (0:18)      (0:07)
                n = 360       0:43                         0:68
                              (0:05)
       Time trend
                n = 12        2:80        0:29             0:72
                              (1:33)      (0:14)
                  n = 24      1:82        0:25             0:73
                              (0:68)      (0:14)
                  n = 60      0:74        0:41             0:83
                              (0:17)      (0:06)
                n = 120       0:52        0:07             0:81
                              (0:14)      (0:02)
                n = 360       0:46                         0:69
                              (0:08)
       First di¤erences
                 n = 12       6:28        0:12             0:27
                              (1:43)      (0:04)
                  n = 24      3:10         0:11            0:27
                              (0:65)      (0:06)
                  n = 60      1:17        0:13             0:26
                              (0:30)      (0:06)
                n = 120       0:54        0:13             0:18
                              (0:18)      (0:05)
                n = 360       0:20                         0:14
                              (0:06)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                          Table 3B
          U.S.- U.K. Evidence: Nominal Speci...cation
                             bS     bL           R2
          Baseline
                   n = 12  9:41     0:06        0:56
                                 (1:33)       (0:12)
                     n = 24      5:17          0:13        0:62
                                 (0:76)       (0:13)
                     n = 60      2:09         0:00         0:59
                                 (0:32)       (0:09)
                   n = 120       0:98         0:12         0:46
                                 (0:30)       (0:13)
                   n = 360        0:29                     0:16
                                  (0:16)
          Time trend
                   n = 12        5:33          0:07        0:69
                                 (1:42)       (0:12)
                     n = 24      3:15          0:10        0:71
                                 (0:70)       (0:12)
                     n = 60      1:25          0:04        0:68
                                 (0:28)       (0:09)
                   n = 120        0:34        0:04         0:63
                                  (0:24)      (0:11)
                   n = 360        0:21                     0:61
                                  (0:06)
          First di¤erences
                    n = 12       3:98          0:08        0:08
                                 (1:33)       (0:03)
                     n = 24      2:75          0:13        0:14
                                 (0:74)       (0:04)
                     n = 60      0:86          0:07        0:17
                                 (0:29)       (0:05)
                   n = 120        0:23         0:05        0:01
                                  (0:16)      (0:05)
                   n = 360          0:06                   0:01
                                  (0:04)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                          Table 3C
      Euro Area - U.K. Evidence: Nominal Speci...cation
                         bS       bL         R2
      Baseline
               n = 12  8:84      0:11       0:50
                             (1:48)       (0:10)
                n = 24       4:92         0:08             0:51
                             (0:88)       (0:09)
                n = 60       2:49          0:01            0:48
                             (0:45)       (0:11)
               n = 120       1:38          0:19            0:30
                             (0:42)       (0:15)
               n = 360         0:00                        0:01
                              (0:14)
      Time trend
               n = 12        8:67        0:28              0:60
                             (1:68)      (0:11)
                n = 24       4:99        0:27              0:63
                             (0:93)      (0:10)
                n = 60       2:72         0:10             0:60
                             (0:48)       (0:08)
               n = 120       1:78          0:04            0:49
                             (0:41)       (0:12)
               n = 360       0:20                          0:15
                             (0:12)
      First di¤erences
                n = 12       7:18        0:09              0:33
                             (1:53)      (0:02)
                n = 24       3:38        0:10              0:29
                             (0:87)      (0:03)
                n = 60       1:35        0:11              0:29
                             (0:23)      (0:05)
               n = 120       0:69        0:08              0:23
                             (0:23)      (0:04)
               n = 360       0:15                          0:13
                             (0:04)



    Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of S and L in the regres-
sion equations (17), (21) and (24) in the main text, respectively. Sample pe-
riod 2004:8-2018:12. Standard errors reported in brackets, computed using
the Newey-West adjustment with 12 lags. One and two asterisks indicate
signi...cance at 10 and 5 percent level, respectively.
                          Table 4
            Behavioral Model: Implied Coe¢ cients
                                    S                L
            U.S.-Euro Area
                     n = 12       2:70           0:43
                     n = 24       1:75           0:39
                     n = 60       1:19           0:26
                   n = 120        1:01            0:07

            U.S.-U.K
                      n = 12      4:21           0:33
                      n = 24      2:60           0:28
                      n = 60      1:64           0:06
                     n = 120      1:34            0:52

            Euro Area.-U.K
                    n = 12        3:28           0:52
                    n = 24        2:13           0:48
                    n = 60        1:45           0:32
                   n = 120        1:23            0:09



   Note: The table reports the values for    S (n)  and L (n) at di¤er-
ent horizons based on the settings for ( u ; v ; ; { ) that minimize the
distance with the corresponding OLS estimates from the baseline spec-
i...cation in Tables 1A-1C.
                                      
                                      
                                      


                 interest rate
      1
                 exchange rate




    0.5




      0




    -0.5




     -1



           -4    -2         0    2       4   6    8     10      12


                                                                      
 
                                      
           Figure 1. Forward Guidance and the Exchange Rate: 
                           Partial Equilibrium 
                          
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       

                                                            1
      1                                     T=1
                                            T=2             0
                                            T=4

    0.5                                                    -1


                                                           -2
      0
                                                           -3
           0       2         4          6         8              0     2          4        6   8
                  nominal interest rate                                      output


      0                                                     0

    -0.5                                                  -0.5

     -1                                                    -1

    -1.5                                                  -1.5

     -2                                                    -2
           0       2         4          6         8              0     2          4        6   8
                  real exchange rate                                 nominal exchange rate


      0                                                     0

     -1                                                    -1

     -2                                                    -2

     -3                                                    -3

     -4                                                    -4

           0       2         4          6         8              0     2          4        6   8
                   domestic inflation                                      cpi inflation


                                                                                                    
 
               Figure 2. Forward Guidance in the Open Economy: 
                             The Role of the Horizon 
 

                                  
    exchange rate response (%)




                                                                                            
 
                                                              
                                 Figure 3. Forward Guidance: Exchange Rate Response and 
                                                 Implementation Horizon 
                                                              
 
