                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE COLLATERAL CHANNEL OF MONETARY POLICY:
                           EVIDENCE FROM CHINA

                                        Hanming Fang
                                        Yongqin Wang
                                          Xian Wu

                                      Working Paper 26792
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26792


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




We thank Tri Vi Dang, Zhiguo He, Guillermo Ordonez, Gregory Phelan, Jian Wang, Wei Xiong,
Tianran Zhao, seminar participants at CUHK (Shenzhen), Fudan University, ShanghaiTech
University, and University of Pennsylvania, and professionals in the Chinese bond markets for
helpful comments. We are responsible for all remaining errors. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hanming Fang, Yongqin Wang, and Xian Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Collateral Channel of Monetary Policy: Evidence from China
Hanming Fang, Yongqin Wang, and Xian Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 26792
February 2020
JEL No. E44,E52,E58,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

Collateral-based monetary policy tools have been used extensively by major central banks. Lack
of proper policy counterfactuals, however, makes it difficult to empirically identify their causal
effects on the financial market and the real economy. We exploit a quasi-natural experiment in
China, where dual-listed bonds are traded in two mostly segmented markets: the interbank market
regulated by the Central Bank, and the exchange market regulated by the securities regulator.
During a policy shift in our study period, China's Central Bank included a class of previously
ineligible bonds in the interbank market to become eligible collateral for financial institutions to
borrow money from its Medium-Term Lending Facility (MLF). This policy shift allows us to
implement a triple-difference strategy to estimate the causal impact of the collateral-based
unconventional monetary policy. We find that in the secondary market the policy reduced the
spreads of the newly collateralizable bonds in the treatment market (the interbank market) by
42-62 basis points. We also find that there is a pass-through effect from the secondary market to
the primary market: the spreads of the treated bonds newly issued in the interbank market were
reduced by 54 basis points.

Hanming Fang                                     Xian Wu
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center                        University of Wisconsin
for Political Science and Economics              Social Science Building
133 South 36th Street                            1180 Observatory Drive
Suite 150                                        Madison, WI 53706
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           xwu394@wisc.edu
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

Yongqin Wang
No. 600, Guoquan Road
School of Economics
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
yongqinwang@fudan.edu.cn
   "The main business of Wall Street is to help make and keep promises. Overtime, as more people
have been included in the process, punishment and reputation have been replaced by collateral."


                                                                             John Geanakoplos (1997)


1     Introduction
    One big lesson from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) is the important role of collateral and
leverage in the modern financial and monetary systems. Collateral is at the heart of the shadow
banking system and the repo run in the GFC (Geanakoplos, 2010; Gorton and Metrick, 2012).
In the modern collateral-based financial system, a financial contract can be viewed as a pair of a
"promise" and "collateral" (broadly defined) to back up the promise; moreover, contracts themselves
can be used as collaterals for new promises. In the financial market equilibrium, both interest rates
(spread) and leverage are endogenously determined (Geanakoplos, 2010). When investors use a
combination of equity and debt to finance the purchase of the assets, which are in turn used as
collateral for the debt, the leverage ratio is simply the ratio of debt over equity. For example, if
the lenders allow the investor to borrow up to 80% of the asset value, i.e. if the haircut is 20%, the
leverage is simply 1/haircut = 5. Haircuts reflect the lenders' fear that the value of the collateral
will fall in the future.
    The leverage cycle theory (Geanakoplos, 2010; Fostel and Geanakoplos, 2012; Gorton and Met-
rick, 2012) is hugely influential in at least two fronts. First, it emphasizes that leverage is a crucial
determinant of asset prices, even more important than interest rate. Leverage-induced boom-bust
cycles arguably have led to financial fragility and recurring financial crises. For example, margin
finance is closely related to the Great Depression of 1929­1933, and the Great Recession following
the 2008 sub-prime crisis (Galbraith, 2009; Fostel and Geanakoplos, 2012). The liquidity dry-up in
the repo run during the GFC was mostly through the deleveraging mechanism (Gorton and Metrick,
2012).
    Second, the leverage cycle theory also has important implications for monetary policy. Before the
GFC, central banks focus more closely on interest-rate based or interest-rate targeted policy tools
such as rediscounting policy and open market operations. After the GFC, collateral-based monetary
policy tools have been extensively deployed by major central banks. For instance, the Federal
Reserve launched the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) in late November 2008,
through which the Fed lent up to $1 trillion to financial markets against collaterals of asset-backed
securities (ABS) and loans guaranteed by Small Business Administration. This was followed by two
additional rounds, respectively announced in November 2010 and September 2012, of what have
been referred to as "Quantitative Easing" (QE) whereby the Federal Reserve buys predetermined
amounts of government bonds or other financial assets in order to inject liquidity directly into




                                                   1
the economy.1 After the GFC, the European Central Bank launched the Long-term Refinancing
Operations (LTROs) aimed to reduce sovereign bond spreads and inject liquidity into the market,
where it provides low interest rate funding to Eurozone banks collateralized by sovereign debt.
    Unconventional collateral-based monetary policy tools have been invoked for at least two reasons.
First, from a theoretical point of view, the collateral-based monetary policy can be used by the
central bank to ease the heightened funding constraint and to reverse the deleveraging cycle in
the financial system (Geanakoplos, 2010; Ashcraft et al., 2011). Second, from a practical point of
view, once the zero-lower-bound (ZLB) constraint of short-term rate begins to bind, which renders
ineffective the interest rate-based tools, collateral-based tools seem to be a natural alternative.
    Despite the theoretical appeal and broad deployment of the unconventional collateral-based
monetary policy during and after the GFC, it is empirically difficult to identify its causal impact
on the financial markets and the real economy. The main challenge is the lack of proper policy
counterfactuals (see (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018)). There are several reasons for the empirical
challenge. First, in the leverage cycle theory, both the interest rate (spread) and leverage (or
haircut) are endogenously determined in equilibrium. Thus, the empirical relationship between
haircuts and spread in the typical bond market data is not causal. Second, the timing of central
banks' implementation of collateral-based monetary policy is not random. Third, the assets that
are made eligible or ineligible as collateral for financial and non-financial institutions to borrow from
the central banks' lending facilities are not random. For example, in QE1, Federal Reserve decided
to purchase "housing-related government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) ­ Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac,
and the Federal Home Loan Banks ­ and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) backed by Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae" and listed the following as the reason for its action: "Spreads of rates
on GSE debt and on GSE-guaranteed mortgages have widened appreciably of late."2 As a result,
the counterfactual outcomes for the spreads of the collateral assets in question in the absence of the
monetary policy intervention are hard to assess, making it difficult to estimate the causal effect of
the monetary policy.
    In this paper, we present, to the best of our knowledge, the first empirical evidence for the causal
impact of the collateral-based monetary policy on the financial markets and the real economy. We
are able to identify the causal impact of collateral-based monetary policy, using a triple-difference
empirical design, by exploiting a unique feature of China's bond market and a policy intervention
by China's Central Bank. The unique feature of China's bond market is that most corporate
bonds are dual-listed in two trading platforms: the interbank market and the exchange market.
These two platforms are subject to different regulations and differentially affected by monetary
    1
      Buiter (2008) makes the distinction between "Quantitative Easing" and "Qualitative Easing." He defines the
former as an increase in the size of central bank's balance sheet, holding constant the composition of its assets; and
defines the latter as a shift in the composition of the assets of the central bank towards less liquid and riskier assets,
holding constant the size of the balance sheet. US Federal Reserve's policy is both quantitative and qualitative easing
in his sense.
    2
      See the Fed's announcement of QE1 on November 25, 2008:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20081125b.htm.



                                                            2
policy interventions, and most importantly, are largely segmented due to difficulties in arbitrage.
As a result, even though the dual-listed bonds have exactly the same fundamentals, they can
have different prices or spreads in the two markets, due to different liquidity in the two markets
for example (see Section 3 for more institutional details).3 On June 1, 2018, People's Bank of
China (PBOC), which is China's central bank, for the first time made corporate bonds and some
financial bonds rated AA and AA+ eligible as collateral for financial institutions to borrow from
its Medium-Term Lending Facilities (MLF) in the interbank market. Importantly, the policy does
not apply in the exchange market. Note that all corporate bonds with AAA ratings have always
been eligible collateral for MLF. This enables us to implement a triple-difference (DDD) approach
to examine the effect of the collateral-based monetary policy. By comparing the changes, before
and after the policy shock, in the difference of spreads of the newly collateral-eligible bonds (the
treatment bonds) and other bonds (the control bonds) between the two markets, we are able to
identify the causal effects of the collateral-based monetary policy on the financial market and the
real economy. The changes in the difference in the spreads between the "control" and "treatment"
bonds in the exchange market (which serves as the role of "policy counterfactual" or the "placebo")
reflect the possibly differential impact of time-varying factors on the two groups of bonds.4 Under
the plausible assumption that the same differential impact of the time-varying factors on the control
and treatment bonds applies in the interbank market and the exchange market, then we can use
the"placebo effect" estimated from the exchange market to tease out the effect of the time-varying
factors in the interbank market. Note that, for our empirical identification strategy, it is crucial that
the interbank market and the exchange market are segmented; otherwise, the policy intervention
in the interbank market would impact the pricing of the dual-listed bonds in the exchange market,
thus contaminating the "placebo."
    We find that the collateral-based monetary policy effectively decreases the spreads of bonds in
interbank market. The policy leads to an average reduction of the spreads of the newly collateral-
izable bonds by 42-62 basis points (bps) ­ which is about 13 to 20 percent of the mean spreads ­
in the interbank market comparing to the dual-listed bonds in the exchange market. Interestingly,
we also find that the funding cost reduction in the interbank market is not restricted to the newly
collateral-eligible bonds, in fact, the overall funding cost of the interbank market falls in general due
to generally more available collateral in the market. We further decompose the bond spread into
liquidity risk premium and default risk premium, and find that the reduction in the spreads of the
treated bonds in the interbank market is mostly attributed to a reduction in the perceived default
risk instead of the liquidity risk. This is consistent with the leverage theory a la Geanakoplos (2010),
which argues that the a lower haircut of the collateral increases the leverage of the optimists, and
in turn pushes up the asset prices. It is also consistent with the view that the treated bonds are
less likely to default because the funding costs of rolling over these bonds are now lower.
   3
      We provide empirical evidence for the market segmentation in Section 4.3.
   4
      It is important to allow for the time-varying factors to potentially impact the treatment and control bonds
differently because, as we mentioned earlier, the treated bonds are not randomly chosen.


                                                       3
    We also analyze the pass-through effect of the secondary market policy shock to the primary
market (issuance market). We find that making the treated bonds collateral-eligible for MLF in
the interbank (secondary) market also reduces their spreads at issuance in the interbank market by
53.8 basis points, ceteris paribus. That is, the pass-through rate is between about 85% to as high as
more than 100%. Since the spread reduction of the newly issued collateral-eligible bonds reflects a
reduction in the funding cost of new real investments, our estimated high pass-through rate to the
primary bond issuance market thus indicates a real effect of the collateral-based monetary policy.
    Our paper makes three contributions to the literature. First, to our knowledge, the paper is
the first to use a clean quasi-natural experiment to identify the causal effects of collateral-based
monetary policy on asset prices and the real economy. This is important because unconventional
monetary policy in general and collateral-based monetary policy in particular have been widely
adopted after the GFC. Second, our paper also adds new causal evidence to the existing but scant
literature on leverage and asset pricing (see Chen et al. (2018); Hansman et al. (2018); Wang
and Xu (2019), which we discuss in detail below in Section 2). We also contribute to an emerging
literature on identification of macroeconomic policies using a clean identification strategy and micro
data ((Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018)). Third, this paper finds that the monetary policy not only
reduces the spreads of the bonds, but also induces more bonds to be issued in the interbank market.
This finding is complementary to several recent papers discussing the borrowing incentive and risk-
shifting behavior under unconventional monetary policy (Nyborg, 2017b; van Bekkum et al., 2017).
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review the most related
literature; in Section 3 we introduce the institutional background of the Chinese bond markets and
of the policy change; in Section 4 we analyze the secondary market; in Section 5 we discuss the
primary market; and finally, in Section 6 we conclude.


2    Related Literature
    The paper is related to two strands of literature. The first strand focuses on the roles, both
theoretically and empirically, of collateral and leverage on asset pricing and financial cycles. In a
series of papers, Geanakoplos and his co-authors (Geanakoplos, 1997, 2010; Geanakoplos and Zame,
2014) lay the theoretical foundations of collateral and leverage in a general equilibrium framework,
and draw important implications for asset pricing, financial cycles and financial fragility. Garleanu
and Pedersen (2011) apply the ideas to asset pricing. The key idea of the literature is that collateral
can mitigate the frictions caused by incomplete contracts and incomplete information, and that
every financial contract is a pair of a promise and associated collateral. The equilibrium terms of
the contracts consist of both the interest rate (equivalently, spread) and the leverage (equivalently,
margin or haircut). Higher asset-based leverage allows the optimists' beliefs to be better reflected
in the asset demand and thus push up the asset prices. Higher asset prices also mean that the
required return of the asset for the investors is lower. In the primary market, this implies a lower
financing cost of the borrowers.

                                                  4
    The empirical literature to test the asset pricing implications of collateral and leverage is emerg-
ing but small, mainly because of the difficulty in finding plausibly exogenous sources of variation
for leverages (haircuts, or margins). Hansman et al. (2018) attempts to quantify both the direct
and indirect effects of leverage on asset prices, by exploiting the unique staggered nature of China's
margin lending liberalization from 2010-2015. The direct effect results from the increase in demand
for assets by ex-ante constrained investors as a result of higher permissible leverage; and the indirect
effect results from the increases in anticipatory speculation by ex-ante unconstrained investors. Two
papers that are closely related to our paper are Chen et al. (2018) and Wang and Xu (2019). Chen
et al. (2018) exploits a sudden policy change on December 8, 2014 that in the exchange market
in China, enterprise bonds with ratings AA+ and AA were no longer accepted as repo collateral.
By comparing how bond prices changed across markets and rating classes around this event, Chen
et al. (2018) estimates the causal effect of asset pledgeability on prices in the secondary market;
and they find that an increase in haircut from 0 to 100% (which corresponds to the policy shock of
unpledgeability of AA+ and AA-rated enterprise bonds) would result in an increase in bond yields
in the range of 40 to 83 bps. Wang and Xu (2019), on the other hand, focuses on the impact of
repo collateral eligibility on the primary bond issuance market pricing. They use a policy shift by
China Central Depository & Clearing Co. Ltd. on April 7, 2017 that for bonds whose prospectuses
were issued after April 7, 2017, only those with bond ratings at AAA or above can be accepted as
collateral; prior to the policy shift bonds rated AA or higher were collateral eligible. The policy
shift, however, only applies to new bond issuances in the exchange market and not in the interbank
market; moreover, it exempts from the new requirement bonds whose prospectuses were published
before April 7, 2017. Wang and Xu (2019) finds that AA rated bonds issued after the policy shift
in the exchange market had 60-70 bps higher spread in the primary market relative to those whose
pledgeability was not affected by the policy shift. Relative to Chen et al. (2018) and Wang and
Xu (2019), we consider the impact of collateral-based monetary policy intervention by the Central
Bank in the Medium-Term Liquidity Facility (MLF), and study both the impacts of the monetary
policy on bond spreads both in the secondary market and in the primary market (thus the real
economy).5 In addition, we consider the impact of an expansion of the collateral eligible bonds for
MLF, while Chen et al. (2018) and Wang and Xu (2019) both consider the tightening of the eligible
collaterals.
    The second strand of related literature focuses on collateral-based monetary policy. A large
literature studies the effects of Quantitative Easing (Gertler and Karadi, 2011; Curdia and Wood-
ford, 2011; Joyce et al., 2012; Maggio et al., 2016; Lenel, 2017; Rodnyansky and Darmouni, 2017;
De Fiore et al., 2018; Acharya et al., 2019), where the collateral channel is highlighted as a key to
QE. In a theoretical paper, Ara´  ujo et al. (2015) introduce the collateral dimension into a monetary
policy framework and study an interesting trade-off especially related to quantitative easing by the
central banks: the purchase of Treasury Bills can release liquidity to the market, but beyond some
    5
      In particular, MLF was established by PBOC in September of 2014, which was after the policy shock studied
in Chen et al. (2018).


                                                      5
point this may reduce available collateral in the market and reduce liquidity.6 Lenel (2017) studies
how central bank asset purchase (i.e., QE) changes the quantities and the maturity structure of
safe assets, which in turn changes interest rates and asset prices, in a model with collateralized
lending and an endogenously segmented markets for safe assets. Geanakoplos and Wang (2018)
study a model where the Central Bank's balance sheet is owned by individual investors, thus when
QE increases the leverage ratio of the Central bank, it also increases the leverage of individual
investors. They show that unconventional collateral-based monetary policy that exchanges reserves
for lower quality collateral can be beneficial when high-quality collateral is scarce. In a related
model of Piazzesi and Schneider (2017), banks borrow or lend in the interbank market, which can
either require collateral or use central bank reserves. They show that the provision and allocation
of collateral play a fundamental role for liquidity in the payment system.
    A small literature in this strand compares the effects of different types of monetary policy.
Ashcraft et al. (2011) explicitly study the collateral-based monetary policy targeting the haircut of
assets, and compare it with the traditional interest-rate-based monetary policy. Their model implies
that when financial institutions are more credit constrained, collateral-based monetary policy tools
are more effective than interest-rate-based monetary policy tools. When financial institutions are
subject to funding constraints, reducing interest rate may decrease the spread of safe assets with
low margins, while increasing the spread of risky assets with high margin, making institutions
that hold the risky asset even more credit constrained. In contrast, collateral-based policies that
allow higher leverages for risky assets can increase their prices, reduce their required returns for
investors, and relax the liquidity constraint facing the financial institutions. Moreover, collateral-
based policies can reduce the overall funding costs, since more collateral availability can ease the
funding constraints on all assets. De Fiore et al. (2018) compared QE with a policy of unlimited
liquidity provision against collateral in an environment with secured and unsecured money markets.
Their model shows that, when safe assets are scarce, direct asset purchase is better than lending to
banks against collaterals.
    Empirical literature on the evaluations of collateral-based unconventional monetary policy is
relatively small. Using survey data, Ashcraft et al. (2011) find that TALF eligibility effectively
increased the investors' valuation for Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS) bonds. By
exploiting weekly data on yield spreads, Ashcraft et al. (2011) also find that spreads of super
senior fixed-rate conduit CMBS bonds significantly increased after being unexpectedly rejected
from TALF plan. Benetton et al. (2018) study the effects of Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing
Operations (TLTROs) by the European Central Bank (ECB) on the financing costs of Italian
firms, and find that the interest rates decreased by 20 bps for the loans of banks that accepted
TLTROs. Some studies point to some potential distortionary effects of collateral-based monetary
policy. For example, Nyborg (2017a) argues that more lax collateral eligibility by ECB creates
perverse incentives for the financial institutions to produce low quality assets. In the context of
Netherlands, van Bekkum et al. (2017) find when ECB lowered RMBS eligibility to BBB-, banks
   6
       Ara´
          ujo et al. (2019) further extend the model to a sticky price economy environment.

                                                          6
issued more low-rated RMBS with higher default rates. Studies also show heterogeneous effects
of the policies. For instance, Krishnamurthy et al. (2017) find that LTROs reduced the spreads
of Spanish sovereign debts, while they had little effect on those of other EU countries. Benetton
et al. (2018) find that the effects of TLTROs depend on the market structure of local banking
industry. However, due to the difficulty in establishing proper policy counterfactuals, none of the
above papers provides a causal estimate of the effects of collateral-based monetary policy on the
financial market and the real economy. Our paper aims to fill in the gaps.


3       Institutional Background

3.1     Bond Markets in China
    Before we elaborate on the collateral-based monetary policy in China, it is necessary to get
an overview of the unique institutional setting of Chinese bond markets.7 In China, there are two
parallel bond markets: the interbank market, and the exchange market. The interbank bond market,
established in 1997, is an over-the-counter (OTC) bond market, and is similar to the U.S. interbank
bond market. In contrast, the exchange bond market, established in 1990, is a centralized market
as part of Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges.

Participants. The participants in two bond markets vary, but they overlap in most of the non-
bank institutional investors. The interbank bond market is a wholesale market, where participants
are qualified institutional investors including commercial banks, mutual funds, insurance companies
and security firms. The exchange-based bond market is a retail market, where non-bank institutions,
corporate investors, and retail investors are allowed to invest in bonds. Commercial banks' presence
in the exchange market is negligible because they are prohibited from repo transactions. Many non-
banks institutions, such as mutual funds and insurance companies, are active in both markets. The
fact that commercial banks are for the most part operating only in the interbank bond market is
important because, together with the fact that the participants of MLF are "commercial banks and
policy banks that are subject to the macro prudential regulations," it implies that the collateral-
based monetary policy tools such as the MLF are then closely linked to the interbank market, not
the exchange market.8


Bond Products. Bonds traded in the exchange market on average tend to be smaller in size
than those traded in the interbank market; nevertheless, many bond products in some categories,
mainly enterprise bonds and government bonds, are traded in both markets. Enterprise bonds
    7
       Amstad and He (2019) provide an excellent description of the historical and institutional background of the
Chinese bond markets.
    8
      see the announcement by the PBOC regarding the establishment of MLF on September 2014:
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/zhengcehuobisi


                                                        7
are corporate bonds issued by state-owned enterprises, or enterprises with a high share of state
holdings. Before 2005, investors in the exchange market had no access to enterprise bonds. In 2005,
the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) in China granted non-pubic-listed
state-owned enterprises access to the exchange market. Since 2005, the dual-listed enterprise bonds
have been growing rapidly. In 2018, over 28% of the enterprise bonds outstanding are dual-listed. In
our full data sample, 21.42% of the bond-day transactions observations are from dual-listed bonds.
These dual-listed bonds will play an important role in our identification strategy.


Regulators and Clearing Houses. The two markets have different regulators. The main regu-
lator of the interbank bond market is People's Bank of China (PBOC), China's central bank. The
regulator of the exchange market is China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC).9
    In the interbank market, participants trade via China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS).
The clearing service is provided by Shanghai Clearing House (SHCH) and China Central Depository
& Clearing Co. Ltd (CCDC). The custodial service is provided exclusively by CCDC. In contrast,
in the exchange market, all bids from investors are aggregated in electronic order books, with the
exchange acting as the central clearing house, and all matched trades are settled via China Securities
Depository & Clearing Co. Ltd (CSDC).


Repo Transactions and Pledgeable Collaterals. The lion's share in both markets is repur-
chase agreement (Repo) transactions, where a lender provides cash to a borrower, with the loan
secured by the collateral from the borrower, typically bonds. The estimated repo transactions take
up over 85% of the total volume in the interbank bond market, and the rest are unsecured lending
between banks.
    The mechanisms of repo transactions in two markets differ greatly. In the exchange market, the
Exchange (the CSDC) facilitates and acts as the central counterparty for all repo transactions. The
eligible collateral pool and the daily haircut rates of the collateral for repo transaction are both
determined by the CSDC unilaterally. Specifically, the repo transaction accepts only AAA rated
bonds as collateral in 2018.10
    In the interbank bond market, prior to October 16, 2018, the seller and buyer can bargain
over the terms in the contract, including the required collateral, haircut rate and repo rate, until
agreement is reached. The haircut rate and repo rate are customized according to the underlying
risk of the collateral and the trading parties. Conversations with practitioners reveal that both AAA
and AA+ bonds are popular collaterals in interbank market. After October 16, 2018, the China's
   9
      The regulatory functions of CSRC are similar to that of the Securities and Exchange Commission in the United
States.
   10
      For example, in Section 2 when we discuss Chen et al. (2018) and Wang and Xu (2019), we mentioned that
the CSDC suspended the eligibility of the AA+ or AA-rated enterprise bonds as pledgeable collaterals for repo
transactions in the exchange market on December 8, 2014, and that on April 7, 2017, the CSDC further restricted
the required minimum rating for repo collateral so that corporate bonds issued after April 7, 2017 should be rated
at least AAA in order to be collateral eligible.


                                                        8
Central Depository & Clearing Co. Ltd (CCDC) can serve as the tri-party agent to determine the
eligibility and valuation of the collateral, while the sellers and buyers only need to negotiate the
borrowing amount, the maturity period and the interest rate.
    Although borrowing bond for the purpose of short-selling is allowed in the interbank bond
market, it is very limited.11 Borrowing cost is high due to the regulation. In addition, once the
value of the bonds an institution borrowed exceeds 30% of its total holdings, or the amount of a bond
being borrowed exceeds 15% of its total issuance, it has to be reported to CFETS and CCDC.12
Such feature is crucial to our analysis as the cost of borrowing bonds prevents the investors from
short-selling.
    The difference in the mechanisms of repo transactions in the two markets results in different
collateral value of the same bond across the two parallel markets.


Market Segmentation. Even though traders and products overlap in the interbank market and
the exchange market, the two bond markets are largely segmented because specific rules make
arbitrage between two markets very difficult. As a result, the different collateral requirements for
repo purchases can result in substantial wedges in the prices of the same bond ­ if dual listed ­ in
the two markets.13
    There are several barriers to arbitrage between the two markets. First, According to Chen
et al. (2018), in 2014 it took about three to four working days if investors apply for the transfer
of depository from the interbank market (the CCDC) to the exchange (the CSDC); and it took
even longer (about four to six working days in 2014) to move depository from the exchange to the
interbank. The transfer of depository becomes quicker in recent years, but still takes a few days.
Second, transferring money from the exchange market to the interbank market is also subject to
the settlement delays. The interbank market adopts "T+0" settlement, while the exchange market
adopts "T+1" settlement. As a result, for an investor who wants to transfer deposit from the
exchange market to the interbank market, he or she would have to wait for a day. Transferring
deposit from the interbank market to the exchange market also takes time. If the transaction is
consummated in the interbank market in the morning, the settlement is usually completed in the
afternoon. Because the exchange market closes at 3:00 pm in the afternoon, the same-day arbitrage
across the two markets is therefore almost impossible to implement. Third, the settlement fee is
relatively high compared to the potential gains from cross-market arbitrages. If the investor uses 100
million yuan to arbitrage for 50 bps spread, the gain would be around 1,300 yuan without considering
the settlement delay, while the estimated settlement fee is 170-250 yuan. Compared to other
strategies, the cross-market arbitrage seems not a very profitable option for the investors. As a result
   11
       In 2018, the total bond lending transaction is 2.4009 trillion yuan, the spot transaction is 151.50 trillion yuan,
and the total repo transaction in the same year is 986.12 trillion yuan. See CCDC 2018 China Bond Market Report
file: https://www.chinabond.com.cn/cb/cn/yjfx/zzfx/nb/20190117/150727538.shtml
    12
       See People's Bank of China Announcement [2006] No. 15. https://www.chinabond.com.cn/Info/998422
    13
       We provide statistical evidence in the price discrepancies of the same bond in the two markets in Section 4.3.



                                                           9
of these barriers, we can treat the two bond markets as more or less segmented, with potentially
sustained price differences across the two markets even for the same bonds. The segmented nature
of the two markets play a crucial role in our identification strategy to estimate the causal impact
of collateral-based monetary policy.


3.2     Collateral-based Monetary Policy in China
    In this paper we analyze the collateral channel of monetary policy using the following unex-
pected policy shock: On June 1, 2018, China's Central Bank, the People's Bank of China (PBOC),
expanded the types of collateral it would allow primary dealers (commercial and policy banks) to
use to borrow from its Medium-term Lending Facility (MLF).14 Launched in September 2014, MLF
is a facility managed by PBOC that offers lending to commercial banks and policy banks with
eligible collaterals for 3/6/12 months. An important feature of the MLF is that it only accepts
targeted bonds listed in interbank market as collateral, rather than the same kind of bonds in the
exchange market.15
    Before the June 1, 2018 expansion of eligible collaterals, MLF accepts Treasury bonds, central
bank bills, policy bank financial bonds, municipal bonds and AAA corporate bonds as collateral.
The expansion will enable (1) corporate bonds; (2) bonds issued by small and micro firms (Xiaowei
Bonds ); (3) bonds to support green economy (Green Bonds ); and (4) financial bonds serving agri-
culture and rural areas (Sannong Bonds ) rated at least AA to be used as collateral for MLF.16 ' 17
The total amount of newly pledgeable bonds for MLF was between 400-600 billion yuan (about $80
billion). The PBOC claimed that the move is aimed at lowering the funding costs and enhancing
the support to smaller businesses.

                                             [Table 1 About Here]

    It is not the first time for PBOC to use collateral-based monetary policy. Table 1 illustrates
the collateral-based monetary policy tools that the PBOC launched prior to 2018. In January
2013, PBOC launched Short-term Liquidity Operation (SLO) and Standing Lending Facility (SLF),
providing liquidity to primary dealer banks with maturity of less than 7 days and between 1 to
3 months, respectively, backed by high quality assets. In 2014, PBOC shifted to longer term
collateral-based monetary policy: Pledged Supplementary Lending (PSL) in April 2014, and MLF
  14
      See PBOC's announcement of the policy change on June 1, 2018 at http://www.pbc.gov.cn/zhengcehuobisi.
  15
      As discussed in the previous subsection, transferring depository from the exchange to the interbank market is
time consuming and costly.
   16
      In Chinese, "Xiaowei" means "small or micro firms"; "Sannong" is the short cut for "three things related to
rural issues: peasants, agriculture, and rural areas."
   17
      In China, the corporate bonds include exchanged-traded corporate bonds, enterprise bonds, medium term notes
and commercial paper. We focus on the first three types of bonds. The commercial paper usually has less than 1-year
maturity and therefore is not popular collateral for MLF. Financial bonds are bonds issued by financial institutions,
including commercial banks, insurance companies, and security firms.




                                                         10
in September 2014, respectively. The last row of Table 1 lists the eligible collaterals for each lending
facility as of 2018.

                                            [ Figure 1 About Here]

    The collateral-based lending facilities have gained increasing significance in PBOC's monetary
policy since 2014. Figure 1 depicts the growing size of lending through SLF, MLF and PSL by
PBOC during the period of March 2013 and January 2019.18 It is interesting to note that, although
these unconventional monetary policy tools were only introduced between 2013 and 2014, they
experienced rapid growth since their launches. At the end of 2018, the balance of MLF, SLF and
PSL accounted for about 25% of China's monetary base, as is shown in Figure 1. This is especially
significant for MLF, which is the largest and most important component of PBOC's collateral-based
lending facilities.

                                            [ Figure 2 About Here]

    Shifting from traditional monetary policy to unconventional monetary policy changes the way
China's Central Bank provides liquidity. Figure 2 illustrates the liquidity transmission mechanism
of traditional and collateral-based monetary policy. In the traditional liquidity transmission mech-
anism, the Central Bank influences the broad financing conditions in the economy by steering the
interbank rate. In the unconventional liquidity transmission system, the Central Bank decides not
only the interest rates but also the eligible collaterals for the SLF, MLF or PSL lending facilities.
By accepting the relatively illiquid assets as collaterals, China's Central Bank provides liquidity to
the primary commercial banks. The liquidity is then transmitted through repo transactions from
the primary dealer banks to other non-bank financial institutions in the interbank market, and in
turn, these financial institutions provide liquidity to the real economy.
    Theoretically at least, the collateral-based monetary policy tools offer the Central Bank more
flexibility than the traditional interest rate policies when the policy goals include lowering the
borrowing cost of some targeted sectors. Take MLF as an example. In the expansion of eligible
MLF collaterals on June 1, 2018, PBOC made corporate bonds and financial bonds of Xiaowei firms,
Green firm and Sannong firms with at least AA ratings to be eligible collaterals, which lowered
the spreads of these bonds in secondary market, as we will show in Section 4. This, theoretically,
would in turn further decrease the coupon rate of these bonds in primary market.19 If working
effectively, MLF would ease the funding constraints for commercial banks that support small firms,
environmental protection and agriculture. We will indeed provide evidence of the primary market
reactions in Section 5.
  18
      Since the lending period of SLF is less than 3 months, as shown in Table 1, the quarterly balance is actually
not very good indicator of its size. The lending period of SLO is even shorter, of less than 7 days. We do not have
quarterly balance data on SLO.
   19
      In China, the coupon rate of bonds is determined through a tender process on "tender day", 3 trading days
before the bond is listed in the market.



                                                        11
    China is not alone in adopting unconventional monetary policy tools. The MLF resembles the
first three rounds of long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) by the European Central Bank in
the Eurozone, with 6-month to 1-year maturity.20 The U.S. has also launched Term-Asset Security
in March 2019. Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) loaned up to
$200 billion on a non-recourse basis to holders of certain AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and
recently originated consumer and small business loans.21 Although the collateral-based monetary
policy tools adopted in China and many other countries have been theoretically predicted to be
useful, empirical test of the effectiveness of these unconventional monetary policies is not easy. As
these policies are always concurrent with other monetary policies and financial regulations, and are
endogenous to underlying macroeconomic conditions, it is difficult to isolate the causal impact of
these collateral-based monetary policies from other confounding factors.
    The unique coexistence and the segmentation of the interbank bond market and the exchange
bond market in China offers us a rare opportunity to identify the causal impact of the collateral-
based monetary policy using a clear identification strategy. As the policy shock of June 1, 2018 only
applies to bonds in the interbank market, and the disparate regulations of and the barriers between
the two bond markets effectively prevent the investors from arbitraging, we are able to isolate the
causal impact of the collateral-based monetary policy. By comparing the changes, before and after
the policy shock, in the difference of spreads of the newly collateral-eligible bonds (the treatment
bonds) and other bonds (the control bonds) in the two markets, we are able to identify the causal
effects of the collateral-based monetary policy on the financial market. In addition, we are able to
examine the transmission of the monetary policy operations in the secondary market to the primary
market, and thus the impact on the real economy. In other words, we will provide causal empirical
evidence of the transmission mechanisms of the unconventional collateral-based monetary policy as
depicted in Figure 2.


4        Secondary Market: Data, Methods and Results
    In this section, we describe the data, methods and results on the impact of the policy shock on
the secondary market bond pricing. We also provide empirical evidence for the segmentation of the
interbank and the exchange markets, which is essential for our empirical strategy.


4.1      Data
Sample Selection As the June 1, 2018 policy shock was mainly targeted at corporate bonds
and a subset of the financial bonds, we restrict our analysis sample to only corporate bonds and
financial bonds. We obtain the bond characteristics, including credit ratings and issuers, and daily
    20
     In the fourth round, the ECB launched three-year maturity LTROs https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/
implement/omo/html/index.en.html
  21
     For a description of TALF, see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/talf.htm


                                                 12
bond transaction information, including yield-to-maturity, trade volume, close price, etc. from
WIND.22
    Our sample period is from 1/1/2018 to 09/30/2018, with 5-month window (99 trading days)
before the June 1, 2018 policy shock and 4-month window (83 trading days) after the policy shock,
respectively. If a bond does not have any trading in a particular day, we will code the bond's
observation as missing for that day. We follow Schwert (2017) to exclude observations of bonds
with less than 1 year to maturity, because at such a short maturity small price changes can lead
to large deviations in the implied yield. We further restrict the bonds to those issued before
09/01/2017, because newly issued bonds tend to exhibit high markups.
    We also restrict our analysis sample to bonds with AA or higher ratings. Bonds rated under AA
account for only a small proportion (less than 5%) of our sample, and such bonds are considered
risky in China; we thus exclude bonds with lower than AA ratings in order to eliminate the potential
noise from these risky bonds.23
    For part of the analysis, we will further restrict our sample to bonds that are dual-listed in
both the interbank and the exchange market. A dual-listed bond has the advantages of being able
to be matched to itself in the other market, and by definition the matched pair have the same
fundamentals.

Construction of Spread. The main dependent variable of our analysis is the spread of the
bonds, which is calculated as the difference between the yield (to maturity) of bonds and the yield
of ChinaBond Government Bond (CGB) with the same term to maturity on the same day.24 The
yield to maturity for the bonds in the exchange market is obtained from WIND, and the yield to
maturity for bonds in the interbank market is calculated by CFETS. Both calculations are based
on the secondary market transaction prices.25 , 26
    We take the targeted bonds, i.e., the bonds in the interbank market that are newly eligible as
collaterals for MLF as described in Section 3.2, as treatment bonds in the treatment market, and the
same type of bonds in the exchange market as treatment bonds in the control market. Similarly, we
consider other bonds that are not impacted by the 06/01/2018 policy shock as control bonds in the
treatment market and control bonds in the control market, respectively. The control bonds include
AAA-rated bonds, and financial bonds that are not in the targeted sectors.
  22
      WIND is a major financial data provider for China.
  23
      In 2018, many bonds rated under AA defaulted.
   24
      The yield curve of ChinaBond Government Bond is provided by CCDC. http://yield.chinabond.com.cn/
cbweb-pbc-web/pbc/more?locale=en_US
   25
      WIND calculates the bond yield of a given day, if there are transactions on the exchange market,
based on a volume-weighted transaction price, inclusive of the interest income of the day. See p.19 of
http://net.wind.com.cn/WindNET/Bulletin/page/windnet3.htm. CFETS calculates the bond yield of a given day
similarly, but with an extra step of estimating a yield-curve predicted yield of the bond, then adjusted using the
day's transaction prices and volumes. See http://www.chinamoney.com.cn/.
   26
      Individual and mutual funds pay income tax of 20% on all interest incomes, and the tax rate does not vary by
bonds, duration of holding, and the bond market.


                                                       13
                                     [ Figures 3-4 About Here]

    Figure 3 provides suggestive evidence that the policy shock reduces the spreads of the treatment
bonds in the interbank market. Figure 3a compares the average daily spreads for all corporate and
financial bonds in the two markets by ratings before (the left panel) and after (the right panel) the
policy shock. Both panels show that, for a given bond rating, the average daily spreads are lower in
the interbank market than in the exchange market. The difference in the spreads is most significant
for AA rated bonds, followed by AA+ rated bonds, and it is the smallest for AAA rated bonds.
However, following the policy shock, the difference in spreads between the two markets of AA and
AA+ rated bonds ­ where include all the treatment bonds -- increased drastically, while the spread
difference of AAA rated bonds only increased marginally. In Figure 3b, we restrict the sample to
dual-listed bonds only. As we mentioned in Section 3.1, dual-listed bonds are all enterprise bonds,
therefore the AA+ and AA rated dual-listed bonds are almost all treatment bonds, and the AAA
bonds are all control bonds which were already collateral eligible for MLF prior to the June 1, 2018
policy shock. Figure 3b reaffirms the same qualitative effect as that from Figure 3a: After the policy
shock, the treatment bonds (AA+ and AA rated bonds) experienced somewhat larger decreases in
spreads than the control bonds (AAA rated bonds).
    Figure 4 further shows the daily movements of the spread differences between the interbank
and the exchange market, by bond ratings, before and after the policy shock. The shaded area is
a 5-trading day period since the expansion of the eligible collaterals for MLF. Figure 4 suggests
that in the 5-day window, the spreads of AA and AA+ rated bonds (treatment bonds) in interbank
market (the treatment market) falls relative to that in exchange market (the control market), while
at the same time, the spread differences between the two markets for AAA bonds (control bonds)
somewhat increased. Figures 3-4 both suggest that the expansion of MLF eligible collateral to
include corporate bonds and some financial bonds rated AA+ or AA may have causally increased
the prices, and thus decreased the spread, of these targeted bonds in the secondary market.


4.2    Descriptive Statistics
                                        [Table 2 About Here]

    In Table 2, we provide the summary statistics for all corporate and financial bonds in the
secondary market with AA or higher ratings. Recall that our sample restrictions exclude the very
small percentage of bonds with below AA ratings. In Panels A-C, an observation is a bond-day.
In the columns headed by "Full Sample", we include all bond-day observations (a total of 78,592).
We also provide summary statistics for bond-day observations in the interbank market (a total of
35,406, about 45% of the total observations) and the exchange market (a total of 43,186, about 55%
of the total observations) separately. Panel A shows that the average daily spread is 3.123% in the
full sample, and the average daily spreads are 2.547% and 3.594% in the interbank market and the
exchange market, respectively. In the full sample, about 42% of the bond-day observations are after


                                                 14
the June 1, 2018 policy shock (Post = 1); separately by market, the post-shock observations account
for 40.4% and 43.3% respectively in the interbank and exchange market. In the full sample, 59.5%
of the observations are those of the treatment bonds (Treat = 1); the corresponding percentages
are 54.8% and 63.4% in the interbank and the exchange market, respectively. The maturity to
term averages 2.955 years in the overall sample; and it is 3.069 and 2.861 years, respectively, in the
interbank and the exchange market. As expected, the average daily volume of trade is much larger
in the interbank market (115.8 million yuan) than in the exchange market (8.443 million yuan).
    In Panels B and C of Table 2, we report the summary statistics of bond ratings and bond types,
respectively. Panel B shows that AAA rated bonds account for 40% of the observations in the
overall secondary market, and about 44.1% and 36.3% in the interbank and the exchange market
respectively. The percentages of AA+ and AA rated bond-day observations are both somewhat
smaller in the interbank market than in the exchange market. Panel C shows that about 33.4% of
observations are those of exchange-traded corporate bonds, which by definition do not appear in the
interbank market transactions. Similarly, a type of corporate bonds, known as medium-term notes,
are only traded in the interbank market. Observations of enterprise bonds (which are corporate
bonds for large State-owned enterprises) account for about 36.2% of the total observations, and
they appear in both the interbank market and the exchange market. As we will show in Table 3,
indeed all dual-listed bonds are enterprise bonds. Financial bonds appear in both markets, but
they account for only a relatively small fraction of all the observations.
    In Panel D of Table 2, we summarize the data at the unique bond level. It shows that in total
there are a total of 6,057 unique bonds in the full sample, of which 5,650 of them are corporate
bonds of various kinds ­ including 1,880 enterprise bonds, 1,447 exchange-traded corporate bonds,
and 2,323 medium-term notes; and only 407 are financial bonds. Note that the medium-term notes
are only traded in the interbank market, and the exchange-traded corporate bonds are only traded
in the exchange market. There are a total of 526 enterprise bonds that are dual-listed in both
markets.

                                        [Table 3 About Here]

    In Table 3, we provide the summary statistics, focusing on the dual-listed bonds only. First of
all, as shown in Panel C of Table 2, only enterprise bonds are dual listed. Moreover, of the 28,460
bond-day observations of enterprise bonds listed in Panel C of Table 2, 16,831 of them are those
of dual listed enterprise bonds. Thus, about 60% bond-day transactions of all enterprise bonds are
those of dual listed bonds. At the unique bond level, Panel D of Table 3 shows that 526 out of the
1,880, namely, about 28%, of the enterprise bonds are dual listed and have transactions in both
market during our sample period.
    Panel A of Table 3 shows that the basic patterns of the spread differences between the interbank
market and the exchange market for all bonds hold for dual-listed bonds as well. For example, the
average spread tends to be lower in the interbank market than in the exchange market (2.612% vs.
3.696%). About 42% of the bond-day observations are post policy shock (Post = 1), and about

                                                 15
76.5% of the bond-day observations are those of the treatment bonds (Treat = 1). At the bond-day
observation level, dual-listed enterprise bonds tend to have shorter term-to-maturity than non-dual
listed bonds: the average term-to-maturity for dual listed bonds is 2.852 years, in contrast to 2.955
years for all bonds as reported in Panel A of Table 2. Comparing Panel B of Tables 2 and 3 reveals
that there are much smaller fraction of AAA rated bond-day observations among dual listed bonds
than among all bonds.


4.3    Evidence for Market Segmentation
                                        [Table 4 About Here]

    An important institutional feature of the parallel bond markets in China that is crucial for our
empirical approach is that the interbank market and the exchange market are effectively segmented,
despite the fact that there are many dual listed bonds and that many market participants trade
in both markets. In Section 3, we provided the detailed information about the barriers to cross-
market arbitrage. In this subsection, we provide further evidence about the spread discrepancies
between the two markets for dual listed bonds when there were "simultaneous transactions" in the
two markets. Our definition of "simultaneous transactions" is close to that in Chen et al. (2018).
For any transaction of a dual-listed bond in the interbank market at a particular date, say date
t, the"simultaneous transactions" in the exchange market are transactions of the same bond on
trading days between t - 2 and t + 2. We then calculate the spread difference between the trades in
the interbank market and their closest corresponding "simultaneous transactions" in the exchange.
We are able to construct 1,089 such matched pairs in our sample.
    Panel A of Table 4 shows that the mean absolute difference of the matched trades is 109.2 bps,
with the minimum difference of 0.0185 bps and the maximum difference 1166 bps. In Panel B, only
slightly more than 10 percent of all the matched trades have absolute spread differences of less than
5 bps; and more than 36 percent of the matched trades differ in spread exceeding 100 bps!

                                       [Figure 5 About Here]

Figure 5 presents the kernel density plot of the absolute spread difference of dual-listed bond trades
in the interbank market and the "simultaneous transactions" of the same bond in the exchange
market. It shows that the distribution has significant probability mass on absolute spread differences
exceeding more than 30 bps.
    The large absolute spread differences between matched trades in the two markets provide direct
empirical evidence that the two markets are effectively segmented. This is crucial because the
segmentation allows us to interpret the exchange market as the "control market" that are immune
to "contamination" when the interbank market experiences the policy shock of June 1, 2018. The
availability of such a control market allows us to construct the "counterfactual outcome" of the
treatment bonds in the control market.


                                                 16
4.4     Baseline Regression Specifications and Results
Baseline Result. In order to examine whether the expansion of the MLF eligible collateral to
include the treatment bonds has any impact on their spreads in the secondary market, our main
estimating equation is a triple-difference (DDD) specification:

    Spreadijt = 1 P ostt × IBj × T reati + 2 P ostt × T reati + ij + jt + (BR × BT )it + ijt ,                     (1)

where the subscripts i, j , and t respectively denote bond (i), bond market (j ), and the date (t).
The dependent variable Spreadijt is the yield of bond i in market j at date t relative to the CGB
bonds of the same date t as we have discussed in Section 4.1. The right hand side variables are as
follows:

    · P ostt is a dummy that equals to 1 if the date t is after June 1, 2018, and 0 otherwise;

    · T reati is a dummy which equals to 1 if the bond is one of the newly included bonds in the
      MLF eligible collateral expansion, i.e. if i is one of the treatment bonds: (i) corporate bonds
      rated AA and AA+; (ii) financial bonds rated AA, AA+ and AAA in the targeted "Xiaowei,"
      "Green" and "Sannong' ' sectors;

    · IBj is a dummy which equals to 1 if the bond-day observation is from the interbank market
      (the treatment market), and 0 otherwise.

    · ij 's are bond by market fixed effects, which absorb bond fixed effects (capturing the effects of
      bond characteristics such as bond type, bond ratings, bond issuance size, bond issuer, etc.), as
      well as IBj , T reati and IBj × T reati , which would have appeared in a typical DDD setting.

    · jt are market by date fixed effects, which absorb the day-by-day average difference in bond
      spread between the two markets due to different market liquidity and institutional differences
      between them. Note that jt also absorb P ostt × IBj , which would have appeared in typical
      DDD setting.

    · (BR × BT )it are the bond rating (BR) by bond type (BT) by date fixed effects, which absorb
      the day-by-day average differences in bond spread for each type and each rating level of bonds.
      The (BR × BT )it fixed effects are not market specific, hence these fixed effects capture the
      fluctuations in the average spreads for each bond type and each bond rating level from common
      shocks affecting both markets. Also, note that (BR × BT )it fixed effects do not fully absorb
      the P ostt × T reati when we use the observations from the full sample in our analysis. The
      reason is that only financial bonds (a particular bond type) with AA or AA+ ratings in
      "Xiaowei," "Green " and "Sannong " are treated. Thus we also include P ostt × T reati in the
      regression when using the full sample.27
  27
     When restricting ourselves to dual-listed bonds, the term P ostt × T reati will be dropped because financial bonds
are never dual listed.

                                                          17
   · ijt are the bond-market-day specific errors, which we allow for correlations at the bond level,
     but independent across date t and market j .

    In estimating regression equation (1), 1 is our main parameter of interest. It captures the
average changes in spread between the treatment bonds and the control bonds after the treatment
bonds were included as eligible collateral for MLF in the interbank market, ceteris paribus, where
we proxy for the potentially differentially effects of time-varying macro shocks on the treatment
and control bonds by the spread movements in the exchange market (the control market). We
expect 1 to be negative, as predicted by the leverage cycle theory: as the treatment bonds in the
interbank market acquire collateral values after the MLF expansion, their spreads relative to the
control bonds should decrease, ceteris paribus.

                                         [Table 5 About Here]

    Table 5 reports the results from the baseline regression as specified by equation (1). Column (1)
uses the full sample of bond-day transactions as summarized in Table 2, and Column (2) uses only
the bond-day transactions of the dual-listed bonds as summarized in Table 3. Recall that, when we
use the dual-listed bond-day transactions, the P ostt × T reati interaction is subsumed by the Bond
Type x Bond Rating x Date fixed effects.
    Column (1) shows that the 1 coefficient estimate of the triple interaction term P ost × T reat × IB
is -0.618 and statistically significant at 1% level. That is, the spread difference between the
treated bonds and the control bonds are reduced by 61.8 bps in the (treated) interbank market
relative to the (control) exchange market after the treated bonds were made eligible as collateral
for MLF. Note also that the coefficient estimate of the P ost × T reat is positive and significant,
suggesting the importance of allowing for the possibility of the treated bonds and control bonds to
be differentially impacted by other macro shocks, which we do by using the exchange market as the
control market. In Column (2), we use only the matched dual-listed bond-day transactions in the
regression. Importantly, we find that the coefficient estimate of the triple interaction is qualitatively
and quantitatively consistent with that of Column (1): the expansion of MLF collateral decreases
the relative spread of treatment bonds by about 42 bps, though because of the smaller sample size,
the statistical significance of the estimate is now at the 10% level.

Spillover Effect to Other Bonds in the Interbank Market. We also investigate whether
impact of the policy shock is restricted to the treated bonds, or it can impact the spreads of all
bonds in the (treated) interbank market. For example, Ashcraft et al. (2011) points out that, if
the haircut rates of a subset of securities are sufficiently reduced, the supply of collateral in the
market will increase substantially, which leads to an easing of investors' funding constraint, and
in turn decreases the spread of other securities even though their haircut rates are not directly
impacted. In other words, collateral-based monetary policy tools can possibly result in positive
spillover effects from the treated bonds to the control bonds in the treatment market, leading to
overall lower average spreads in interbank bond market.

                                                   18
   To test whether the MLF collateral expansion has a spillover effect on the spreads of bonds
traded in the interbank market as a whole, we use the following regression specification:28

            Spreadijt = 1 P ostt × IBj + 2 P ostt × IBj × T reati + ij + (BR × BT )it + ijt ,                        (2)

where 1 captures the average policy effect on the spreads of bonds in interbank market. 1 is
expected to be negative if the MLF collateral expansion has effectively reduced the spreads of other
non-treated bonds in interbank market.

                                                [Table 6 About Here]

Table 6 reports the results. In Column 1 where the full sample is used in the regression, the
coefficient estimate of the interaction term P ostt × IBi is negative 10.4 bps but it is not statistically
significant; however, in Column 2 where we use the dual-listed bonds only, we find that indeed the
policy shock reduced the overall spreads of the dual-listed bonds in the interbank market relative
to those in the exchange market, even for the bonds that are not directly treated. The magnitude
of the spillover effect is also quite substantial: the average spread of dual listed bonds is reduced
by 34.3 bps even if they were not treatment bonds, and this effect is statistically significant at 10%
level. Thus the results reported in Table 6 provides some evidence for the predictions from model
of Ashcraft et al. (2011) that a higher supply of collateral in the interbank market eases the overall
funding constraints in the treatment market and lowers the overall spreads, with the caveat that
the spillover effect seems to be restricted to dual listed bonds only.


4.5       Additional Analysis
Parallel Trends. A requirement for DDD as specified by Equation (1) as a valid identification
strategy is that the difference in the spreads between treated and control bonds in the interbank
market (the treatment market) and those in the exchange market (the control market) exhibit
parallel trend prior to the policy shock. In this subsection, we conduct the parallel trend analysis.
The model is specified in Equation (3):


                     k=17
                                 k
 Spreadijt =                  k Dt × IBj × T reati + 1 P ostt × T reati + ij + (BR × BT )it + jt + ijt , (3)
                  k=-20,k=0


where we divide our sample period (a total of 184 trading days) into 36 sub-periods, with each
                                                         k
period consisting of a 5-day window. The dummies Dt        equals 1 if the date t falls in the sub-period
k , and 0 otherwise. Following Freyaldenhoven et al. (2019), we normalize the point estimate of
the DDD coefficient immediately before the policy shock date to zero. The same sets of control
variables as those specified for regression specification (1) are included.
  28
       Note that the fixed effects jt are not included in equation (2) because it is collinear with P ostt × IBj .

                                                            19
                                              [Figure 6 About Here]

    Figure 6 plots the point estimate of k , k  {-20, ... - 1, 1, ..., 17} and the corresponding 95%
confidence intervals. Panel A of Figure 6 suggests that, the spread differences between the (later)
treated bonds and the control bonds in the interbank market parallel those in the exchange market
before the the collateral expansion policy took effect on June 1, 2018. However, after the expansion
of the set of eligible collateral for MLF, the spread difference of the treated bonds and the control
bonds significantly decreased in the interbank market relative to that in the exchange market. The
magnitude reaches close to 100 bps about 30 trading days after the policy shock. The negative
impact on the spreads for treated bonds persists for over 60 trading days. Panel B of Figure 6
shows the pattern of k estimated when we use only the transactions of the dual-listed bonds is
similar, with slightly larger magnitudes.

Liquidity vs. Default Spreads We interpret the negative coefficient of 1 reported in Table
5 as evidence of the working of the collateral channel. One may be concerned, however, that the
expansion of MLF collateral may increase the market liquidity of the targeted bonds, therefore
decreases the spread of targeted bonds without necessarily changing their collateral values. For
example, it is possible that the policy changes the distribution of investors' belief and increases the
frequency of transactions of the targeted bonds and increase their market liquidity. To interpret the
findings in Table 5 as the evidence of collateral channel, it is crucial for us to distinguish between
the policy impact on liquidity spread and default spread.
    To this end, we follow Schwert (2017) to decompose the spread into liquidity spread and default
spread as follows. First, we construct the illiquidity measure in the existing finance literature
proposed by Amihud (2002). The illiquidity measure, which we denote by Amihud, for bond i in
market j at time t is based on the absolute daily return relative to the trading volume, averaged
over a seven-trading-day window around the focal date. Specifically,29

                                                              t+3
                                                          1       |rijs |
                                           Amihudijt =                    ,                              (4)
                                                          7 s=t-3 V olijs

                   |P   -P
                        ijs-1 |
where |rijs | = ijs|Pijs-1 |
                              is the absolute daily return constructed using Pijs , the clean close price
for bond i in bond market j on date s; and V olijs is the trading volume of bond i in market j on
day s, where s are the seven-trading-days around the focal date t. The higher is Amihudijt , the
lower is the liquidity of bond i in market j at date t because more liquid bonds are likely associated
with larger trading volumes and less day-to-day price volatility.
    Second, with the illiquidity measure constructed by (4), we follow Schwert (2017) to decompose
the yield spread of a bond into a liquidity spread and a default spread. In order to construct the
liquidity spread, we run, separately by quarter q  {1, 2, 3} and by market j , the following set of
  29
       As bond transactions are not frequent, we take a weekly moving average to calculate Amihudijt .



                                                         20
regressions:
                     Spreadijt = qj Amihudijt +  qj Xijt + BRij + t + it , if t  Dq                               (5)

where Amihudijt is the illiquidity measure constructed in (5), Xijt refers to a set of bond charac-
teristics such as issuance size, term to maturity, bond coupon rate, BRij is the bond rating fixed
effect, t is the trading day fixed effect, and Dq denotes the trading days in quarter q  {1, 2, 3}.30
By running the regressions of equation (5) separately for each quarter and each market, we generate
  ^
  qj . In addition, for each market j , we denote the 1st percentile of the distribution of computed
Amihudijt as Amihud1pj , and use it to benchmark the illiquidity measure of a very liquid bond in
market j .
      Now we follow Schwert (2017), and decompose the spread of bond i in market j at date t into
liquidity spread and default spread ; specifically, the liquidity spread of bond i in market j at date t
is calculated as:
                          LiquiditySpreadijt = qj (Amihudijt - Amihud1pj );                          (6)

and its default spread is simply the residual of its spread after subtracting the liquidity spread
estimated in (6):
                       Def aultSpreadijt = Spreadijt - LiquiditySpreadijt .                     (7)

    We then regress the liquidity spread and default spread constructed above as the dependent
variable, and run the baseline regression as specified in (1). The results are reported in Table 7.
The left panel uses the full sample and the right panel only the dual listed bond transactions.
Columns (1) and (4) simply replicate the results in Table 5. Columns (2) and (5) report the
results for liquidity spread, Columns (3) and (6) for the default spread. Column (2) shows that the
coefficient estimate of the triple interaction term Post × Treat × IB is positive and statistically
significant, suggesting that the treated bonds may have actually experienced an increase in the
liquidity spread in the interbank market after the policy shock. This is theoretically possible, for
example, if a large quantity of treatment bonds is used as collateral for MLF, which reduces the
available of such bonds for transactions in the interbank market. However, when we restrict to
the dual listed bonds only, we find in Column (5) that the causal impact of the MLF collateral
expansion has almost no effect on the liquidity spread of the treated bonds in the interbank market.
In contrast, we find that the coefficient estimates of the triple interaction term Post × Treat ×
IB are almost identical to those of Column (1) and (4) for the total spread. Thus we conclude
that almost all the decrease of the total spread is due to the decrease of the default spread, and
the liquidity spread is not significantly affected by the expansion of the MLF collateral.31 This
is consistent with the prediction of the leverage cycle theory that leverage allows more optimistic
investors to incorporate their opinions into the spread, and their perceived default risk is lower.
  30
     Recall from Section 4.1, our sample period is from 1/1/2018-8/31/2018, which covers three quarters.
  31
     We also examined the dynamics of the changes in liquidity spread and default spread separately using the
regression specification of (3). The change in default spread almost explains all the fluctuations in the total spread
due to the policy shock. Results are available from the authors upon request.


                                                         21
                                         [Table 7 About Here]

Heterogeneous Analysis. One of the policy objectives of PBOC's unconventional collateral-
based monetary policy to include the treated bonds as MLF eligible collateral is to adjust the
leverage structure of economy and free up funding for small firms (Xiaowei ), green firms and
agricultural (Green ) firms. To examine whether the expansion of MLF collateral indeed help achieve
these policy objectives, we conduct a heterogeneous analysis where we further allow Post × Treat ×
IB to interact with Green, Xiaowei or Sannong dummies in the baseline regression specification (1).
Since the dual listed bonds do not include any financial bonds (see Table 3), such a heterogeneous
analysis can be performed only using the full sample. Table 8 reports the results. We find that
Xiaowei bonds seem to have experienced a particularly large spread reduction after the policy shock
(additional 47.6 bps), while the estimates for the Green and Sannong bonds are quite noisy.

                                         [Table 8 About Here]


5        Primary Market: Data, Methods and Results
    Since the secondary market does not directly involve the financing of the bond issuers, to assess
the impact of the collateral-based monetary policy on the real economy it remains to be shown
whether the policy has decreased the borrowing cost of bond issuers in the primary market.
    The transition of the monetary policy effect from the secondary market to the primary market
relies on the fact that the tender process for new bond issuance ensures that the coupon rate is
correlated with the market rate of a comparable bond in the secondary market. In China, the
new corporate bond issuance is marked with several important dates: The bond issuer first has to
submit an application to National Development & Reform Commission (NDRC). The issuer usually
has to wait for 2-3 months for NDRC to process the application. After the approval, the issuer
can decide when and which market to issue the bonds. After the issuer has decided the time and
the place, a bond prospectus is published, and a tender process is scheduled. The tender day is
usually 2 trading days after the bond prospectus is issued. On the tender day, all qualified tenders
participate in a uniform-price auction where they submit sealed bids of yield-quantity pairs that
specify the amount they are willing to purchase at a specified minimum yield to the underwriter.
The market-clearing yield, which determines the coupon rate of the bond, is the yield at which
the aggregate demand submitted by all tenders equates the bond issuance amount. The bond is
settled on the following day, and the bond will be traded in the secondary market on the first
business day after the settlement.32 The tender process ensures that a new bond's coupon rate will
be closely related to that of an existing comparable bond in the secondary market. If the spreads
    32
     See Ding et al. (2019) for a description of the bond issuance process in China. They document the bond
overpricing in the primary bond market in China.




                                                    22
of comparable bonds in the secondary market have decreased, it is likely that the coupon rate of
new issuance would also decrease.
    In this section, we use bond issuance data to examine whether the expansion of MLF eligible
collateral resulted in lower financing cost for new bond issuers.


5.1    Data
Sample Selection. We focus on the issuance of corporate bonds and financial bonds. Following
the logic behind the sample selection rules used in Section 4 for the secondary market, we restrict the
sample to newly issued bonds rated at least AA. In baseline analysis we restrict the sample period
to 1/1/2018-08/31/2018; later we also use data from 1/1/2015-08/31/2015 to conduct a placebo
test. We choose to focus on the primary bond issued before 8/31/2018 because the applications for
such new bond issuances almost certainly would have been submitted to the NDRC for approval
before the policy shock date of June 1, 2018, because as we previously mentioned, it would typically
take NDRC 2-3 months to process a new bond issuance application. We restrict our analysis to
include new bonds issued after the policy date, but whose applications for approval before the policy
date to avoid potential biases from firms changing their venue of bond issuance (see Section 5.3 for
some evidence of firms shopping for the venue of bond issuance after August 1, 2018). It is possible
that some firms would take advantage of the monetary policy and shift their bond issuance from
the exchange market to the interbank market, which may result in a selection bias if bonds issued
by these "mover" firms are of lower default risk or higher liquidity than bonds of the same rating
issued by "non-mover" firms. Bond issuance information are obtained from WIND.

Construction of Spread. The dependent variable is spread, calculated as the difference between
coupon rate and the yield of ChinaBond Government Bond (CGB) with the same term to maturity
on the same day. In China, all bonds are issued at face value, therefore the yield to maturity at
issuance equals the coupon rate of the bonds.

                                    [Figures 7 and 8 About Here]

    We first provide a first glance of the effect of the expansion of MLF collateral on the issuance
spread of treated bonds. Figure 7 shows the monthly average bond spreads in the interbank market
and the exchange market, by rating categories, as well as the difference in the average spreads in the
two markets. The left graph uses data from the five months before the policy change, and the right
graph uses data from the three months after the policy change. It shows that the spread is lower
in the interbank market than in exchange market for all rating categories. However, comparing
the left and right panel reveals that the spread difference between the interbank market and the
exchange market is significantly lower for AA and AA+ rated bonds after the policy change, but
there is no change in the spread difference between the two markets for AAA rated bonds. Figure
8 shows the evolution of the differences in the average spreads of bonds in the two markets before

                                                  23
and after the expansion of MLF collateral by rating categories in five-day windows. The figure
suggests that, before the policy change, the spread difference between the interbank market and
the exchange market does not exhibit a clear trend for all three rating categories; however, after
the policy change, the AA and AA+ rated bonds experienced a sharp decline in spreads in the
interbank market relative to those in the exchange market; in contrast, the change for AAA rated
bonds (control bonds) is smaller and does not exhibit a significant decline.

Control Variables. Because a new bond cannot be issued both before and after the policy shock,
the identification strategy for the effect of the policy shock on the primary market spreads of the
treated bonds must be different from that for the secondary market. To ensure that the bonds
issued before the policy shock and those issued after the policy shock are comparable, we need to
include an exhaustive list of control variables that may be relevant for new bond yield rates. Now
we describe our control variables, which include bond level controls, bond issuer controls, bond
market level controls, and macroeconomic factors.

Bond Level Controls. For bond level controls we include the following variables from WIND:
    quantity of issuance; term; guaranteed or not; issued by SOE or not; puttable bond or not;
    callable bond or not;

Bond Issuer Controls. For bond issuer controls we include the following variables from WIND:
    debt to asset ratio; liquidity ratio; cash coverage ratio; logarithm of asset; logarithm of equity.

Bond Market Level Controls. For bond market level controls, we include the following vari-
    ables from WIND: daily total new issuance of bonds of the same rating category (AAA, AA+,
    or AA) and same type (financial bond, corporate bond, enterprise bond, medium term note)
    in the same market (a variable that is referred to as "Similar Bond Issuance" in Table 9);
    daily issuance of Treasury bonds (Chinese Government Bonds, CGB); and daily issuance of
    local government bonds (China Municipal Bonds, CMB).

Macroeconomic Factors. It is also important for us to account for macroeconomics factors other
    than the MLF collateral expansion on June 1, 2018. We control for quarterly growth rate
    of GDP in the province of the issuer, which we obtain from China Statistical Yearbook. In
    addition, we control for the monthly M2 growth rate, which we obtain from the People's Bank
    of China. Finally, we control for the impact from the 100 bps bank reserve requirements ratio
    (RRR) cut on April 25, 2018 for commercial and foreign banks to pay back loans obtained
    via MLF.33 To allow for the possibility that the RRR cut impacts the spread of corporate
    bonds differently in the interbank market and the exchange market, we add a series of control
  33
     The reserve requirement ratio (RRR) was 17 percent for large banks, and 15 percent for smaller banks. The move
injected an estimated 1.3 Trillion yuan into the money market, 900 billion of which were used to repay loans via MLF,
and 400 billion yuan were injected into banking system. See Economic Watch: China's monetary policy unchanged
despite reserve requirement cut at: http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2018-04/19/c_137121802.htm.


                                                         24
      variables to account for the RRR cut impact, including RRRcuti × AAAi ,RRRcuti × AAplusi ,
      RRRcuti × AAAi × IBi , RRRcuti × AAplusi × IBi , where RRRcuti is a dummy equals 1
      if the date of issuance is after April 25, 2018 and 0 otherwise, IBi is a dummy which equals
      to 1 if the bond is listed in interbank market, AAA is a dummy if the bond is AAA rated
      corporate bond, and AAplus is a dummy if the bond is AA+ rated corporate bond.


5.2    Baseline Regression Specifications
   Our baseline equation for the primary market is based on the following triple-differences (DDD)
specification:

           Spreadit = 1 P ostt + 2 T reati + 3 IBi + 4 P ostt × T reati + 5 P ostt × IBi
                                                                                                     (8)
                     + 6 T reati × IBi + 7 P ostt × T reati × IBi +  Xit + t + it

where Spreadit , the dependent variable, is the yield of bond i issued at date t relative to the yield
of CGB bonds at date t; P ostt is a dummy which equals to 1 if issue date t was after June 1, 2018,
and 0 otherwise; T reati is a dummy which equals to 1 if bond i belongs to the categories of bonds
that became newly eligible for MLF collaterals on June 1, 2018, i.e. corporate bonds rated AA
and AA+, and financial bonds of Xiaowei, Green and Sannong firms rated AA or higher; IBi is a
dummy which equals to 1 if bond i is issued in the interbank market; Xit is a list of control variables
discussed in the previous section; and finally, t are quarter fixed effects. We focus specifically on
coefficient 7 for the triple interaction term P ostt × T reati × IBi .
    Table 9 presents the summary statistics of the variables used for primary market analysis. Panel
A shows that, of the 1,791 new bond issuances in our sample of 1/1/2018-12/31/2018, 1090 (60.9%
of the total) were issued in the interbank market and 701 (39.1%) in the exchange market; 37.8%
of the new bond issuance took place after June 1, 2018; and about 43.3% of the new bonds were
treated bonds. The mean issuance size of the new bonds is 1.39 billion yuan, and the bonds issued
in the interbank market tend to have a larger size than those issued in the exchange market: 1.50
Billion yuan for the interbank market vs. 1.2 billion yuan for the exchange market. The mean
terms to maturity are about 4.28 years, and those issued in the interbank market have a slightly
longer term. Panel B shows that 53% of the new bonds are rated AAA, 28% AA+, and 19% AA.
Panel C shows that 89% of the new bonds are corporate bonds, and about 11% are financial bonds.

                                         [Table 9 About Here]


5.3    Baseline Result, Robustness Checks and Heterogeneous Analysis
Baseline Result. Table 10 presents the baseline results. The coefficient of particular interest is
that of the interaction term P ostt × T reati × IBi , which is estimated to be negative and statistically
significantly in all specifications. In Columns (1)-(5), the regression is weighted by bond issuance
sizes. In our view, the bond issuance size weighted regressions provides a more useful estimate on

                                                   25
how the collateral expansion affects the overall funding cost of borrowers in the economy. In the
preferred specification where we include all the relevant control variables, we find that the spread
of the treated bonds is 53.8 bps lower in the treatment market (the interbank market) relative to
the control market (the control market). The estimates suggests, for a firm issuing 1.4 billion yuan
corporate bond (which is the mean bond issuance size of our sample) with semi-annual coupon
payment, the expansion of MLF collateral will save its borrowing cost for over 7.53 million yuan
every year. This is a substantial reduction in the funding cost of the firms that issue treated bonds
in the interbank market. In Column (6), we also report the results from an unweighted regression,
where we estimate that the MLF collateral expansion reduces the spread of treated bonds by 37.1
bps.

                                    [Table Table 10 About Here]

Parallel Trends and Dynamic Effects. In order to examine the parallel trend assumption
necessary for the DDD strategy specified in (8) to work, we also estimated the following specification:

         Spreadit = 1 P ostt + 2 T reati + 3 IBi + 4 P ostt × T reati + 5 P ostt × IBi
                                          k=9
                                                                                                   (9)
                   + 6 T reati × IBi +             k M onthk
                                                           it × T reati × IBi +  Xit + t + it
                                         k=1,k=5


where M onthk
            it is dummy which equals 1 if bond i is issued in the k
                                                                    th
                                                                       month in 2018. We normalize
the dummy for the fifth (k = 5) month to 0 as the benchmark.

                                         [Figure 9 about Here]

     Figure 9 presents the estimated values of k based on equation (9) for k  {1, ..., 9}. It shows
that, prior to the policy shock, the k estimates are small and tend to be statistically insignificant,
i.e., before the policy shock, the difference in the spreads in the interbank market and in the
exchange market are similar for the treated bonds and for the control bonds. After the policy
shock, the spreads of treated bonds in the interbank market are significantly reduced relative to the
control bonds. The effect is immediate and persisted for all three months after the policy shock in
our estimation sample.

Seasonal Effect? A Placebo Test. We used only the new bond issuance data within three
months of the policy shock to deal with the potential selection bias from "movers" choosing to issue
their bonds in the interbank market. This short post-policy sample period, however, introduces a
possible concern: maybe the changes in the difference of the spreads of the treated bonds in the
interbank market and in the exchange market are driven by a seasonal effect that differentially
impacts the interbank market and the exchange market, instead of the policy effect. To address
such a concern, we conduct the following placebo test: we use the new bond issuance data for bonds

                                                     26
issued between 1/1/2015 and 8/31/2015 to re-run regression equation (8), setting June 1, 2015 as
the factitious policy date.34 The variable P ostt is redefined so that it equals 1 if the bond is issued
after June 1, 2015, and 0 otherwise.
    Table 11 reports the result from this placebo test. We find that, different from the findings
reported in Table 10, the coefficient estimates of the triple interaction term P ostt × T reati × IBi
in this placebo test tend to be statistically insignificant, and if anything, of a positive sign. This
implies that seasonal factors are unlikely the driver for the findings reported in Table 10.
                                             [ Table 11 about Here]

Heterogeneous Analysis. It is also interesting to see whether there are heterogeneous effects
of the expansion of the collateral eligible bonds for MLF depending on the sector of the bond
issuer. Table 12 reports the regression results from heterogeneous analysis, where we add additional
interaction terms of P ostt × T reati × IBi with Green and Sannong. We find that the patterns are
generally consistent with those in the secondary market. The Green and Sannong bonds see a larger
decrease in spread.35 The magnitude of the impact is large for these bonds, ranging from 2-4 times
the impact of an average targeted bonds.
                                             [ Table 12 about Here]

Shopping for "Venue"? Results reported in Table 10 provide strong evidence that the collateral
expansion monetary policy reduced the yield of the targeted bonds in the interbank market relative
to that in the exchange market. This of course has direct implications of funding costs for the firms
issuing the targeted bonds in the interbank market. An additional implication is that, to the extent
that bond issuers have a choice of which market ­ the interbank market or the exchange market
­ to issue their bonds, we may expect that eligible firms would take advantage of the policy and
issue bonds in interbank market. We call this phenomenon "shopping for venue." Recall that any
new bond issuance application needs to be submitted to NDRC for approval, which takes about
two to three months typically. That is, even though the policy shock occurred on June 1, 2018,
the effect of the policy on the venue of the new bond issuance should not manifest itself until at
least August of 2018. This only for results here, we redefine the L.P ostt variable to take value 1
if t is after August 1, 2018. In addition, we include all new bonds issued before 12/31/2018 in our
analysis sample.36
     To test this hypothesis, we estimate the following logistic regression model:

                      IBit = 1 P ostt + 2 T reati + 3 P ostt × T reati +  Xit + it ,                             (10)
  34
      We choose the data from 2015 for the placebo test because China Securities Depository & Clearing Co. Ltd
(CSDC) introduced important changes to the bond market both in 2017 and 2016.
   35
      We did not examine the heterogeneity between Xiaowei Bonds and other bonds because there were only two
new Xiaowei Bond issued during 1/1/2018-08/31/2018.
   36
      Table A.1 in the on-line appendix provides the summary statistics of the sample of all bonds issued in 2018 used
in the analysis reported in Table 13.

                                                         27
where the dependent variable IBit = 1 if new bond i is issued in the interbank market at date t;
P ostt = 1 if the bond issuance date t is after August 1, 2018; T reati = 1 if bond i is one of the
targeted bonds; Xit stands for the same sets of control variables we described in Subsection 5.1,
and the coefficient of interest is 3 for the interaction term P ostt × T reati . We expect that 3 will
be positive and statistically significant if targeted firms engage in venue shopping in that they are
more likely to apply to NDRC to issue their bonds in the interbank market after the policy shock.

                                        [ Table 13 about Here]

    Table 13 presents the result from the logistic regressions specified by equation (10). In the
preferred specification reported in Column (4) where we control for month fixed effects, as well as
all the controls we described in Subsection 5.1, we find that, indeed, ceteris paribus, firms are more
likely to apply to issue the treated bonds in the interbank market after the June 1, 2018 policy
shock of MLF collateral expansion. The coefficient estimates of L.Post × Treat are positive and
statistically significant. The coefficient estimates implies that, after June 1, 2018, the odds ratio
that firms issuing treated bonds apply to have their bonds issued in the interbank market went up
by 60 percent more relative to firms issuing control bonds. That is, firms are indeed more likely to
choose the venue with a lower funding cost to issue their bonds.


6    Conclusion
    In this paper, we provide a causal evaluation of collateral-based unconventional monetary policy
on asset prices in the secondary market and on the real economy. This is an empirically challenging
problem because of the well-known policy endogeneity problem. We in the estimation of the causal
effects of collateral-based monetary policy, we exploit the unique institutional features of Chinese
bond market, namely, dual-listed bonds are traded in two largely segmented markets: the interbank
market regulated by the Central Bank, and the exchange market regulated by the securities regu-
lator. During a policy shift in our study period (June 1, 2018), China's Central Bank included a
class of previously ineligible bonds in the interbank market to become eligible collateral for financial
institutions to borrow money from its Medium-Term Lending Facility (MLF). These bonds that
were newly eligible as MLF collateral are referred to as ``treated bonds". However, these treatment
bonds are treated only in the interbank market ("treatment market" ) but not in the exchange mar-
ket (the "control market"). Since many of these treatment bonds are dual-listed in both markets,
we can use the changes in the spread difference between the "control" and "treatment" bonds in the
exchange market, which reflects the possibly differential impact of time varying factors on the two
groups of bonds. as the counterfactual outcome of the treatment bonds, if they did not receive the
treatment. Thus, this policy shift allows us to implement a triple-difference strategy to estimate
the causal impact of the collateral-based unconventional monetary policy.
    Our results provide corroborative support for the leverage cycle theory which predicts that
the collateral eligibility of an asset for MLF will increase its price (i.e. reduce its spread) in the

                                                  28
secondary market. We find the spreads of treated bonds in the secondary market are reduced by
42-62 bps on average. We also find that the collateral effects pass through to the primary bond
market, where issuance spread of targeted bonds is reduced by 54 bps.
    The finding is in support of effectiveness of collateral-based policy tool in reducing financial
costs in the economy. The US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, as well as many
other central banks, have been using collateral-based monetary policy extensively after the Great
Financial Crisis. To the extent that in the modern collateral-based financial system, every financial
contract is a pair of a promise and associated collateral to back the promise, the findings in this
paper may suggest a stronger case for collateral-based monetary policy. Alongside the traditional
interest-rate based tools, collateral-based tools can make monetary policy more effective in reducing
financing cost in targeted sectors, both for economic and social purposes. In this case, the central
bank can manage a collateral basket, and by changing the eligibility and haircuts of the collateral in
the basket (intensive margin) and changing the composition of the collateral in the basket (extensive
margin), the central banks can better navigate and moderate financial cycles and business cycles.
    Many interesting questions remain to be answered. This paper provides evidence on price
(spread) effect of monetary policy. To fully access the effects on corporate financing, evidence on
quantity adjustment, e.g. issuance of bonds in the primary market, would also be informative. As
important, we should also be cautious about the potential distortions caused by the collateral-based
monetary policies. For instance, the policy may induce risk-taking of financial institutions towards
certain bonds, worsen the quality of the overall collateral, and may also affect bond issuers' capital
structure. These can increase the fragility of the financial system. The causal effects on these
margins, and the design of the collateral-based monetary policy that strikes an optimal balance,
are fascinating avenues for future research.


References
Acharya, Viral V, Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger, and Christian Hirsch, "Whatever It Takes: The
  Real Effects Of Unconventional Monetary Policy," The Review of Financial Studies, 2019, 32 (9),
  3366­3411.

Amihud, Yakov, "Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects," Journal
 of Financial Markets, 2002, 5 (1), 31­56.

Amstad, Marlene and Zhiguo He, "Chinese Bond Market and Interbank Market," Technical Report,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Ara´
   ujo, Alo´
           isio, Susan Schommer, and Michael Woodford, "Conventional and unconventional mon-
  etary policy with endogenous collateral constraints," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 2015, 7 (1), 1­43.

  , , and , "Real Effects of Interest-rate Policy and Central-bank asset Purchases with Endoge-
  nous Collateral Constraints," 2019.


                                                 29
Ashcraft, Adam, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Two monetary tools: Interest rates
  and haircuts," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2011, 25 (1), 143­180.

Benetton, Matteo, Davide Fantino et al., Competition And The Pass-Through of Unconventional
  Monetary Policy: Evidence From TLTROs, Banca d'Italia, 2018.

Buiter, Willem. H., "Quantitative Easing And Qualitative Easing: A Terminological And Taxo-
  nomic Proposal," Financial Times, Willem Buiter's mavercon blog, 2008.

Chen, Hui, Zhuo Chen, Zhiguo He, Jinyu Liu, and Rengming Xie, "Pledgeability and Asset Prices:
 Evidence from the Chinese Corporate Bond Markets," University of Chicago, Becker Friedman
 Institute for Economics Working Paper, 2018, (2018-82).

Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford, "The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument of Mon-
 etary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2011, 58 (1), 54­79.

Ding, Yi, Wei Xiong, and Jinfan Zhang, "Overpricing In China's Corporate Bond Market," Working
  Paper, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen and Princeton University, 2019.

Fiore, Fiorella De, Marie Hoerova, and Harald Uhlig, "Money Markets, Collateral And Monetary
  Policy," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Fostel, Ana and John Geanakoplos, "Tranching, Cds, And Asset Prices: How Financial Innovation
  Can Cause Bubbles And Crashes," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2012, 4 (1),
  190­225.

Freyaldenhoven, Simon, Christian Hansen, and Jesse M Shapiro, "Pre-Event Trends In The Panel
  Event-Study Design," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (9), 3307­38.

Galbraith, John Kenneth, The Great Crash 1929, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2009.

Garleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Margin-Based Asset Pricing And Deviations From
 The Law Of One Price," The Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24 (6), 1980­2022.

Geanakoplos, John, "Promises, promises," The Economy As An Evolving Complex System Ii, 1997,
 27, 285.

  , "The Leverage Cycle," Nber Macroeconomics Annual, 2010, 24 (1), 1­66.

  and Haobin Wang, "Quantitative Easing, Collateral Constraints, and Financial Spillovers," 2018.

   and William R Zame, "Collateral Equilibrium, I: A Basic Framework," Economic Theory, 2014,
  56 (3), 443­492.

Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, "A Model Of Unconventional Monetary Policy," Journal of mon-
 etary Economics, 2011, 58 (1), 17­34.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, "Securitized Banking And The Run On Repo," Journal of
 Financial economics, 2012, 104 (3), 425­451.

Hansman, Christopher, Harrison Hong, Wenxi Jiang, Yu-Jane Liu, and Juan-Juan Meng, "Riding
  The Credit Boom," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

                                              30
Joyce, Michael, David Miles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos, "Quantitative Easing And Un-
  conventional Monetary Policy­An Introduction," The Economic Journal, 2012, 122 (564), F271­
  F288.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, "Ecb Policies Involving Gov-
  ernment Bond Purchases: Impact And Channels," Review of Finance, 2017, 22 (1), 1­44.

Lenel, Moritz, "Safe Assets, Collateralized Lending and Monetary Policy," Technical Report, SIEPR
  Discussion Paper 2017.

Maggio, Marco Di, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer, "How Quantitative Easing Works: Ev-
 idence On The Refinancing Channel," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2016.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson, "Identification in Macroeconomics," Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 2018, 32 (3), 59­86.

Nyborg, Kjell G, "Central Bank Collateral Frameworks," Journal of Banking and Finance, 2017,
 76, 198­214.

  , Collateral Frameworks: The Open Secret Of Central Banks, Cambridge University Press, 2017.

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider, "Payments, Credit And Asset Prices," 2017.

Rodnyansky, Alexander and Olivier M Darmouni, "The Effects Of Quantitative Easing On Bank
  Lending Behavior," The Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (11), 3858­3887.

Schwert, Michael, "Municipal Bond Liquidity And Default Risk," The Journal of Finance, 2017,
  72 (4), 1683­1722.

van Bekkum, Sjoerd, Marc Gabarro, and Rustom M Irani, "Does a Larger Menu Increase Appetite?
  Collateral Eligibility and Credit Supply," The Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 31 (3), 943­979.

Wang, Yongqin and Hongxun Xu, "How Leverage Affects Asset Prices: Evidence from a Natural
 Experiment in China's Bond Markets," Journal of Financial Research, 2019, (2), 1­19.




                                                31
     Tables and Figures

                               Table 1: Collateral-based Monetary Policy Tools of People's Bank of China before 2018


        Name               Short-term                        Standing                   Medium-term                          Pledged
                           Liquidity                         Lending                    Lending                              Supplementary
                           Operation,                        Facility,                  Facility,                            Lending,
                           SLO                               SLF                        MLF                                  PSL


        Launch time        2013.1                            2013.1                     2014.9                               2014.4


        Maturity           <7D                               1-3M                       3M/6M/1Y                             3-5Y
32




        Collateral         Treasury bonds,                   High credit rating         Treasury bonds,                      High credit rating
                           central Bank bills,               corporate bonds            central Bank bills,                  corporate bonds and
                           policy bank financial bonds,      and high quality asset     policy bank financial bonds,         high quality asset
                           commercial bank bonds                                        corporate bonds and Sannong,
                                                                                        Green and Xiaowei bonds
                                                                                        rated at least AA


        Target                                                                          Small firms, agriculture             Projects with specific purpose

     Note : The collaterals documented in this table are eligible assets for the corresponding monetary policy tools as of 2018.
                                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics for Secondary Market: All Bonds
      Panel A                                              Full Sample                                  Interbank Market                                  Exchange Market
      Variable                            Obs     Mean      Std.Dev.   Min        Max      Obs       Mean    Std.Dev. Min               Max     Obs     Mean  Std.Dev. Min             Max

      Spread (%)                         78,592    3.123     2.190     0.263      14.43   35,406      2.547      1.294      0.263     14.43    43,186    3.594   2.619     0.263       14.43
      Default Spread (%)                 78,440    3.041     2.174    -2.081      14.43   35,314      2.444      1.265     -1.830     14.43    43,126    3.530   2.599    -2.081       14.43
      Liquidity Spread (%)               78,440   0.0829     0.253       0        2.344   35,314      0.103      0.235        0       2.093    43,126   0.0666   0.265       0         2.344
      Post                               78,592   0.420      0.493       0          1     35,406      0.404      0.491        0         1      43,186   0.433    0.495       0           1
      IB                                 78,592   0.451      0.498       0          1     35,406        1          0          1          1     43,186      0       0         0            0
      Treat                              78,592   0.595      0.491       0          1     35,406      0.548      0.498        0         1      43,186   0.634    0.482       0           1
      Quantity (Billion RMB)             78,592   2.079      2.668    0.0600        50    35,406      2.225      3.423      0.100       50     43,186    1.960   1.821    0.0600         20
      Term (Year)                        78,592   2.955      1.620       1        17.87   35,406      3.069      1.739        1       17.87    43,186   2.861    1.509       1         15.58
      Volume (Million RMB)               78,592   56.80      141.6   0.000100     6000    35,406      115.8      191.9     0.0590      6000    43,186    8.443   32.91   0.000100      3000
      Clean Price (RMB)                  78,592   90.44      16.76     19.30       122    35,406      93.67      13.29       20       119.6    43,186   87.79    18.73     19.30        122
      Amihud (% per million RMB)         78,440   0.375      1.945       0        18.51   35,314    0.000136   0.000264   2.06e-07   0.00185   43,126   0.683    2.583       0         18.51

      Panel B                                              Full Sample                                    Interbank Market                                  Exchange Market
      Bond Rating                            Freq.                       Percent                 Freq.                         Percent             Freq.                      Percent

      AA                                     23,640                       30.08                  9,831                          27.77              13,809                      31.98
      AA+                                    23,684                       30.14                   9,974                         28.17              13,710                      31.75
      AAA                                    31,268                       39.79                  15,601                         44.06              15,667                      36.28
      Total                                  78,592                        100                   35,406                          100               43,186                       100

      Panel C                                              Full Sample                                    Interbank Market                                  Exchange Market
      Bond Type                              Freq.                       Percent                 Freq.                         Percent             Freq.                      Percent
33




      Corporate Bonds                        76,282                       97.06                  33,826                         95.53              42,456                      98.31
      - Enterprise Bond                      28,460                       36.21                  12,245                         34.58              16,215                      37.55
      - Exchange-traded Corporate Bond       26,241                       33.39                     -                             -                26,241                      60.76
      - Medium-term Note                     21,581                       27.45                  21,581                         60.95                 -                          -
      Financial Bond                         2,310                        2.940                  1,580                          4.460               730                        1.690
      Total                                  78,592                        100                   35,406                          100               43,186                       100

      Panel D                                              Full Sample                                    Interbank Market                                  Exchange Market
      Unique Bond Numbers                    Freq.                       Percent                 Freq.                         Percent             Freq.                      Percent

      Corporate Bonds                        5,650                        93.28                  4,093                          92.87              2,083                       95.73
      - Enterprise Bond                      1,880                        31.04                  1,770                          40.16               636                        29.23
      - Exchange-traded Corporate Bond       1,447                        23.89                    -                              -                1,447                       66.50
      - Medium-term Note                     2,323                        38.35                  2,323                          52.71                 -                          -
      Financial Bond                          407                         6.720                   314                           7.130                93                        4.270
      Total                                  6,057                         100                   4,407                           100               2,176                        100




     Note : This table provides sample summary statistics for variables used in our secondary market baseline regressions. Panel A describes the variables used
     in the regressions in Section 4. Spread, Default Spread, and Liquidity Spread are in percentage term. Post is a dummy which equals 1 if the date is after
     June 1, 2018; and 0, otherwise. IB is a dummy which equals 1 if the bond is listed in interbank market, and 0 otherwise. Treat is a dummy which equals 1
     if the bond is corporate bonds rated AA and AA+ and financial bond in the targeted sectors rated at least AA, and 0 otherwise. Quantity is the total
     value of the bond issuance, measured in billion-yuan term. Term is the bond's remaining terms to maturity, measured in year. Volume is the daily trading
     volume of the bond, measured in million-yuan term. Clean Price is the clean close price of bonds, measured in RMB. Amihud is estimated from regressions
     with Eq. (4), quarter by quarter, measured in percentages.
                                     Table 3: Summary Statistics for Secondary Markets: Dual-listed Bonds Only
      Panel A                                       Full Sample                                    Interbank Market                                Exchange Market
      Variable                     Obs       Mean     Std.Dev. Min         Max     Obs      Mean       Std.Dev. Min          Max       Obs       Mean  Std.Dev. Min            Max

      Spread (%)                   16,831    3.478    2.067   0.263        14.43   3,393    2.612      1.152      0.263      14.43     13,438    3.696    2.187   0.263        14.43
      Default Spread (%)           16,802    3.414    2.054   -2.081       14.43   3,381    2.482      1.107      -0.847     13.29     13,421    3.648    2.168   -2.081       14.43
      Liquidity Spread (%)         16,802    0.0659   0.225   0            2.344   3,381    0.130      0.296      0          2.093     13,421    0.0498   0.201   0            2.344
      Post                         16,831    0.423    0.494   0            1       3,393    0.403      0.491      0          1         13,438    0.428    0.495   0            1
      IB                           16,831    0.202    0.401   0            1       3,393    1          0          1          1         13,438    0        0       0            0
      Treat                        16,831    0.765    0.424   0            1       3,393    0.787      0.410      0          1         13,438    0.759    0.428   0            1
      Quantity (Billion RMB)       16,831    1.569    1.570   0.300        20      3,393    1.658      1.986      0.300      20        13,438    1.547    1.445   0.300        20
      Term (Year)                  16,831    2.852    1.544   1            12.26   3,393    2.905      1.496      1.003      12.26     13,438    2.838    1.556   1            12.22
      Volume (Million RMB)         16,831    15.94    44.53   0.00100      1000    3,393    74.32      73.89      0.0590     1000      13,438    1.203    5.222   0.00100      128.5
      Clean Price (RMB)            16,831    72.41    22.63   19.30        116     3,393    76.55      22.59      20.09      110.6     13,438    71.37    22.52   19.30        116
      Amihud (% per million RMB)   16,802    0.432    1.919   0            18.51   3,381    0.000167   0.000318   2.06e-07   0.00185   13,421    0.541    2.133   0            18.51

      Panel B                                       Full Sample                                    Interbank Market                                   Exchange Market
      Bond Rating                        Freq.                    Percent                  Freq.                       Percent               Freq.                      Percent

      AA                                 7,176                       42.64                 1,391                        41.00                5,785                       43.05
      AA+                                 5,697                      33.85                 1,278                        37.67                 4,419                      32.88
      AAA                                 3,958                      23.52                  724                         21.34                3,234                       24.07
34




      Total                              16,831                       100                  3,393                         100                 13,438                       100

      Panel C                                       Full Sample                                    Interbank Market                                   Exchange Market
      Bond Type                          Freq.                    Percent                  Freq.                       Percent               Freq.                      Percent

      Enterprise Bond                    16,831                      100                   3,393                         100                 13,438                      100
      Total                              16,831                      100                   3,393                         100                 13,438                      100

      Panel D                                       Full Sample                                    Interbank Market                                   Exchange Market
      Unique Bond Numbers                Freq.                    Percent                  Freq.                       Percent               Freq.                      Percent

      Enterprise Bond                     526                        100                   526                           100                  526                        100



     Note : This table provides sample summary statistics for variables used in our secondary market baseline regressions. Panel A describes the variables used
     in the regressions in Section 4. Spread, Default Spread, and Liquidity Spread are in percentage term. Post is a dummy which equals 1 if the date is after
     June 1, 2018; and 0, otherwise. IB is a dummy which equals 1 if the bond is listed in interbank market, and 0 otherwise. Treat is a dummy which equals 1
     if the bond is corporate bonds rated AA and AA+ and financial bond in the targeted sectors rated at least AA, and 0 otherwise. Quantity is the total
     value of the bond issuance, measured in billion-yuan term. Term is the bond's remaining terms to maturity, measured in year. Volume is the daily trading
     volume of the bond, measured in million-yuan term. Clean Price is the clean close price of bonds, measured in RMB. Amihud is estimated from regressions
     with Eq. (4), quarter by quarter, measured in percentages.
                      Table 4: Differences between the Spreads of Dual-listed Bonds in the Interbank and Exchange Markets

              Panel A
                                                            Obs      Mean     Std.Dev.     Min       Max
              Absolute Difference in Spreads (bps)
                                                            1,179    109.2    135.4        0.0185    1166
             Panel B
             Absolute Difference in Spreads (bps) 0-0.1              0.1-1     1-5       5-10       10-50     50-100 100+           Total
             Obs.                                 8                  34        76        47         309       272    433            1,179
             Percentage                           0.68%              2.88%     6.45%     3.99%      26.21%    23.07% 36.73%         100.00%

     Note : This table presents the absolute value of the difference between the spreads in the interbank market and the exchange market for the same bond,
     based on "simultaneous transactions," following the construction in Chen et al. (2018). Denote the date of trasaction in the interbank market as t. If there
     are transactions of the same bond in the exchange market that falls within [t - 2, t + 2] trading window, then these transactions are called the
     "simultaneous" exchange transaction. The difference between the spreads is simply the spread of the simultaneous exchange transaction closest to date t
     minus the interbank spread in date t of the same bond.
35
                       Table 5: Baseline Regression Results for Secondary Market

                                                                Full Sample      Dual-listed Bonds
                                                                                       Only
              Variables                                              (1)                 (2)

              Post × Treat × IB                                  -0.618***             -0.419*
                                                                  (0.171)              (0.235)
              Post × Treat                                       0.487***
                                                                  (0.153)

              Bond Type × Bond Rating × Date FE                     Yes                  Yes
              Market × Date FE                                      Yes                  Yes
              Bond FE                                               Yes                  Yes
              Obs.                                                 77,731               16,661
              Adjusted R2                                          0.860                0.812

                                                                                                               
Note : Regression equation is specified by (1). Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.   ,   , and
represent statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                         36
     Table 6: The Spillover Effect of the MLF Collateral Expansion on the Interbank Market

                                                                Full Sample      Dual-listed Bonds
                                                                                       Only
              Variables                                              (1)                 (2)

              Post × Treat × IB                                  -0.614***             -0.447*
                                                                   (0.168)             (0.229)
              Post × IB                                             -0.104             -0.343*
                                                                   (0.106)             (0.183)
              Post × Treat                                        0.475***
                                                                   (0.147)

              Bond Type × Bond Rating × Date FE                     Yes                  Yes
              Bond FE                                               Yes                  Yes
              Obs.                                                 77,731               16,661
              Adjusted R2                                          0.859                0.811

                                                                                                               
Note : Regression equation is specified by (3). Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.   ,   , and
represent statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                         37
                                        Table 7: Liquidity Spread vs. Default Spread in the Secondary Market

                                                                       Full Sample                                            Dual-listed Bonds Only
      Variables                                    Total Spread     Liquidity Spread     Default Spread        Total Spread    Liquidity Spread Default Spread
                                                        (1)                (2)                (3)                   (4)                 (5)          (6)

      Post × Treat × IB                              -0.618***          0.0662***           -0.682***             -0.419*            -0.00123            -0.416*
                                                       (0.171)           (0.0235)            (0.168)              (0.235)            (0.0393)            (0.228)
      Post × Treat                                    0.487***          -0.0966**           0.581***
                                                       (0.153)           (0.0445)            (0.159)

      Bond Type × Bond Rating × Date FE                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
      Market × Date FE                                  Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
      Bond FE                                           Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
      Obs.                                             77,731             77,579              77,579               16,661             16,631              16,631
      Adjusted R2                                      0.860              0.275               0.854                0.812              0.337               0.811

     Note : Regression equation is specified by (1) for Columns (1) and (4); for Columns (2) and (5), the dependent variables are replaced by the liquidity
38




     spread constructed in (6); and for Columns (3) and(6), they ar replaced by the default spread constructed in (7). Standard errors are clustered at the bond
     level.  , , and  represent statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                 Table 8: Heterogeneous Effects on Spreads in the Secondary Market

     Variables                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)

     Post × Treat                                      0.00373       0.470***      0.485***        -0.110
                                                       (0.406)        (0.153)       (0.153)       (0.469)
     Post × Treat × IB                                -0.620***      -0.602***     -0.618***     -0.604***
                                                       (0.171)        (0.171)       (0.171)       (0.171)
      Post × Treat × IB × Green                          0.511                                      0.581
                                                        (0.401)                                    (0.450)
      Post × Treat × IB × Xiaowei                                    -0.476***                   -0.473***
                                                                      (0.0736)                    (0.0737)
      Post × Treat × IB × Sannong                                                    0.0392         0.620
                                                                                     (0.198)       (0.490)
     Bond Type × Bond Rating × Date FE                    Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
     Market × Date FE                                     Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
     Bond FE                                              Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
     Obs.                                               77,731        77,731         77,731        77,731
     Adjusted R2                                         0.860        0.860           0.860         0.860

Note : Regression equation is similar to that specified by (1), with the addition of the quadruple interaction terms
of Post × Treat × IB with Green, Xiaowei and Sannong respectively to capture the heterogeneous effects. Full
sample is used in the regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.  , , and  represent statistical
significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                        39
                                       Table 9: Summary Statistics for the Primary Market Data: 2018/1/1-2018/8/31
      Panel A                                                               Full Sample                               Interbank Market                              Exchange Market
      Variables                                            Obs     Mean      Std.Dev.   Min        Max      Obs     Mean  Std.Dev. Min          Max      Obs     Mean  Std.Dev. Min           Max

        Dep.Var.     Spread                                1,791    2.537     1.029    0.503       5.889    1,090   2.500    0.988   0.568     5.249     701      2.594    1.087   0.503     5.889

       Dummies       Post                                  1,791    0.378     0.485       0             1   1,090   0.347    0.476     0            1    701      0.427    0.495     0            1
                     IB                                    1,791    0.609     0.488       0             1   1,090     1        0       1            1    701        0        0       0            0
                     Treat                                 1,791    0.433     0.496       0             1   1,090   0.484    0.500     0            1    701      0.354    0.478     0            1

       Bond Info     Quantity (Billion RMB)                1,791    1.389     1.930   0.0300           40   1,090   1.504    2.322   0.0800         40   701      1.211    1.042   0.0300    7.200
                     Term                                  1,791   4.275      1.846   0.917            15   1,090   4.393    2.016      2           15   701     4.093     1.527   0.917      15
                     Guarantee                             1,791   0.111      0.314      0             1    1,090   0.105    0.306      0           1    701     0.121     0.327      0        1
                     SOE                                   1,791    0.782     0.413      0              1   1,090   0.858    0.349      0            1   701      0.665    0.472      0        1
                     Put                                   1,791    0.341     0.474      0              1   1,090   0.158    0.365      0           1    701     0.626     0.484      0        1
                     Call                                  1,791   0.0882     0.284      0              1   1,090   0.120    0.325      0            1   701     0.0385    0.193      0        1

       Issuer Info   Detb Asset Ratio                      1,791    62.33     18.23       0        95.59    1,090   62.17    18.70      0      95.17     701      62.58    17.48      0      95.59
                     Liquidity Ratio                       1,791    3.795     68.24       0        2887     1,090   5.194    87.45      0      2887      701      1.619    1.774      0      26.46
                     Cash Coverage Ratio                   1,791    0.501     2.048    -2.571      3.024    1,090   0.431    2.070   -2.571    3.024     701      0.610    2.010   -2.571    3.024
                     Log Assets                            1,766    24.99     1.394     19.93      30.68    1,078   25.04    1.424   20.76     30.68     688      24.91    1.342    19.93    27.78
                     Log Equity                            1,766    23.86     1.259     19.35      29.00    1,078   23.90    1.281   19.84     29.00     688      23.80    1.221    19.35    26.64

      Market Info    Similar Bond Issuance (Billion RMB)   1,791    4.885     5.037   0.0300        40      1,090   5.363    5.638   0.0800     40       701      4.144    3.812   0.0300    14.60
                     CMB Issuance (Billion RMB)            1,791    24.82     34.79      0         176.9    1,090   18.38    22.72      0      88.44     701      34.84    46.11      0      176.9
                     CGB Issuance (Billion RMB)            1,791    16.80     61.68      0         500.2    1,090   15.51    50.78      0      250.1     701      18.81    75.56      0      500.2

       Macro Info     GDP                                  1,774   11.63      2.895    -13.58      20.30    1,081   11.65    2.725   -13.58    20.30     693      11.59    3.143   -13.58    20.30
                      M2                                   1,791   8.869      0.276    8.174       9.233    1,090   8.880    0.282    8.174    9.233     701      8.852    0.265    8.174    9.233
                     IB × AA+                              1,791   0.180      0.385      0           1      1,090   0.296    0.457      0        1       701        0        0        0        0
                     IB × AAA                              1,791   0.263      0.440      0           1      1,090   0.432    0.496      0        1       701        0        0        0        0
                     RRRcut ×   IB                         1,791    0.321     0.467      0           1      1,090   0.528    0.499      0        1       701        0        0        0        0
                     RRRcut ×   AA+                        1,791    0.128     0.334      0           1      1,090   0.142    0.349      0        1       701      0.106    0.307      0        1
40




                     RRRcut ×   AAA                        1,791   0.294      0.456      0           1      1,090   0.239    0.426      0        1       701      0.379    0.486      0        1
                     RRRcut ×   IB × AA+                   1,791   0.0865     0.281      0           1      1,090   0.142    0.349      0        1       701        0        0        0        0
                     RRRcut ×   IB × AAA                   1,791   0.145      0.352      0           1      1,090   0.239    0.426      0        1       701        0        0        0        0

      Panel B                                                               Full Sample                                 Interbank Market                               Exchange Market
       Bond Rating                                               Obs.                         Percent           Obs.                   Percent                 Obs.                  Percent

                     AA                                         339                            18.93            208                        19.08               131                       18.69
                     AA+                                        497                            27.75            345                        31.65               152                       21.68
         Rating
                     AAA                                        955                            53.32            537                        49.27               418                       59.63
                     Total                                     1,791                            100            1,090                        100                701                        100

      Panel C                                                               Full Sample                                 Interbank Market                               Exchange Market
       Bond Type                                                 Obs.                         Percent           Obs.                   Percent                 Obs.                  Percent

                     Corporate Bonds                           1596                            89.11            984                        90.27               612                       87.31
                     - Enterprise Bonds                         141                            7.870            139                        12.75                 2                       0.290
          Type       - Exchange-traded Corporate Bonds          610                            34.06             -                           -                 610                       87.02
                     - Medium-term Notes                        845                            47.18            845                        77.52                 -                         -
                     Financial Bonds                            195                            10.89            106                        9.720                89                       12.70
                     Total                                     1,791                            100            1,090                        100                701                        100

      Panel D                                                               Full Sample                              Interbank Market                             Exchange Market
      Issuance size (Billion RMB)                            Quantity                 Quantity/Total         Quantity            Quantity/Total           Quantity           Quantity/Total

                     Corporate Bonds                          1815.8                           72.97           1164.9                       71.06              650.9                      76.66
                     - Enterprise Bonds                        125.1                           5.027           122.9                       7.497               2.200                     0.259
        Issuance     - Exchange-traded Corporate Bonds         648.7                           26.07              -                           -                648.7                     76.40
                     - Medium-term Notes                       1042                            41.87            1042                       63.56                 -                          -
                     Financial Bonds                          672.7                           27.03            474.5                       28.94               198.2                     23.34
                     Total                                    2488.5                          100.00           1639.4                      100.00              849.1                     100.00




     Note : See text in Section 5 for details of the variables.
                                                Table 10: Baseline Regression with Primary Market Data


                                                                    Weighted by Bond Issuance Size                     Unweighted

                               Variables                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)

                               Post                      0.0442    0.000862        0.0502       0.0996       0.111         -0.0465
                                                       (0.0913)     (0.0807)     (0.0791)     (0.0827)     (0.0867)       (0.0854)
                               Treat                   0.966***    0.916***     0.824***     0.833***     0.594***        0.614***
                                                        (0.129)      (0.128)      (0.117)      (0.117)      (0.131)        (0.111)
                               IB                     -0.267***      -0.0957      0.0314       0.0214     -0.623***      -0.866***
                                                       (0.0805)     (0.0590)     (0.0561)     (0.0555)      (0.151)        (0.128)
                               IB × Treat               -0.0531      -0.187*    -0.296***    -0.298***      0.0166        0.543***
                                                        (0.111)     (0.0954)     (0.0958)     (0.0963)      (0.164)        (0.146)
                               Post × Treat            0.870***    0.910***      0.885***     0.888***     0.838***       0.649***
41




                                                        (0.144)      (0.160)      (0.160)      (0.162)      (0.156)        (0.120)
                               Post × IB                -0.0786       -0.109      -0.137*      -0.159*     -0.206**         -0.154
                                                        (0.116)     (0.0871)     (0.0824)     (0.0826)     (0.0944)        (0.103)
                               Post × Treat × IB      -0.547***    -0.525***     -0.479**     -0.482**    -0.538***       -0.371**
                                                        (0.205)      (0.200)      (0.194)      (0.196)      (0.206)        (0.169)

                               Quarter FE                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                               Bond Info.                 No           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                               Bond Issuer Info.          No           No           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                               Market Info.               No           No           No           Yes          Yes           Yes
                               Macro Factors              No           No           No           No           Yes           Yes
                               Obs.                      1,791        1,791        1,766        1,766        1,757         1,757
                               Adjusted R2               0.451        0.591        0.613        0.613        0.634         0.609

     Note : Regression equation is specified by (8). In Columns (1)-(5), the regression is weighted by bond issuance sizes. Column (6) reports the results from
     an unweighted regression. Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.  , , and  represent statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
 Table 11: Placebo Test: Primary Market Data: Using June 1, 2015 as the Fictitious Event Date


                                            Weighted by Bond Issuance Size                  Unweighted

           Variables                 (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)

           Post                     0.108      0.630       0.673       0.714*    0.701**       0.662*
                                  (0.316)     (0.404)     (0.409)     (0.399)    (0.337)       (0.349)
           Treat                   0.574*     0.755*      0.678*      0.675*      0.689*      0.995***
                                  (0.333)     (0.394)     (0.408)     (0.400)    (0.388)       (0.316)
           IB                     -0.361*      0.140       0.195       0.115      -0.300        -0.273
                                  (0.201)     (0.346)     (0.353)     (0.345)    (0.392)       (0.356)
           IB × Treat              0.586*       0.379      0.319       0.339     0.981**      0.913**
                                  (0.345)     (0.370)     (0.379)     (0.374)    (0.389)       (0.361)
           Post × Treat            -0.514    -0.975**    -1.002**    -0.893**     -0.650      -0.952**
                                  (0.451)     (0.465)     (0.471)     (0.447)    (0.466)       (0.412)
           Post × IB              -0.0968      -0.658     -0.726*     -0.680*     -0.545        -0.527
                                  (0.331)     (0.414)     (0.425)     (0.401)    (0.340)       (0.356)
           Post × Treat × IB        0.138       0.687      0.742       0.678       0.515       0.791*
                                  (0.473)     (0.484)     (0.495)     (0.472)    (0.483)       (0.428)

           Quarter FE                Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
           Bond Info.                No         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
           Bond Issuer Info.         No         No          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
           Market Info.              No         No          No          Yes         Yes          Yes
           Macro Factors             No         No          No          No          Yes          Yes
           Obs.                      581        581         580         580         580          580
           Adjusted R2              0.367      0.556       0.554       0.567       0.617        0.552

Note : Regression equation is specified by (8). In Columns (1)-(5), the regression is weighted by bond issuance sizes.
Column (6) reports the results from an unweighted regression. Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.
 
  , , and  represent statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                         42
                     Table 12: Heterogeneous Analysis with Primary Market Data

                  Variables                                   (1)          (2)           (3)


                  Post                          0.0997     0.109    0.0975
                                               (0.0859)  (0.0867)  (0.0858)
                  Treat                       0.643*** 0.589*** 0.640***
                                                (0.134)   (0.131)   (0.135)
                  IB                          -0.670*** -0.636*** -0.687***
                                                (0.157)   (0.152)   (0.158)
                  IB × Treat                     0.141    0.0285     0.162
                                                (0.181)   (0.165)   (0.182)
                  Post × Treat                0.881*** 0.836*** 0.881***
                                                (0.155)   (0.156)   (0.155)
                  Post × IB                    -0.203** -0.208** -0.206**
                                               (0.0941)  (0.0944)  (0.0941)
                  Post × Treat × IB            -0.436** -0.508** -0.397**
                                                (0.204)   (0.205)   (0.201)
                  Post × Treat × IB × Green   -1.055***           -1.115***
                                                (0.224)             (0.221)
                  Post × Treat × IB × Sannong           -1.788*** -2.028***
                                                          (0.133)   (0.137)

                  Quarter FE                                  Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Bond Info.                                  Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Bond Issuer Info.                           Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Market Info.                                Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Macro Factors                               Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Obs.                                       1,757        1,757        1,757
                  Adjusted R2                                0.638        0.635        0.640

Note : Regression equation is specified by (8), with the additional interaction terms of P ostt × T reati × IBi with
Green and Sannong. We report only the results with all controls. Robust standard errors are clustered at the bond
level.  , , and  represent statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                        43
            Table 13: Shopping for Venue in Primary Markets: Logit Regression Results

                     Variables                  (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)


                     Treat                  2.047*** 2.307***          2.367***     2.491***
                                             (0.256)  (0.249)           (0.251)      (0.268)
                     L.Post × Treat         0.384**   0.389*            0.441**      0.473**
                                             (0.192)  (0.199)           (0.205)      (0.233)

                     Month FE                  Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes
                     Bond Info.                Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes
                     Bond Issuer Info.         No              Yes        Yes          Yes
                     Market Info.              No              No         Yes          Yes
                     Macro Factors             No              No         No           Yes
                     Obs.                     3,075           3,042      3,042        3,026

Note : Results are repored from a logistic regression as specified by (10). L.Post dummy takes value of 1 if the bond
was issued after August 1, 2018: the application for the approval to issue such bonds would have been submitted
after the policy shock date of June 1, 2018 because the NDRC typically takes 2-3 months to approve the bond
issuance. Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.  , , and  represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%
and 10%, respectively.




                                                         44
                   Figure 1: Balance of PBOC's Collateral-based Lending Facilities




Note : Statistic is calculated by authors according to data reported by People's Bank of China, obtained from
WIND, as of May 30th 2019.




                                                        45
Figure 2: Liquidity Transmission Mechanism of Traditional and Unconventional Monetary Policies
in China




                                             46
Figure 3: Average Daily Spread of Bonds in the Exchange Market and the Interbank Market Before
and After the Expansion of MLF Collaterals on June 1, 2018: Secondary Market




                                                  (a) Full Sample




                                            (b) Dual-listed Bonds Only

Note : The sample period of left graph is 01/01/2018-05/31/2018. Panel (a) uses the full sample; and Panel (b) uses
dual listed bonds only. The sample period of right graph is 06/01/2018-09/30/2018. The horizontal axis denotes
the three rating of bonds. The darker bar is the average spread in interbank market, the lighter bar is the average
spread in exchange market (left scale). The solid line depicts the difference between the two spreads (right scale).
                                                        47
Figure 4: Spread Differences Between the Interbank and the Exchange Market, by Bond Ratings:
Secondary Market




Note : Date 0 is June 1, 2018, the date of the policy shock. The graph covers the period of 01/01/2018-09/30/2018.
Each point represents the average spread premium in 5 day window, where average spread premium = average
spread of bonds in the interbank market ­ average spread of bonds in the exchange market. The black, blue and
green line depicts the change of spread premium of AA, AA+ and AAA bonds over time.




                                                       48
Figure 5: Kernal Distribution of Absolute Difference Between Spreads of Dual-listed Bonds in
Interbank Market and Exchange Market: Secondary Market




                                            49
    Figure 6: Parallel Pre-Trend and Time Patterns of Policy Effects in the Secondary Market




                                                  (a) Full Sample




                                            (b) Dual-listed Bonds Only

Note : Each dot in window [t - 5 + 5k, t + 5k ] stands for the point estimate of coefficient k in regression equation
(3). The vertical whisk around the point is the associated 95% confidence interval. The point in window [t - 5, t] is
normalized to 0.
                                                         50
Figure 7: Spread Differences for Primary Market between the Interbank and the Exchange Markets,
by Bond Rating: Primary Market




Note : The sample period of left graph is 01/01/2018-05/31/2018. The sample period of right graph is
06/01/2018-8/31/2018. The horizontal axis denotes the three rating of bonds. The lighter bar is the average spread
in exchange market, the darker bar is the average spread in interbank market (left scale). The solid line depicts the
difference between the two spreads (right scale).




                                                         51
               Figure 8: Primary Market Data: Spreads Before and After June 1, 2018




Note : The sample period of the graph is 01/01/2018-08/31/2018. Each point represents the average difference of
spread at issuance between the interbank market and the exchange market in 5-day windows, where average spread
difference is simply the average spread at issuance interbank market bonds minus the average spread at issuance of
exchange market bonds.




                                                       52
                    Figure 9: Parallel Trend and Dynamic Effects: Primary Market




Note : Each dot in window [t - 1 + k, t + k ] stands for the point estimate of coefficient k from equation (9). The
vertical whisk around the point is the associated 95% confidence interval. The point in window [t - 1, t] is
normalized to 0.




                                                         53
                                     Table A.1: Summary Statistics for the Primary Market Data: 2018/1/1-2018/12/31
      Panel A                                                              Full Sample                               Interbank Market                             Exchange Market
      Variables                                            Obs     Mean     Std.Dev.   Min           Max   Obs     Mean  Std.Dev. Min          Max      Obs     Mean  Std.Dev. Min              Max

       Dep.Var.      Spread                                3,076   2.518     1.157    0.232      5.889     1,889   2.473    1.113   0.232     5.461     1,187    2.590    1.220    0.326     5.889

       Dummies       L.Post                                3,076   0.519     0.500       0            1    1,889   0.522    0.500     0            1    1,187    0.513    0.500     0            1
                     IB                                    3,076   0.614     0.487       0            1    1,889     1        0       1            1    1,187      0        0       0            0
                     Treat                                 3,076   0.411     0.492       0            1    1,889   0.458    0.498     0            1    1,187    0.336    0.473     0            1

       Bond Info     Quantity (Billion RMB)                3,076   1.494     2.657   0.00900         43    1,889   1.634    3.281   0.0800         43   1,187   1.271     1.045   0.00900    7.200
                     Term                                  3,076   4.244     1.861    0.917          15    1,889   4.386    2.049      2           15   1,187   4.017     1.489    0.917      15
                     Guarantee                             3,076   0.114     0.318      0            1     1,889   0.105    0.306      0           1    1,187   0.129     0.335      0         1
                     SOE                                   3,076   0.791     0.406      0             1    1,889   0.863    0.343      0            1   1,187    0.676    0.468      0         1
                     Put                                   3,076   0.323     0.468      0             1    1,889   0.149    0.356      0           1    1,187   0.600     0.490      0         1
                     Call                                  3,076   0.114     0.318      0             1    1,889   0.163    0.370      0            1   1,187   0.0371    0.189      0         1

       Issuer Info   Detb Asset Ratio                      3,076   63.30     18.11       0       95.59     1,889   63.19    18.66      0      95.38     1,187    63.47    17.20      0       95.59
                     Liquidity Ratio                       3,076   3.606     54.82       0       2887      1,889   4.392    68.59      0      2887      1,187    2.356    17.30      0       420.6
                     Cash Coverage Ratio                   3,076   0.531     2.049    -2.571     3.024     1,889   0.449    2.070   -2.571    3.024     1,187    0.661    2.010   -2.571     3.024
                     Log Assets                            3,045   25.03     1.457    16.09      30.73     1,873   25.04    1.499   16.09     30.73     1,172    25.00    1.388   19.93      29.86
                     Log Equity                            3,043   23.87     1.276    16.09      29.00     1,871   23.88    1.299   16.09     29.00     1,172    23.87    1.240   19.35      27.71

      Market Info    Similar Bond Issuance (Billion RMB)   3,076   5.287     5.757    0.0300     70.50     1,889   5.507    6.463   0.0800    70.50     1,187    4.938    4.386   0.0300     18.32
                     CMB Issuance (Billion RMB)            3,076   22.04     37.51       0       259.0     1,889   15.24    23.27      0      129.5     1,187    32.85    50.94      0       259.0
                     CGB Issuance (Billion RMB)            3,076   17.00     58.04       0       500.2     1,889   15.74    48.52      0      250.1     1,187    19.00    70.58      0       500.2

      Macro Info      GDP                                  3,050   10.49     3.377    -13.58     20.30     1,873   10.42    3.340   -13.58    20.30     1,177    10.60    3.432   -13.58     20.30
                      M2                                   3,076   8.781     0.243    8.174      9.233     1,889   8.786    0.249    8.174    9.233     1,187    8.772    0.234    8.174     9.233
                     IB × AA+                              3,076   0.164     0.370      0          1       1,889   0.267    0.443      0        1       1,187      0        0        0         0
                     IB × AAA                              3,076   0.281     0.449      0          1       1,889   0.457    0.498      0        1       1,187      0        0        0         0
                     RRRcut ×   IB                         3,076   0.447     0.497      0          1       1,889   0.727    0.445      0        1       1,187      0        0        0         0
                     RRRcut ×   AA+                        3,076   0.166     0.372      0          1       1,889   0.178    0.383      0        1       1,187    0.147    0.354      0         1
A1




                     RRRcut ×   AAA                        3,076   0.396     0.489      0          1       1,889   0.345    0.476      0        1       1,187    0.476    0.500      0         1
                     RRRcut ×   IB × AA+                   3,076   0.110     0.312      0          1       1,889   0.178    0.383      0        1       1,187      0        0        0         0
                     RRRcut ×   IB × AAA                   3,076   0.212     0.409      0          1       1,889   0.345    0.476      0        1       1,187      0        0        0         0

      Panel B                                                              Full Sample                                 Interbank Market                              Exchange Market
       Bond Rating                                             Obs.                      Percent               Obs.                   Percent                 Obs.                  Percent

                     AA                                        540                           17.56             356                        18.85              184                        15.50
                     AA+                                       820                           26.66             551                        29.17              269                        22.66
        Rating
                     AAA                                      1,716                          55.79             982                        51.99              734                        61.84
                     Total                                    3,076                           100             1,889                        100              1,187                        100

      Panel C                                                              Full Sample                                 Interbank Market                              Exchange Market
       Bond Type                                               Obs.                      Percent               Obs.                   Percent                 Obs.                  Percent

                     Corporate Bonds                          2758                           89.66            1696                        89.78             1062                        89.47
                     - Enterprise Bonds                        286                           9.300             284                        15.03               2                         0.170
         Type        - Exchange-traded Corporate Bonds        1,060                          34.46              -                           -               1060                         89.3
                     - Medium-term Notes                      1,412                          45.90            1,412                       74.75               -                           -
                     Financial Bonds                           318                           10.34             193                        10.22              125                        10.53
                     Total                                    3,076                           100             1,889                        100              1,187                        100

      Panel D                                                              Full Sample                              Interbank Market                              Exchange Market
      Issuance size (Billion RMB)                           Quantity                 Quantity/Total         Quantity            Quantity/Total            Quantity           Quantity/Total

                     Corporate bonds                         3,160.9                         68.79           1,937.7                       62.78          1,223.20                       81.09
                     - Enterprise Bonds                       245.9                          5.352            243.7                       7.895            2.200                        0.146
        Issuance     - Exchange-traded Corporate Bonds        1,221                          26.57              -                            -             1,221                        80.95
                     - Medium-term Notes                      1,694                          36.87            1,694                       54.88               -                            -
                     Financial Bonds                          1,434                          31.21            1,149                       37.22            285.2                        18.91
                     Total                                   4,594.9                          100            3,086.7                      100.00          1,508.4                       100.00




     Note : See text in Section 5 for details of the variables. This summary statistics table include all new bond issued between 2018/1/1 and 2018/12/31, which
     are used in the analysis for Table 13 where we test for the hypothesis of venue shopping.
