                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       HOW DO U.S. VISA POLICIES AFFECT UNAUTHORIZED IMMIGRATION?

                                        Brian K. Kovak
                                        Rebecca Lessem

                                      Working Paper 26790
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26790


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We thank Laurence Ales, Sam Bazzi, Kelly Bishop, Brian Cadena, Gordon Hanson, Carl Sanders,
Lowell Taylor, Yuan Tian, Ariel Zetlin-Jones, and seminar participants at the Carnegie-
Rochester-NYU Conference and the NYU Trade and Labor Mini-Conference for their feedback
on this project. Michael Stafford provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Brian K. Kovak and Rebecca Lessem. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?
Brian K. Kovak and Rebecca Lessem
NBER Working Paper No. 26790
February 2020
JEL No. F22,J61

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine how increasing the number of visas available to potential migrants would affect
unauthorized immigration from Mexico to the U.S. Current U.S. policy bans people who are
deported from receiving legal status for a period of time. This policy aims to serve as an
additional deterrent to unauthorized immigration, but may be ineffective given that most potential
Mexican migrants have an extremely low probability of ever being able to legally move to the
U.S. We develop a dynamic discrete location choice model, which we estimate using data from
the Mexican Migration Project, and consider various counterfactual policies that vary the
intensity of enforcement and access to work visas. We find that legal entry bans for deported
individuals are ineffective at current rates of legal immigration, but that increased legalization
rates would amplify the deterrent effects of deportation. We also show that a temporary work
visa program would yield similar deterrent effects as an increase in permanent legalization
without resulting in very large increases in the total stock of migrants residing in the U.S. These
findings have important implications for structuring future immigration reforms.


Brian K. Kovak
H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bkovak@cmu.edu

Rebecca Lessem
Tepper School of Business
5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
rlessem@andrew.cmu.edu
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                       Kovak and Lessem


1        Introduction
Approximately 8 million unauthorized immigrants have been present in the U.S. workforce since
2005 (Passel and Cohn 2018). U.S. employers demand these workers' services in spite of the
significant barriers to employment facing unauthorized workers and potential sanctions facing their
employers. Because U.S. immigration policy is quite restrictive, the vast majority of potential
immigrants can only reside and work legally in the U.S. if they have a close family member who
is a U.S. citizen or permanent resident.1 In this paper, we ask how increasing the number of visas
available to potential immigrants would affect the flow of unauthorized immigrants to the U.S.
        U.S. immigration law states that in many cases an immigrant who was formally deported from
the U.S. cannot legally reenter for a period of time for any reason, including family reunification
or via a work visa.2 We refer to this as the "legal entry ban" policy. Given this policy environ-
ment, immigration enforcement through deportation discourages unauthorized migration to the
U.S. through at least two channels. First, a higher probability of deportation directly reduces the
expected value of moving to the U.S., since there is an increased probability of being removed
before the individual would have chosen to return home. Second, deportation results in a loss of
the option value of migrating legally in the future. As the baseline probability of receiving legal
status increases, this second channel becomes more important. Therefore, the policy of banning
deportees from returning to the U.S. creates a complementarity between enforcement measures
that increase the probability of deportation and policies that expand the available options for legal
migration. We quantify this channel using detailed data on potential Mexican migrants' location
choices and legal status in a dynamic discrete location choice framework, considering the effects of
counterfactual deportation, permanent legalization, and temporary work visa policies.
        Specifically, we construct a simplified version of the setup in Lessem (2018). Potential Mexican
migrants are forward looking, and in each period choose whether to live in Mexico or the U.S. in
order to maximize the expected discounted value of their lifetime utility. They take into account
the utility of living in each location given their education and legal status, the cost of moving,
the probabilities of deportation and legalization, and their idiosyncratic payoff to living in each
location. We estimate the model using data from the Mexican Migration Project (MMP), which
provides unparalleled detail regarding the migration histories of migrants between Mexico and the
U.S. Importantly, the MMP data include information on the timing of migration events and changes
in legal status, showing that many migrants move temporarily and repeatedly, making the dynamic
nature of the model essential to accurately understand the implications of migration policy for
migration decisions.
    1
      In 2016, 68 percent of those obtaining legal permanent residence in the U.S. did so as immediate relatives of U.S.
citizens or through family-based preferences, while only 12 percent did so under employment-based preferences, 13
percent as refugees and asylees, 4 percent under the diversity visa lottery program, and 3 percent under other smaller
programs (DHS 2017).
    2
      See footnote 12 for specifics of the entry ban policy for those formally removed from the U.S.


                                                           2
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                         Kovak and Lessem


   After estimating the model using maximum likelihood, we consider various counterfactual poli-
cies that alter deportation rates and the probability that a potential migrant receives legal status in
the U.S. The results are consistent with complementarity between deportation rates and increased
probability of legal status when deportees are banned from reentering the U.S. As expected, increas-
ing the deportation rate reduces the rate of unauthorized migration to the U.S. and the cumulative
number of years a potential migrant spends living in the U.S. as an unauthorized immigrant. How-
ever, even with very high deportation rates, the policy of excluding those with prior deportations
has minimal effect on rates of unauthorized migration because the baseline probability of obtain-
ing legal status is so low. Only when the probability of gaining legal status is much higher than
that currently observed does the legal entry ban policy measurably reduce unauthorized migration.
These findings confirm the importance of losing the opportunity to legally move to the U.S. and
highlight the interactions between enforcement and visa policies.
   Although increases in the probability of achieving legal status deter unauthorized immigration,
they also sharply increase the number of authorized immigrants living permanently in the U.S. In
some contexts, this outcome may be politically infeasible, so we additionally consider the effects
of expanding access to temporary work visas, which allow migrants to work in the U.S. for a
fixed period of time, after which they must return home. Our counterfactual analysis shows that
permanent legal status and temporary visas drive similar reductions in unauthorized immigration,
but the latter increases the stock of authorized immigrants by far less. This finding suggests
that expanding the number of temporary work visas would be effective in deterring unauthorized
migration without resulting in very large increases the overall stock of migrants resident in the U.S.
   Our model is based on prior work that has estimated structural models of migration, start-
ing with Kennan and Walker (2011) who develop and estimate a discrete choice dynamic model
of internal migration in the U.S. They develop a dynamic framework in which forward-looking
individuals make a sequence of migration decisions, considering the benefits of living in each loca-
tion, costs of migrating between locations, and information gained through past location choices.
Lessem (2018) adapts this framework to examine migration between Mexico and the U.S., focusing
on wage differences across countries and the role of family members' location choices. We use a
similar framework, but focus on the interactions between legal status and enforcement policies and
consider a variety of policy counterfactuals focused on varying deportation rates and changes in
permanent and temporary visa policies. Given this focus, we simplify the location choice set to
include 2 locations, the U.S. and Mexico, instead of allowing for a variety of locations in the U.S.
as in Lessem (2018). Gorlach (2020) also uses a dynamic discrete choice model to study migration
from Mexico to the U.S., but focuses instead on the role of borrowing constraints in influencing
potential migrants' ability to move to the U.S. All of these models are partial equilibrium, in the
sense that changes in migration to not affect the returns to living in either location.
   In spite of broad agreement in the policy community that expanded legal work opportunities


                                                  3
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                   Kovak and Lessem


for immigrants would reduce unauthorized immigration, we are aware of no systematic evidence
regarding the likely magnitude of this effect.3 Instead, prior work has focused on how unauthorized
immigration responds to changes in enforcement, including border enforcement personnel, bor-
der barriers, interior deportation policies, and state-level immigration policies.4 The most closely
related of this work is Bazzi et al. (2019), who examine the effects of the U.S. Border Patrol's
Consequence Delivery System (CDS). This policy, starting in 2008, increased the share of formal
deportations among unauthorized Mexican migrants, involved releasing some deportees in Mexican
locations far from their point of capture, and increased criminal prosecution for migration-related
violations. Bazzi et al. (2019) find that, among those with a previous apprehension, the imposition
of these sanctions substantially reduced the probability of subsequent reapprehension. The effects
of CDS were largest for those whose prior removals had not already triggered a reentry ban, sup-
porting the idea that potential unauthorized immigrants are deterred by the possibility of losing the
option to migrate legally in the future. We complement these findings by examining how increased
visa access amplifies the deterrent effects of enforcement policies by increasing the option value
associated with future legal migration.
    Our findings are important for contemporary immigration policy debates. Specifically, the com-
plementarity between enforcement and legal immigration policy informs the choice of whether to
enact different types of immigration policies simultaneously or sequentially. Many of the compre-
hensive immigration reforms that have been proposed in the past 25 years include increases in
enforcement and expanded temporary worker programs that would begin simultaneously. Our re-
sults suggest that these policies would reinforce one another in reducing unauthorized immigration
to the U.S. However, an alternative approach requires reductions in unauthorized migration prior
to increasing the options for legal migration. This sequential approach is implemented in prac-
tice either through the use of "trigger" clauses within a single piece of legislation or by proposing
legislation focused exclusively on enforcement prior to separate legislation expanding the options
for legal immigration.5 While there may be other justifications for the sequential approach, our
findings suggest that achieving a target reduction in unauthorized migration will be more costly
in the absence of increased legal access to the U.S. than when implementing both sets of policies
simultaneously.
    Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes the relevant aspects of U.S. immigration
policy, highlighting aspects that drove important decisions in constructing and estimating our
   3
     Massey, Durand, and Malone (2002) speculate that the Bracero guest worker program, in place during 1942-1964,
may have caused the observed decline in border apprehensions during that time period.
   4
     For example, among many others, Hanson and Spilimbergo (1999), Bohn and Pugatch (2015) and Lessem (2018)
study changes in Border Patrol resources, Bohn, Lofstrom, and Raphael (2014) and Caballero, Cadena, and Kovak
(2018) study an Arizona law reducing employment opportunities for unauthorized immigrants, Feigenberg (2017) and
Allen, Dobbin, and Morten (2019) study border barriers between Mexico and the U.S., and East et al. (2018) and
East and Velasquez (2019) study the effects of deportations under the Secure Communities program.
   5
     See Section 2 for a more detailed discussion including examples of legislative proposals exemplifying these ap-
proaches to immigration reform.


                                                         4
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                    Kovak and Lessem


model. Section 3 describes the Mexican Migration Project data and provides summary statistics.
Sections 4 and 5 describe the model and estimation. Section 6 presents the results, including
measures of model fit and the results of counterfactual simulations. Section 7 concludes.


2        Policy background
Since 1965, U.S. immigration policy has largely been based upon a categorical preference system
focused on admitting close relatives of U.S. citizens and prior immigrants and those with skills
deemed valuable to the U.S. labor market.6 Individuals may be admitted to the U.S. as lawful
permanent residents or as temporary residents or visitors. About two-thirds of those gaining per-
manent residence fall under family-based categories of admission with the remainder falling under
employment-based preferences, humanitarian admissions, and the diversity visa lottery program
(CBO 2010).7 There are also many categories of temporary visas, covering tourists, temporary
workers, students, and many others. Of particular relevance to our study are the temporary worker
programs, which cover highly skilled workers (H-1) or other workers in agriculture (H-2A) and
services (H-2B). The latter programs for less-skilled temporary workers are quite small, accounting
for only 537,150 admissions in fiscal year 2017 (DHS 2019). The small scale of these programs
implies that potential immigrants without advanced degrees and without close relatives in the U.S.
have very few opportunities to pursue lawful residence and employment in the U.S.
        Partly due to the limited options available to the majority of Mexican migrants seeking to work
in the U.S., since the 1970s a significant number of Mexican-born individuals have moved to the
U.S. as unauthorized immigrants. Unauthorized immigrants may enter the U.S. by crossing the
border between ports of entry, by being smuggled through a port of entry, or by entering legally
on a temporary visa and staying in the U.S. after the visa's expiration. Estimating the number
of unauthorized immigrants is difficult due to the lack of administrative records for unauthorized
migrants, but a standard approach is to use household survey data to estimate the total number
of foreign-born individuals residing in the U.S. and then subtract the number of authorized im-
migrants based on administrative data. Figure 1 shows two such measures of the unauthorized
immigrant population, one constructed by the Pew Research Center and another showing official
estimates produced by the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Department of Home-
land Security.8 In spite of differences in the analyses, the two data sources provide remarkably
similar estimates for the unauthorized population in each year. The unauthorized population fell
    6
      See CBO (2006) for an accessible review of current and past U.S. immigration policy.
    7
      In 2017, 88 percent of Mexican migrants gaining legal permanent residence did so as immediate relatives of U.S.
citizens or through family-sponsored preferences, 3 percent under employment-based preferences, and the remaining
9 percent under the diversity program, as refugees and asylees, or through other smaller categories.
    8
      See Appendix B.3 for details on these data. Note that the official government estimates were produced by the
Immigration and Naturalization Service prior to 2003 and by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Office of
Immigration Statistics thereafter, following the creation of DHS in 2003.



                                                         5
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                    Kovak and Lessem


between 1986 and 1989 before increasing steadily until the onset of the Great Recession in 2007,
after which the unauthorized population has been relative stable around 11 million.
       The significant growth in the unauthorized immigrant population prompted a number of at-
tempts to address the issue. Most prominent among these is the Immigration Reform and Control
Act of 1986 (IRCA), which provided legal permanent residence and the possibility of citizenship
for more than 3 million previously unauthorized immigrants, more than 2 million of whom were
from Mexico (Massey, Durand, and Malone 2002). IRCA provided two paths to legal status, one
requiring applicants to show continuous residence in the U.S. since January 1, 1982, and a Special
Agricultural Worker program for those who worked for at least 90 days on certain specified crops
during the 1985-86 season. It also strengthened enforcement measures, with a 50 percent increase
in the enforcement budget of the Immigration and Naturalization Service and, for the first time,
imposing sanctions on employers knowingly hiring unauthorized workers (Massey, Durand, and
Malone 2002). The law's passage was generally viewed as a surprise, following a decade of failed
attempts at reform, so it is unlikely that migrants or other agents anticipated its arrival (Cascio
and Lewis 2019). The effect of IRCA in legalizing a significant share of the previously resident
unauthorized immigrant population is visible in Figure 1 between 1986 and 1990, but the subse-
quent years make clear that the policy did not have the intended effect of reducing unauthorized
immigration in the long run.
       The ensuing decades saw various attempts at reducing unauthorized immigration to the U.S.,
generally through increasing border enforcement, including personnel, physical barriers, and tech-
nology to detect illegal crossing, and additional resources for interior enforcement such as workplace
raids. Figure 2 shows border enforcement budgets and the number of Border Patrol staff assigned
to the "Southwest Sectors" along the U.S.-Mexico border.9 Both series exhibit very large increases
in enforcement resources starting in the mid 1990s and continuing through the late 2000s. Of
particular interest for this study is the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility
Act (IIRIRA) of 1996.10 As with other policies enacted during the 1990s, IIRIRA increased bor-
der enforcement, but it also broadened the options available for law enforcement seeking to deport
unauthorized immigrants, and strengthened reentry bans for those violating immigration law under
various circumstances.
       IIRIRA expanded the ability of enforcement officers to directly remove unauthorized immi-
grants, without a hearing before an immigration judge, and limited immigrants' ability to request
waivers or to appeal decisions.11 These non-judicial removal processes made it much easier for
   9
     Figure 2 shows the budget for the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and the combined budgets of
Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), which took over INS
enforcement functions following the creation of the Department of Homeland Security in 2003. Both series are
presented in year-2015 dollars.
  10
     See Rosenblum et al. (2014) for a thorough summary of IIRIRA, upon which this discussion of IIRIRA is based.
  11
     Such procedures include "expedited removal" for those arriving in the U.S. without valid entry documents,
"reinstatement of removal" for those who illegally reenter after a previous removal, and "administrative removal" for



                                                         6
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                   Kovak and Lessem


enforcement agencies to formally remove unauthorized immigrants who previously might have been
allowed to return informally, through a "voluntary departure" or "withdrawal of application for
admission." This distinction is particularly important; after a formal removal the individual is not
allowed to reenter the U.S. for any reason for a specified period of time, i.e. they lose access to
the possibility of legal immigration.12 Those departing informally do not face these reentry bans.
Figure 3 shows the numbers of formal removals (which result in reentry bans) and informal returns
(which do not) on the left axis, along with removals' share of the total on the right axis. Formal
removals became much more prevalent starting in 1997, and constituted more than 70 percent of
the total in recent years, meaning that the vast majority of removals were subject to entry bans.
    The combination of increased reliance on formal removals and entry bans for formally deported
individuals leads to the primary mechanism we examine in this paper. When those apprehended
migrating illegally are banned from migrating legally in the future, the deterrent effect of immi-
gration enforcement will depend upon the baseline probability that one can obtain legal status.
The lost option value of legal immigration will be larger when obtaining legal status is more likely,
increasing the deterrent effect of enforcement. In Sections 4 ­ 6 we estimate a model and generate
counterfactuals allowing us to investigate these interactions between immigration enforcement and
legal immigration policies.
    Understanding the interactions between immigration enforcement and legal immigration poli-
cies is important for contemporary immigration policy debates. In the decades since IIRIRA,
U.S. lawmakers have proposed many immigration reforms seeking to address the ongoing issue of
unauthorized immigration, and these proposals have taken different forms. Comprehensive reforms
generally incorporate increases in immigration enforcement and significant changes to the legal im-
migration system, often including expanded temporary worker programs.13 Other proposals focus
on enforcement alone, with the idea that subsequent legislation may address the legal immigration
system after enforcement objectives have been met.14 Yet other proposals take a hybrid approach,
including both increased enforcement and expanded legal immigration provisions in the same piece
of legislation, but structured such that the legal immigration programs are implemented only after
certain enforcement "triggers" are met.15 While all of these approaches envision increased enforce-
those without lawful permanent residence who commit aggravated felonies.
  12
     Those deported through expedited removal are ineligible for a visa for 5 years, those removed through standard
procedures are ineligible for 10 years, those removed a second time after apprehension at arrival are ineligible for
20 years, and those removed a second time after re-entering the U.S. are permanently barred. Moreover, those
apprehended after re-entering the U.S. after a removal order may be subject to criminal charges, rather than civil
charges as in most cases involving violations of immigration law. See Rosenblum et al. (2014) for additional detail.
  13
     For example, see the W-Visa low-skilled guest worker program proposed in the "Border Security, Economic
Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act," Senate Bill S.744, in July 2013.
  14
     An example of the border-security-first approach is the "Border Security and Immigration Reform Act" of 2018
(H.R.6136), which would have increased border security funding significantly without expanding legal immigration
channels.
  15
     There are many examples of "triggers" in recent comprehensive reform proposals. In the "Secure Borders,
Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Reform Act" of 2007 (S.1639), unauthorized immigrants would only have



                                                         7
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                     Kovak and Lessem


ment and reforms of the legal immigration system, the latter two pursue these changes sequentially
rather than simultaneously. Given the complementarity between enforcement and legal immigra-
tion policies that we will document below, whether various immigration policies are implemented
sequentially or simultaneously is likely to substantially influence their effects.


3     Data
We use data from the Mexican Migration Project (MMP), a joint project of Princeton University
and the University of Guadalajara.16 The MMP is a repeated cross-sectional dataset that was
first collected in 1982 and is still ongoing. In each year, a few target communities in Mexico are
selected, and a random sample of households is surveyed in an effort to understand the circum-
stances, decisions, and outcomes related to international migration for Mexican individuals. To our
knowledge, this is the most detailed source of information available on migration decisions between
the U.S. and Mexico. Although the survey is cross-sectional, it asks respondents about their entire
migration history, recording detailed information on when each individual lived in Mexico or the
U.S. and whether and when they had legal authorization to reside in the U.S. We are aware of no
other large scale data source that provides this level of detail on migration and legal status, both
of which are essential to our analysis.
    Although the MMP sample is representative of the communities surveyed in a given year, the
dataset is not representative of Mexico as a whole, since the survey has oversampled communities
with historically high rates of migration to the U.S. For example, the early years of the survey
oversampled relatively rural communities in Western-Central Mexico with high historical migration
rates.17 Over time, however, the MMP sampling frame has shifted to other areas in Mexico,
including those with lower migration rates. Since the MMP collects retrospective data on migration
and legal status, we can still observe migration behavior in early years for individuals in the
communities that were surveyed more recently, mitigating representativeness concerns somewhat.18
Another restriction of the MMP data is that the sample captures a relatively small number of
permanent migrants to the U.S. Although the MMP does survey some individuals who have moved
to the U.S., this represents a small share of the survey sample (see Table 1).19
received access to an expanded guest worker program 18 months after the appropriation of funds for an employment
verification system. In the "Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act" of 2013
(S.744), formerly unauthorized immigrants could seek legal permanent residence only following deployment of addi-
tional Border Patrol agents, construction of additional border fencing, and other enforcement investments, with the
objective of a 90% apprehension rate for attempted border crossings.
   16
      The data are publicly available at mmp.opr.princeton.edu
   17
      Appendix Figure B1 shows a map with the current coverage of the survey.
   18
      Appendix Table B1 compares the demographic and educational distributions of household heads in the MMP
and the Mexican Census for the year 2000, finding quite similar results across the two datasets.
   19
      The possibility of omitting permanent migrants to the U.S. may lead us to underestimate the rate at which
Mexican individuals obtain legal status. As discussed in footnote 33, we reimplement our analysis using administrative
data on legalization, finding nearly identical results.


                                                          8
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                               Kovak and Lessem


       We utilize MMP data collected in 1997 and later because earlier waves of the survey omitted
information on migrants' legal status in the U.S. We also consider retrospective migration and
legalization information from 1980 onward in order to avoid earlier years in which migration patterns
may have been quite different from those in more recent years. We focus on individuals born in
Mexico and restrict the sample to household heads in order to take advantage of the extensive
migration and legalization histories the MMP reports for them. In doing so, we abstract from joint
household migration decisions.20 We focus on migration decisions for individuals age 18 to 65 and
omit those already in the U.S. by age 18 in order to avoid migration decisions that may have been
heavily influenced by family members. Finally, we omit a small number of observations exhibiting
inconsistencies or missing key information, such as location, education, and legal status.
       We present summary statistics for our sample in Table 1. Panel (a) shows the characteristics of
the household heads in our sample, as observed in the year of the survey (i.e. with one observation
for each individual). We observe 17,538 unique individuals across all years of the survey from 1997
to 2018. 85% of the sample is male, and the majority of individuals is between age 30 and 59
in the survey year. We split the sample by years of education, grouping people as low education
(0-5 years) or high education (6+ years). Reflecting the educational distribution of the broader
Mexican population, 66% of the sample has 6 or more years of education. The vast majority of the
sample is surveyed in Mexico, but 4.7% is surveyed in the U.S., while 2.9% of the sample has legal
authorization to reside in the U.S. in the survey year.
       Panel (b) uses the retrospective panel dimension of the survey to measure migration patterns.
We observe 4,694 Mexico-to-U.S. migration events between 1980 and 2018. The vast majority
(83.4%) never migrated to the U.S. prior to being surveyed by the MMP, 11.2% of individuals
migrated north once, and the remaining 5.4% migrated 2 or more times. Most observed spells of
time living in the U.S. were relatively short, with 48.1% of spells lasting only one year. However,
there is a long tail, with 20.7% of spells lasting 5 or more years, 10.4% lasting 10 or more years,
and 2.9% lasting 20 or more years. This pattern reflects the diversity of migration experiences
for Mexican migrants to the U.S., with many individuals migrating for a short time, often visiting
repeatedly for seasonal work, and more recent migrants who tend to stay in the U.S. for a longer
period of time, particularly as border enforcement has increased.
       We now describe yearly migration rates in more detail. Figure 4 examines Mexico-to-U.S.
migration separately for those with or without legal authorization to reside in the U.S. Panel (a)
shows the share of those in Mexico and without U.S. legal status in year t - 1 who migrated to the
U.S. in year t. Panel (b) shows the same northward migration rate for those with U.S. legal status
in year t - 1. A few patterns are apparent. First, people with the ability to move legally migrate
to the U.S. at much higher rates. We also see fluctuations over time, most notably high migration
  20
    See Gemici (2011) and Lessem (2018) for papers with dynamic models of migration decisions in which an indi-
vidual's migration decision is influenced by those of family members.



                                                      9
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                   Kovak and Lessem


rates in both directions in the 1990's and early 2000s and lower migration rates in 2010 and later,
following the U.S. Great Recession.21 Figure 5 performs a similar exercise, measuring the share of
those in the U.S. in year t - 1 who return to Mexico in year t separately by legal status in period
t - 1. The results largely mirror those for northward migration, with authorized immigrants less
likely to return to Mexico. Together, the results in Figures 4 and 5 demonstrate the importance
of accounting for cyclical factors that may influence the incentive to move between the U.S. and
Mexico during different portions of the sample period.
         The retrospective panel nature of the MMP also allows us to observe when Mexican individuals
obtain legal status in the U.S. Figure 6 plots the probability of receiving legal status in each year.
To be precise, it shows the share of those without legal status in year t - 1 who get legal status
in year t. It is clear that legalization rates are generally quite low, with the exception of the
years immediately following the passage of IRCA in 1986. The dashed black line shows legalization
probabilities omitting those reporting receiving legal status under IRCA, and shows that in the
absence of this policy, legalization rates were quite consistent over time, averaging around 0.05%
per year. However, the overall legalization rate was an order of magnitude larger during the IRCA
implementation period of 1987-1991. Therefore, when parameterizing the model in Section 5, we
allow the legalization rate during 1987-1991 to differ from the rate in other years, and the estimates
confirm the much higher legalization rate during these years.
         As a final piece of descriptive evidence influencing the modeling choices in the following section,
we consider the choice to apply for legal status in the U.S. Starting in the 1997 survey, the MMP
records when an individual applied for legal status, along with the date, if any, when legal status was
granted. When analyzing this information, it became clear that there was little distinction between
applying for legal status and obtaining it. 85% of those ever applying for legal status received it
by the survey year, and more than 90% of individuals who eventually received legal status did so
within 3 years of applying. It appears that potential migrants in the MMP sample only apply for
legal status when they know they are very likely to be approved and when that approval is likely to
come quickly, so the application information available in the MMP data provided little information
beyond what is already present in the information on realized legal status. For this reason, we
choose not to include information on applications for legal status in our model estimation.


4         Model
Our model is based on a simplified version of the setup in Lessem (2018), in which there are only
two locations: the U.S. and Mexico. A person starts each period knowing their legal status and
their prior period location. They then receive a set of payoff shocks to living in each location and
    21
    Due to the MMP's retrospective panel structure, the sample sizes are largest in the middle of the sample period.
In early years fewer migrants who were surveyed in later years had already reached age 18, while few survey years
are able to observe migration events later in the sample.


                                                        10
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                      Kovak and Lessem


decide whether to live in the U.S. or Mexico, considering the utility of living in a location, the cost
of moving, the payoff shocks to each location, and the expected continuation value of living in that
location. If they currently lack legal status in the U.S., they may be granted legal status in the
future with some probability, which we will estimate. Consistent with the MMP data, we assume
that legal status is an absorbing state, so once a person is granted legal status they do not lose it.22
In addition, unauthorized immigrants may be deported, in which case they are forced to return to
Mexico.
       The timing of the model is as follows. People start the period knowing their prior location and
legal status for this period. They learn their payoff shocks and decide where to live. If they choose
to live in the U.S., they are deported with some probability, which forces them to return to Mexico.
At the end of the period, if they previously did not have the ability to move to the U.S. legally,
with some probability they get a visa that enables them to move legally, should they choose to do
so in a subsequent period.
       The state space includes a person's prior location jt-1  {m, us}, their legal status at the start
of the period lst (= 1 if legal and 0 otherwise), their fixed characteristics X , their age at , and their
set of preference shocks kt . The value function is written as follows:

                        Vt (jt-1 , lst , X, at , t ) = max vt (k, jt-1 , lst , X, at ) + kt ,                   (1)
                                                    k{m,us}


A person chooses the location k with the highest valuation each period t, where the valuation has
a deterministic component, which we denote as vt (·), and a random component, which we denote
as kt . We assume that the random shocks follow the type-I extreme value distribution.
       The following expressions show the deterministic component of choosing location k . First,
consider an individual who already has legal status, lst = 1.

                   vt (k, jt-1 , lst = 1, X, at ) = ut (k, lst , X ) - M Ct (k, jt-1 , lst , X )
                                                 + Et Vt+1 (k, lst+1 = 1, X, at+1 , t+1 ) .                     (2)

The first component on the right side of equation (2) is the utility of living in a location, which
we assume depends on legal status and characteristics. Utility differences across locations arise
from two sources: wage differentials between the two countries and preference to live in one's home
country, likely due to the presence of one's family, familiarity with the culture, etc. The second
component of equation (2) is the cost of moving between locations. This is normalized to equal
0 if a person does not change locations. We allow the cost of moving to vary with legal status,
  22
     Of course, an individual may have temporary legal status in the U.S., or an immigrant may lose legal permanent
residence for a variety of reasons, including if they "move to another country, intending to live there permanently"
(USCIS 2016). However, the MMP data only report the date in which an individual immigrant received legal status
in the U.S., without providing any information reporting whether or when an individual might have lost that status.



                                                         11
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                             Kovak and Lessem


given that it is more costly for unauthorized immigrants to cross the border, since they will have
to evade detection. The last component of equation (2) is the expected continuation value, in this
case maintaining legal status since it is an absorbing state.
       Those without legal status (lst = 0) additionally consider the possibility that they may receive
legal status in the next period; this happens with probability pl
                                                                t+1 (X ). This legal status transition
may occur whether the individual chooses to live in Mexico or the U.S., and only depends on year
and characteristics. However, if an individual without legal status chooses to live in the U.S., they
face the additional possibility of deportation, with probability pd  23 Those who are deported start
                                                                  t.
the subsequent period in Mexico.24 Therefore, the deterministic component of choosing to live in
Mexico for those without U.S. legal status is

            vt (k = m, jt-1 , lst = 0, X, at )     =    ut (k, lst , X ) - M Ct (k, jt-1 , lst , X )
                                                   +     pl
                                                          t+1 (X ) Et Vt+1 (k, lst+1 = 1, X, at+1 , t+1 )

                                                   +     1 - pl
                                                              t+1 (X ) Et Vt+1 (k, lst+1 = 0, X, at+1 , t+1 ) .              (3)

The same expression for choosing the U.S. without legal status is

   vt (k = us, jt-1 , lst = 0, X, at )   =       ut (k, lst , X ) - M Ct (k, jt-1 , lst , X )
                                         +        pl             d
                                                   t+1 (X ) 1 - pt Et Vt+ 1 (k = us, lst+1 = 1, X, at+1 , t+1 )

                                         +        pl         d
                                                   t+1 (X ) pt Et Vt+ 1 (k = m, lst+1 = 1, X, at+1 , t+1 )

                                         +        1 - pl
                                                       t+1 (X )        1 - pd
                                                                            t Et Vt+ 1 (k = us, lst+1 = 0, X, at+1 , t+1 )

                                         +        1 - pl         d
                                                       t+1 (X ) pt Et Vt+ 1 (k = m, lst+1 = 0, X, at+1 , t+1 ) .             (4)



       To compute the expected continuation values in equations (2) - (4), we need to integrate out
future payoff shocks, t+1 . Because we assumed the shocks follow the extreme value distribution, we
can solve for a closed form expression for the continuation values. This leads to choice probabilities
with the standard logit form:

                                                              exp (vt (jt , jt-1 , lst , X, at ))
                          Pt (jt |jt-1 , lst , X, at ) =                                                                     (5)
                                                               k exp (vt (k, jt-1 , lst , X, at ))

Finally, we assume a terminal period T at age 65, such that VT +1 = 0, and then solve the model
using backward induction.
  23
    We assume this probability is constant across demographic groups and only varies over time.
  24
    The only penalty facing deported individuals is that they start the next period in Mexico. We do not impose the
U.S.-to-Mexico moving cost on deportees because doing so would substantially complicate model timing.




                                                                 12
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                        Kovak and Lessem


5     Estimation
5.1    Parameterization
In this section, we parameterize the utility function, moving cost function, and legal status transition
function. We write the utility function as follows:
                                                       
                                                        um                if j = m
                                                          X,ls
                                    ut (j, ls, X ) =                                                                  (6)
                                                       uus +              if j = us
                                                        X,ls  X,t

                                                 
                                                  0          if t  1993
                                                 
                                                             if t  1994 and t  2000
                                                  
                                                  X,1
                                                 
                                    where X,t   = X,2        if t  2001 and t  2005
                                                 
                                                             if t  2006 and t  2009
                                                 
                                                 X,3
                                                 
                                                 
                                                  X,4        if t  2010
                                                 

The utility from living in a location j  {m, us} may vary arbitrarily by individual characteristics
X and legal status. These utilities capture both the intrinsic value of living in a location and
the wage one could earn there in a given year.25 Characteristics X capture individuals' education
levels, taking on two possible values reflecting low (0-5 years) and high (6+ years) educational
attainment.26 This allows the locations' utility levels to vary by education level, reflecting the
possibility that earnings differences across countries vary by education level. We also allow utility
to vary by legal status, given that authorized and unauthorized immigrants may have different
earnings, particularly in the U.S. In order to capture changes over time in the relative attractiveness
of living in the U.S. and Mexico, which may vary by educational attainment, we allow the U.S. utility
to vary over time by including the term X,t , which may take on different values across 5 different
time ranges and the two education groups, as shown in (6). We need to make a normalization
for identification, so we set um
                               ls,X = 0 (see Appendix A for a discussion of how the parameters are
identified).27
  25
     (Lessem 2018) estimates the utility as a function of wages in each location. In that case, the effect of wages on
utility was identified by looking at where people move as a function of wages. In the 2 location case, however, if
the wage differential is the same for everyone, it is difficult to identify the effect of wages on utility separately from
moving costs. This was not a problem in (Lessem 2018) which considered internal migration, as well as a choice of
locations in the U.S. We do have variation in the self-reported wage differential across locations for individuals, but
in practice that does a poor job of predicting who chooses to migrate, as the people most likely to move do not report
the largest wage differentials.
  26
     These categories were chosen to reflect natural breakpoints in the Mexican educational distribution and to
separate groups with distinct baseline migration probabilities in the MMP.
  27
     This normalization can be imposed across all legal status and education groups because we do not allow migration
decisions to endogenously affect future types, including legal status. This precludes us from including the legal entry
ban policy in the baseline model that we use for estimation. However, as shown in Section 6, at the low legalization
rates faced by potential migrants in our sample, the presence or absence of the legal entry ban policy has very
minimal effect on migration decisions. Therefore, omitting it from the estimation will have little effect on our



                                                           13
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                   Kovak and Lessem


    We parameterize moving costs as follows.
                                        
                                        cX,ls + bt 1(ls = 0)
                                          m-us
                                                                       if j = m and k = us
                                        
                   M Ct (k, j, ls, X ) = cus -m                                                           (7)
                                          X,ls                         if j = us and k = m
                                        
                                        0
                                        
                                                                       otherwise

The moving cost when not changing locations is zero, and we allow costs to differ when moving
from Mexico to the U.S. or from the U.S. to Mexico. Moving costs critically depend on legal status,
given that it is much easier for authorized immigrants to move to the U.S. We also allow the moving
costs to vary with education level, which may affect a person's access to the resources necessary to
move between countries. In addition, we allow unauthorized immigrants' cost of moving to the U.S.
to vary over time with U.S. border enforcement bt .28 We estimate the parameter  , which captures
the relationship between border enforcement resources and the moving costs faced by unauthorized
migrants.
    We also parameterize the function characterizing the probability of transitioning to legal status.
                                                  
                                                  p + 1(IRCA )          if lst-1 = 0
                                                    X       t
                             pl
                              t ( ls t -1 , X ) =                                                         (8)
                                                  1                     if lst-1 = 1

As stated in Section 4, we assume that U.S. legal status is an absorbing state. Consistent with
Figure 6, we assume a constant baseline legalization probability over time, but we allow that
probability pX to differ for the two education groups. Furthermore, we assume that the probability
of being granted legal status increases by  in the IRCA years of 1987-1991 (again following Figure
6). Since this policy was unanticipated and did not apply to migrants arriving after the policy was
announced, when computing value functions we assume that  = 0. However, in the likelihood
function, where we consider transitions over legal status, we allow for  = 0, potentially increasing
the probability of being granted legal status during the IRCA years, to match the observed rates
in the data.
    Finally, in equation (4) there is a probability pd
                                                     t of being deported each period. We calcu-
late these deportation rates using data on interior apprehensions of unauthorized immigrants and
estimates of the unauthorized population in each year, as described in Appendix B.3.
    Given this setup, we have 4 parameters for the utility of living in the U.S., 8 moving cost
parameters, 8 relative U.S. utility parameters over time, the border enforcement cost parameter
( ), 2 legalization probabilities across the education groups (pl
                                                                X ), and the IRCA legalization rate
parameter (), for a total of 24 parameters. We assume perfect foresight over changes in deportation
rates (pd
        t ), border enforcement (bt ), and the relative U.S. utility parameters (t ). As just mentioned,

parameter estimates.
  28
     Appendix B.2 describes the data sources and construction of the border enforcement series.


                                                        14
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                               Kovak and Lessem


agents do not take changes in legalization rates due to IRCA () into account when making location
choices.

5.2        Likelihood function
The likelihood function is as follows:
                   Ti
                                                                                                                     1-lsit
                                                                                     lsit
 L(  ) =                log Pt (jit |ji,t-1 , lsit , Xi , ait ) × pl
                                                                   t (lsi,t-1 , Xi )      × 1 - pl
                                                                                                 t (lsi,t-1 , Xi )            (9)
               i   0

Given the type-I extreme value preference shocks, the choice probabilities, Pt (·), are given by
equation (5).


6         Results
We estimate the model using maximum likelihood with data from the MMP, and the resulting
parameter estimates are reported in Tables 2 ­ 4. Table 2 shows the estimated utility of living
in the U.S. and the moving cost parameters, conditional on education and legal status. Recall
that the utility of living in Mexico, um , was normalized to zero for each group. The positive U.S.
utility estimates for authorized immigrants and low education unauthorized immigrants imply that
these groups of immigrants prefer living in the U.S. relative to Mexico. In contrast, high education
unauthorized immigrants prefer Mexico to the U.S. This is not surprising given the limited U.S.
employment opportunities facing those without legal status and the fact that potential migrants
may simply prefer to live in their home country, all else equal. We find large costs of moving
from Mexico to the U.S., and much higher costs for those moving without legal status. The return
migration costs are much smaller in magnitude and are negative for unauthorized immigrants.
         Table 3 presents estimates governing how the relative utility of living in the U.S. varies with
time. As shown in (6), the X,t parameters additively shift the relative utility of living in the
U.S., and vary by education group. The variation over time is consistent with aggregate migration
trends, with steadily increasing Mexico-U.S. migration rates through the 1990s and early 2000s,
and a decline following the Great Recession.29 Table 3 also shows the effect of border enforcement
on the costs unauthorized immigrants face when moving from Mexico to the U.S. ( in (7)). The
effect of border enforcement is modest in comparison to the baseline migration costs reported in
Table 2. During our sample period, enforcement expenditures increased by more than 10 billion
dollars.30 Since we measure bt in (7) in billions of dollars, we can multiply the estimate of  by 10
    29
    See Figures 4 and 5. While migration rates do vary significantly in other time periods, northward and southward
migration tend to move together, so net migration is quite constant, until the 2010-2018 period.
 30
    See Appendix B.2




                                                                15
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                        Kovak and Lessem


to evaluate the effect of increased border enforcement spending on migration costs. The resulting
value of 0.331 is an order of magnitude smaller than the baseline moving costs.
   Finally, Table 4 shows the estimated legal status transition rates. The rates are extremely small
for both education groups, consistent with the baseline legalization rates shown in Figure 6. We
also see a very substantial increase in transition rates in the IRCA years, consistent with the spike
in the share receiving legal status after 1986 in Figure 6. Recall that we assume individuals did
not anticipate the increase in legalization probabilities that came with IRCA, but the inclusion of
this effect is important to match the realized increase in transitions from illegal to legal status in
the years immediately after IRCA.
   Table 5 shows the model fit, comparing average migration rates in the data (columns (1) and (3))
to migration probabilities predicted by the model (columns (2) and (4)). We show the probability
of moving to the U.S. and of return migration from the U.S. to Mexico. The model fits the data
very well, with predicted migration rates falling within a few tenths of a percentage point of the
observed migration rates in all cases.

6.1   Counterfactuals
We use various counterfactuals to study the effects of changing both enforcement policies and op-
portunities to obtain legal status, highlighting the complementarities between these policies. First,
we consider an increase in deportation rates. This has a mechanical effect of lowering the number
of unauthorized immigrants by forcing people to return to Mexico. However, it also influences po-
tential migrants' decisions on where to live. If a person knows that they could be forced to return
to Mexico if they move to the U.S. illegally, then this lowers the value of moving to the U.S. and
can reduce immigration rates for those without legal status. Next, we consider a policy imposing
perfectly enforced legal entry bans on those who were previously deported, i.e. their legalization
probability goes to zero. In theory, this should further reduce immigration rates for a given de-
portation probability, because deportation both removes an individual from the U.S. and causes
them to lose the option value of returning legally in the future. This potential loss of option value
will result in an additional deterrent effect for unauthorized immigrants considering migrating to
the U.S. However, given that the estimated legal transition rates are quite low, we anticipate this
channel will drive small changes in migration behavior. We then explore how the deterrent effect
of legal entry bans increases when the probability of gaining legal status is higher. Finally, we
compare a policy with increased probability of permanent legal status to one in which workers may
obtain temporary work visas that allow them to reside and work legally in the U.S. for three years,
after which they must return to Mexico.
   We examine three different outcomes under the various counterfactual immigration policies just
described. In Table 6, we examine migration probabilities in order to understand how the different
policies affect potential immigrants' location choices and hence migrant flows. Specifically, we show


                                                 16
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                     Kovak and Lessem


the probability of moving to the U.S. for a person without legal status, in the high education group
(6+ years), and age 33 in 2017. We separate these estimates into those for individuals with and
without a previous deportation, a distinction that becomes relevant when we impose the legal entry
ban policy. We then consider two different measures of immigrant stocks, which is important since
relatively small changes in migration flows can lead to large changes in stocks over time. Changing
legalization probabilities affects the stock of unauthorized immigrants directly by providing legal
status to unauthorized immigrants and indirectly by changing the incentives faced by potential
unauthorized immigrants. The first stock measure, shown in Table 7, isolates the incentive effect
by changing the legalization rates immigrants perceive when making location choices, but without
actually legalizing immigrants in the simulations. It reports the average amount of time spent as
an unauthorized immigrant in the U.S., assuming that they never receive legal status.31 We refer to
this as the "incentive-only" stock measure. The second stock measure, shown in Table 8, includes
both the mechanical and incentive effects of changing legalization rates. It reports the average time
spent in the U.S. as an unauthorized immigrant or as an authorized immigrant. In both Tables 7
and 8, the averages include zeros (those with no time in the U.S.).
       Rows 1 and 2 of Tables 6 ­ 8 examine the effect of a perfectly enforced legal entry ban for
those previously deported, holding deportation rates and legalization probabilities at their baseline
values. The resulting migration flows and stocks are nearly identical across rows 1 and 2 in all
three counterfactual tables, showing that the legal entry ban has minimal effect at the baseline
deportation and legalization rates. This is not surprising; since the probability of obtaining legal
status for the potential migrants in our sample is very small, so is the option value of legal migration
that is lost after deportation under a legal entry ban policy.32,           33

       Comparing rows 1 and 3 of Tables 6 ­ 8 shows the effects of increased deportation rates in the
absence of a legal entry ban policy. We increase the deportation rate from the approximately 1­3%
baseline rate (see Appendix B.3) to 10% per year. This substantial increase in enforcement drives
  31
     To calculate this, we took the total number of person years where a person does not have legal status, and
computed the share of those years spent in the US. We then multiplied this ratio times the average number of years
we observe a person in the sample (9 years).
  32
     This finding may seem to contrast with those of Bazzi et al. (2019), who find substantial deterrent effects of
the Border Patrol's Consequence Delivery System (CDS), which increased enforcement of the legal entry ban policy.
Our contrasting results likely stem from two differences in our analysis. First, while Bazzi et al. (2019) examine
subsequent apprehensions for those who were already apprehended previously, we consider all migration events for a
sample including all potential migrants. Second, CDS increases enforcement of the legal entry ban policy, but also
involves deporting some individuals far from their location of entry and increased criminal prosecution for migration-
related offenses. We only consider the mechanism related to the legal entry ban policy, potentially explaining our
more modest effects.
  33
     A concern with this finding is that we may be underestimating the true rate of legalization because the MMP
data may systematically omit those who receive legal status and remain in the U.S. With that in mind, we reran the
estimation and counterfactual analysis after calibrating the yearly legalization probabilities based on administrative
data on legal immigration in the U.S. and Mexican Census data on the Mexican population, which indeed imply
higher legalization rates than those observed in the MMP. All results, which are available upon request, are nearly
identical to those presented here.



                                                         17
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                         Kovak and Lessem


large declines in the probability that those without legal status choose to migrate to the U.S and,
as a result, large reductions in the stock of unauthorized migrants in the U.S. For example, in Table
8, we see that for individuals in our sample, the average time spent as an unauthorized migrant in
the U.S. falls from 0.65 to 0.35 years, a 46% decline.
   Row 4 maintains the increased deportation rate of row 3, but also imposes the perfectly enforced
legal entry ban for previously deported individuals. In this case, we still see minimal effects on
migration rates and unauthorized immigrant stocks. Even with the much higher deportation rate
in rows 3 and 4, the legal entry ban policy is ineffective at the extremely low baseline legalization
probabilities. With this in mind, row 5 drastically increases the yearly legalization probability to
1% from the baseline level of approximately 0.05% (see Table 4). In this case, the legal entry
ban policy has a nontrivial effect on migration rates. Comparing rows 4 and 5 in Table 6, the
northward migration rate falls from 0.59% to 0.55% for unauthorized immigrants without a prior
deportation. This decrease results from immigrants deciding not to migrate illegally for fear of
being deported and losing the option to move legally in the future. Note that the migration rate
for those with a prior deportation is unaffected by the increased legalization rate, since those with
a prior deportation have already lost the option value of migrating legally. Comparing rows 4 and
5 in Table 7, we see that this change reduces by 4.4% the incentive-only measure of average years
in the U.S. as an undocumented immigrant.
   This comparison between rows 4 and 5 reflects the complementarity between deportation and
legalization policies in the presence of the legal entry ban policy. The complementarity can be
seen from yet another perspective by examining the the effect of an increase in deportations when
the legalization rate is high, i.e. comparing rows 5 and 6. Increasing the deportation rate when
the legal status transition rate is high (row 6 vs. 5) reduces the unauthorized migration of the
never-deported from 0.80% to 0.55%.
   Increasing the legal transition rate amplifies the deterrent effect of deportations, but it also
increases the total number of immigrants resident in the U.S. Focusing on the last two columns
of rows 4 and 5 in Table 8, increasing the legal status transition rate does deter unauthorized
migrants somewhat, but it also increases the number of authorized immigrants by roughly an order
of magnitude. We now investigate whether a temporary guest worker program can provide similar
deterrence without such large increases in the legal immigrant population. To be specific, we start
with the situation in row 5 of Tables 6 ­ 8: 10% deportation rate, 1% legal status transition rate, and
the legal entry ban policy in place. The results from this counterfactual scenario are reproduced in
the first row of Table 9. The last three columns of Table 9 report the migration rate for unauthorized
immigrants from Table 6, the incentive-only unauthorized immigrant stock measure from Table 7,
and the sum of overall authorized and unauthorized immigrant stock measures from Table 8.
   The second row of Table 9 then considers a situation with the baseline rate of obtaining per-
manent legal status, but additionally creates a temporary visa program in which immigrants who


                                                  18
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                       Kovak and Lessem


obtain a visa may live and work in the U.S. for up to 3 years, after which they must return to Mex-
ico. The probability of obtaining a temporary visa is 5% per year. Note that this policy changes
the evolution of legal status over time; it is no longer an absorbing state. Compared to increasing
the rate of receiving permanent legal status, this temporary visa program yields an even larger
deterrence effect in terms of unauthorized migration flows and incentive-based stocks, and does so
while roughly halving the total years spent in the U.S. Thus, in the presence of a legal entry ban
policy, the temporary visa program amplifies the deterrent effect of enforcement policies by creat-
ing a valuable legal alternative. However, its temporary nature means that it drives more modest
increases in the overall numbers of immigrants in the U.S., which may be more politically feasible
in certain contexts. The temporary visas provide an effective deterrent because many immigrants
seem to prefer relatively short stays in the U.S. even absent policy incentives to do so. Panel (b)
in Table 1 shows that 65% of migrant spells in the U.S. last less than 3 years, so for a substantial
share of potential migrants the 3-year limit on the simulated work visas may not be binding.


7    Conclusion
This paper examines how increasing the number of visas available to potential migrants would
affect the flow of unauthorized immigrants to the U.S. We develop a dynamic discrete location
choice model, which we estimate using data from the Mexican Migration Project, and consider
a variety of policy counterfactuals to understand the interactions between i) enforcement policies
that change the probability of deportation facing unauthorized immigrants and ii) increased access
to work visas that increase the probability that a migrant will obtain legal status in the future.
Our results make clear that these two sets of policies reinforce one another to lower unauthorized
migration rates. Increased deportation rates directly reduce the value of migrating to the U.S. by
making it more likely that unauthorized migrants will be forced to return to Mexico before they
would have chosen to do so. In the presence of a nontrivial probability of receiving legal status,
the costs of deportation are even larger because deportation also causes migrants to lose access to
the possibility of migrating to the U.S. legally in the future.
    Our findings inform ongoing immigration policy debates along three main dimensions. First,
because for most potential Mexican migrants the probability of obtaining legal status is small, the
legal entry ban policy for previously deported individuals has a minimal deterrent effect on unautho-
rized immigration. The implementation of this policy is costly in terms of enforcement personnel,
immigrant detention, and immigration court resources, yet our counterfactual simulations suggest
that it currently has a very small impact.
    Second, our findings are informative regarding how to structure immigration reforms designed
to address the issue of unauthorized migration. Because enforcement and visa policies reinforce
each other, implementing them together will likely have a larger impact on unauthorized immigra-


                                                  19
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                      Kovak and Lessem


tion than would alternative approaches that seek to achieve enforcement goals prior to expanding
the options for legal immigration. Moreover, if increasing legal access to the U.S. labor market
substantially reduces unauthorized immigration, then it may help reduce other enforcement costs.
For example, a decrease in the numbers of immigrants crossing the border illegally to work in the
U.S. would make it easier to identify those involved in drug or weapons smuggling.
   Third, we find that a temporary work visa program provides a similar deterrent effect to that
of an increase in the probability of receiving permanent legal status, without such large increases
in the total number of immigrants residing in the U.S. at a given moment in time. Therefore,
in certain contexts, temporary work visa programs may provide a more politically feasible means
of providing legal access to the U.S. labor market while still amplifying the deterrent effects of
immigration enforcement policies.




                                                20
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                Kovak and Lessem


References
Allen, Treb, Caue Dobbin, and Melanie Morten. 2019. "Border walls." NBER Working Paper, no. 25267.
Bazzi, Samuel, Sarah Burns, Gordon Hanson, Bryan Roberts, and John Whitley. 2019. "Deterring Illegal Entry:
    Migrant Sanctions and Recidivism in Border Apprehensions." NBER Working Paper, no. 25100.
Bohn, Sarah, Magnus Lofstrom, and Steven Raphael. 2014. "Did the 2007 Legal Arizona Workers Act reduce the
    state's unauthorized immigrant population?" Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (2):258­269.
Bohn, Sarah, and Todd Pugatch. 2015. "U.S. border enforcement and Mexican immigrant location choice." De-
    mography 52 (5):1543­1570.
Caballero, Maria Esther, Brian C. Cadena, and Brian K. Kovak. 2018. "Measuring Geographic Migration Patterns
    Using Matr´  iculas Consulares." Demography, no. 55:1119­1145.
Cascio, Elizabeth U., and Ethan G. Lewis. 2019. "Distributing the Green (Cards): Permanent residency and
    personal income taxes after the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986." Journal of Public Economics
    172 (April): 135­150.
CBO. 2006, February. "Immigration Policy in the United States." Technical Report, Congressional Budget Office.
        . 2010, December. "Immigration Policy in the United States: An Update." Technical Report, Congressional
    Budget Office.
DHS. 2017. "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2016." Technical Report, U.S. Department of Homeland Security,
    Office of Immigration Statistics.
        . 2019. "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2017." Technical Report, U.S. Department of Homeland
    Security, Office of Immigration Statistics.
East, Chloe N., Annie Laurie Hines, Phillip Luck, Hani Mansour, and Andrea Velasquez. 2018. "The Labor Market
    Effects of Immigration Enforcement." unpublished.
East, Chloe N., and Andrea Velasquez. 2019. "Unintended Consequences of Immigration Enforcement: Personal
    Services and High-Skilled Women's Work." unpublished.
Feigenberg, Benjamin. 2017. "Fenced Out: Why Rising Migration Costs Matter." unpublished.
Gemici, Ahu. 2011. "Family Migration and Labor Market Outcomes." working paper.
Gorlach, Joseph-Simon. 2020. Borrowing Constraints, Migrant Selection, and the Dynamics of Return and Repeat
    Migration.
Hanson, Gordon H, and Antonio Spilimbergo. 1999. "Illegal immigration, border enforcement, and relative wages:
    Evidence from apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico border." American Economic Review 89 (5):1337­1357.
Kennan, John, and James Walker. 2011. "The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions."
    Econometrica 79 (1): 211­251.
Lessem, Rebecca. 2018. "Mexico-U.S. immigration: Effects of wages and border enforcement." Review of Economic
    Studies 85 (4):2353­2388.
Massey, Douglas S., Jorge Durand, and Nolan J. Malone. 2002. Beyond smoke and mirrors: Mexican immigration
    in an era of economic integration. Russell Sage Foundation.
Passel, Jeffrey S., and D'Vera Cohn. 2018. "U.S. unauthorized immigrant total dips to lowest level in a decade."
    Technical Report, Pew Research Center.
Rosenblum, Marc R., Doris Meissner, Claire Bergeron, and Faye Hipsman. 2014. "The Deportation Dilemma:
    Reconciling Tough and Humane Enforcement." Technical Report, Migration Policy Institute, Washington,
    D.C.
USCIS. 2016, February. Maintaining Permanent Residence.




                                                      21
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                      Kovak and Lessem




                                       Figure 1: Unauthorized Immigrant Population Measures

                                    

                                              
            
               
    
 
 






                                    



                                    



                                    



                                    



                                    
                 





                                    



                                    
                                       "!
                                       "!
                                       "!
                                       "!
                                       "!
                                       "!
                                       "!

                                       "!!
                                       "!"
                                       ""
                                       ""
                                       ""
                                       ""
                                       ""
                                       ""
                                       ""

                                       ""!
                                       """
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       

                                       !
                                       "
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       "!




                                       ""




                                       




                                       
Sources:   Both the Pew Research Center and INS/DHS series estimate the unauthorized immigrant population
using a residual method, in which administrative measures of the number of authorized immigrants is sub-
tracted from a survey-based estimate of the total foreign-born population.            For the Pew Research Center se-
ries, estimates for 1990, 1995, 2000, and 2005-2017 are from https://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2019/06/03/
facts-on-u-s-immigrants/; estimates for 1980, 1982, 1986, 1989, and 1992 are from https://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/
2006/03/07/ii-unauthorized-migrants-the-numbers/; and estimates for 2001-2004 are from https://www.pewresearch.
org/hispanic/2008/10/02/trends-in-unauthorized-immigration/.          For the INS/DHS series the estimate for 1992
is from https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Unauthorized%20Immigrant%20Population%20Estimates%
20in%20the%20US%201996.pdf; the estimate for 1996 is from https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
Unauthorized%20Immigrant%20Population%20Estimates%20in%20the%20US%201990%20to%202000.pdf; estimates for 2000 and
2005-2009 are from https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/18_1214_PLCY_pops-est-report.pdf using the
2000 Census, while 2010-2015 are from the same source using the 2010 Census.




                                                               22
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                                Kovak and Lessem




                                        Figure 2: Border Enforcement Resources
                             "                                                                            " 




                                                                                                                  
                                       
                             !%                                                                           !%
                                    &       
                             !$                                                                           !$
                                              
  
                  




                             !#                                                                           !#




                                                                                                                 

   
                      
 




                             !"                                                                           !"


                             !                                                                            ! 


                              %                                                                           %


                              $                                                                           $


                              #                                                                           #




                                                                                                               
                              "                                                                           "
                                  $#
                                  $#
                                  $#
                                  $#
                                  $#

                                  $#!
                                  $#"
                                  $##
                                  $#$
                                  $$
                                  $$
                                  $$
                                  $$
                                  $$

                                  $$!
                                  $$"
                                  $$#
                                  $$$
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  

                                  !
                                  "
                                  #
                                  $
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  

                                  !
                                  "
                                  $#




                                  $$




                                  




                                  




Sources: Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) Budget for 1980-2003 from https://www.justice.gov/archive/jmd/
1975_2002/2002/html/page104-108.htm. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) Budgets for 2003-2017 from yearly Department of Homeland Security Budgets-in-Brief, available at https://www.dhs.
gov/dhs-budget. Both are reported in billions of year-2015 dollars (left axis) using the CPI-U yearly price deflator. Border Patrol
staffing numbers for the Southwest Sectors (right axis) from the U.S. Border Patrol Fiscal Year Staffing Statistics, available at
https://www.cbp.gov/document/stats/us-border-patrol-fiscal-year-staffing-statistics-fy-1992-fy-2018.




                                                               23
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                         Kovak and Lessem




                                         Figure 3: Removals and Returns

                                                                                                      
                                                 
                   
      
                             
                                                                                                      

                             




                                                                                                         
                      




                                                                                                      
                             




                                                                                                          
 
                                                                                                      
                             


                                                                                                      




                                                                                                          
                             
                 
 




                                                                                                      




                                                                                                          

                             
                                                                                                      
                             

                                                                                                      
                             


                                                                                                      
                                ! 
                                ! 
                                ! 
                                ! 
                                ! 
                                ! 
                                ! 
                                ! 

                                ! !
                                !!
                                !!
                                !!
                                !!
                                !!
                                !!
                                !!
                                !!

                                !!!
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                

                                !
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                !!




                                
                                !




Sources: Table 39 of the 2017 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, available at https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/
yearbook/2017. Removals include standard removals, stipulated orders, expedited removals, reinstatement of removal, and
administrative removal. Returns include withdrawal of application for admission, voluntary return, and voluntary departure.
See Rosenblum et al. (2014) for details on each category of departure.




                                                            24
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                                                                                             Kovak and Lessem


                                                             Figure 4: Mexico to U.S. migration rates




                                                                                                                                                 15000
                                       .02
                              share migrating north




                                                                                                                                                              10000
                                                                                                                                                 obs. in denominator
                                    .01       .015




                                                                                                                                                 5000
                           .005        0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                      1980       1985         1990         1995          2000       2005        2010      2015
                                                                                                  Year

                                                                      share migrating north                         obs. in denominator
                                                       Share of those in Mexico and without legal status in t-1 who migrate to US in t.



                                                         (a) Immigrants Without Legal Status in the U.S.




                                                                                                                                                 150
                                       .25     .2
                           share migrating north




                                                                                                                                                 obs. in denominator
                                                                                                                                                               100
                               .1     .15




                                                                                                                                                  50
                                       .05
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                      1980       1985         1990         1995          2000       2005        2010      2015
                                                                                                  Year

                                                                      share migrating north                         obs. in denominator
                                                       Share of those in Mexico and with legal status in t-1 who migrate to US in t.



                                                             (b) Immigrants With Legal Status in the U.S.


Source: Authors' calculations based on Mexican Migration Project data. See text for sample restrictions. The black line in
panel (a) shows the share of those in Mexico and without U.S. legal status in year t - 1 who migrate to the U.S. in year t, listed
on the x-axis, with values plotted on the left axis. Panel (b) shows the share of those in Mexico and with U.S. legal status in
year t - 1 who move to the U.S. in year t. In both panels, the gray line shows the number of observations in the denominator
of the relevant share in each year (i.e. those in Mexico and without U.S. legal status in year t - 1 in panel (a) and those in
Mexico and with U.S. legal status in year t - 1 in panel (b)), plotted on the right axis.




                                                                                                  25
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                                                                                                         Kovak and Lessem


                                                              Figure 5: U.S. to Mexico migration rates




                                                                                                                                                      600
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                             500
                                                 .35
                           share migrating south




                                                                                                                                                         obs. in denominator
                                                                                                                                                                     400
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                             300
                               .25




                                                                                                                                                      200
                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                      100
                                        .15




                                                       1980       1985         1990         1995          2000       2005         2010         2015
                                                                                                   Year

                                                                       share migrating south                         obs. in denominator
                                                        Share of those in the US and without legal status in t-1 who migrate to Mexico in t.



                                                          (a) Immigrants Without Legal Status in the U.S.




                                                                                                                                                      300
                                        .2      .15
                             share migrating south




                                                                                                                                                      obs. in denominator
                                                                                                                                                                    200
                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                       100
                           .05          0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                       1980       1985         1990         1995          2000       2005         2010         2015
                                                                                                   Year

                                                                       share migrating south                         obs. in denominator
                                                        Share of those in the US and with legal status in t-1 who migrate to Mexico in t.



                                                              (b) Immigrants With Legal Status in the U.S.


Source: Authors' calculations based on Mexican Migration Project data. See text for sample restrictions. The black line in
panel (a) shows the share of those in the U.S. and without U.S. legal status in year t - 1 who migrate to Mexico in year t, listed
on the x-axis, with values plotted on the left axis. Panel (b) shows the share of those in the U.S. and with U.S. legal status in
year t - 1 who move to Mexico in year t. In both panels, the gray line shows the number of observations in the denominator of
the relevant share in each year (i.e. those in the U.S. and without U.S. legal status in year t - 1 in panel (a) and those in the
U.S. and with U.S. legal status in year t - 1 in panel (b)), plotted on the right axis.




                                                                                                   26
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                                                                                          Kovak and Lessem




                                                                   Figure 6: Legal Status Transition Rates




                                                                                                                                              15000
                                         .008
                           share receiving legal status
                                                .006




                                                                                                                                              obs. in denominator
                                                                                                                                                          10000
                                      .004




                                                                                                                                               5000
                             .002        0




                                                                                                                                              0
                                                          1980        1985         1990         1995          2000       2005   2010   2015
                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                   share receiving legal status
                                                                                   share receiving legal status, omitting IRCA
                                                                                   obs. in denominator
                                                           Share without legal status in t-1 getting legal status in t




Source: Authors' calculations based on Mexican Migration Project data. See text for sample restrictions. The solid black line
shows the share of those without U.S. legal status in year t - 1 who get legal status in year t. The dashed black line plots the
same share, omitting those who report receiving legal status under IRCA. The gray line shows the number of observations in
the denominator of the relevant share (i.e. those without U.S. legal status).




                                                                                                        27
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                               Kovak and Lessem




                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics.


                Panel (a): Characteristics in survey year (or last year in sample)
                    Number of household heads observed                                                   17,538
                    Share female                                                                         0.153
                    Age distribution
                         18-29                                                                            0.094
                         30-39                                                                            0.211
                         40-49                                                                            0.232
                         50-59                                                                            0.204
                         60-65                                                                            0.259
                    Education distribution (years)
                         0-5 (low)                                                                        0.340
                         6+ (high)                                                                        0.660
                    Share in the U.S.                                                                     0.047
                    Share with U.S. legal status                                                          0.029

                Panel (b): Migration patterns
                    Number of observed Mexico to U.S. migration events                                    4,694
                    Distribution of Mexico to U.S. migration events per person
                         0                                                                                0.834
                         1                                                                                0.112
                         2                                                                                0.033
                         3+                                                                               0.021
                    Distribution of spell length in the U.S. (years)
                         1                                                                                0.481
                         2                                                                                0.173
                         3                                                                                0.089
                         4                                                                                0.050
                         5+                                                                               0.207
                         10+                                                                              0.104
                         20+                                                                              0.029

Authors' calculations based on Mexican Migration Project data on household heads. See text for additional sample restrictions.
Panel (a) shows the characteristics of the household heads in our sample as observed in the year of the survey, or the last year
of the sample (the survey year for those surveyed after age 65 does not appear in our sample due to the age restriction of 18-65).
This yields one observation per individual household head. Panel (b) uses the retrospective panel dimension of the data to
measure migration patterns. Note that the distribution of spell lengths includes censored spells at the beginning or end of the
panel for each individual.




                                                               28
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                               Kovak and Lessem


                             Table 2: Utility and moving cost parameter estimates


               Legal Status:                                           Unauthorized            Authorized
               Education:                                             Low      High          Low      High
               U.S. utility (uus )                                   0.219    -0.263         0.169    0.012
                                                                    (0.030) (0.050)         (0.030) (0.030)
               Moving cost, Mexico to U.S. (cm-us )                   6.068    5.969         3.513    2.356
                                                                    (0.413) (0.735)         (0.351) (0.474)
               Moving cost, U.S. to Mexico (cus-m )                  -0.739   -0.947         0.517    1.681
                                                                    (0.410) (0.731)         (0.343) (0.471)

These parameters show the estimated utility from living in the U.S. (recall that the utility from living in Mexico, um , is
normalized to zero), and the moving cost estimates. Standard errors in parentheses.


                                            Table 3: Time effects in utility


                                        Education:                 Low       High
                                        1994-2000                 0.0267    0.0915
                                                                 (0.0218) (0.0162)
                                        2001-2005                 0.0930    0.1375
                                                                 (0.0288) (0.0191)
                                        2006-2009                 0.0739    0.1150
                                                                 (0.0514) (0.0281)
                                        2010-2018                 0.0034    -0.0108
                                                                 (0.0503) (0.0273)
                                        Enforcement ( )                0.0331
                                                                      (0.0068)

These parameters report the additive increase in utility when living in the U.S. in a given year for the relevant education group.
The excluded group is years 1980-1993. Enforcement reports the effect of border enforcement on moving costs when moving
from Mexico to the US. Standard errors in parentheses.


                                            Table 4: Legal transition rates


                                            Education group              plt
                                            Low (0-5)                  0.000523
                                                                       (0.000071)
                                            High (6+)                  0.000526
                                                                       (0.000050)
                                            IRCA ()                    0.003413
                                                                       (0.000247)

We report the probability of being granted legal status in a given period. These depend on education level, and we allow the
probability to shift in the years following IRCA (1987-1991).



                                                               29
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                             Kovak and Lessem



                                                    Table 5: Model fit


                                                                Mexico    to U.S.        U.S. to    Mexico
                                                                Data       Model         Data        Model
                 Education group          Legal status            (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
                 Low                      Unauthorized          1.02%       1.02%       29.34%      28.62%
                 Low                      Authorized           15.21%      15.03%       9.11%        9.05%
                 High                     Unauthorized          1.28%       1.28%       29.81%      29.54%
                 High                     Authorized           14.20%      14.28%       9.95%        9.92%

Columns (1) and (2) consider people who start a period in Mexico. Column (1) shows the share of people in the relevant group
that moves to the U.S. in the MMP data. In column (2) we calculate the model-predicted probability of moving to the U.S. for
each individual, and then report the average over the sample. Columns (3) and (4) repeat this for the set of people who start
a period in the U.S., considering the model-predicted and observed rates of return migration to Mexico.


                     Table 6: Counterfactuals: Mexico to U.S. migration probabilities


                   Deportation        Legal status          Entry ban           Mex. to U.S. Migration rate
          Row      rate               transition rate       for deported        Never deported Deported
          1        Baseline           Baseline              No                  0.8342%         0.8342%
          2        Baseline           Baseline              Yes                 0.8339%         0.8361%
          3        10%                Baseline              No                  0.5868%         0.5868%
          4        10%                Baseline              Yes                 0.5856%         0.5876%
          5        10%                1%                    Yes                 0.5529%         0.5876%
          6        Baseline           1%                    Yes                 0.7975%         0.8361%

We report the model-predicted migration probabilities. This is for a 33 year old unauthorized immigrant in 2017 with the high
education level. We show these probabilities for situations where a person has never been deported, and when they have been
deported previously.


      Table 7: Counterfactuals: Average years unauthorized in the U.S. - incentive-only stock


                         Deportation        Legal status           Entry ban          Years unauthorized
                Row      rate               transition rate        for deported       in the U.S.
                1        Baseline           Baseline               No                 0.2705
                2        Baseline           Baseline               Yes                0.2702
                3        10%                Baseline               No                 0.1463
                4        10%                Baseline               Yes                0.1462
                5        10%                1%                     Yes                0.1397
                6        Baseline           1%                     Yes                0.2586

Considering only years in which a person does not have U.S. legal status, we compute the share of those years spent in the U.S..
We multiply this by 9 (the average number of years observed in the data) to get the average number of years spent in the U.S.
for unauthorized immigrants in each scenario.



                                                              30
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                            Kovak and Lessem




                      Table 8: Counterfactuals: Total years in the U.S. - overall stock


                                                                                  Total years (per person)
                    Deportation        Legal status          Entry ban                   in the U.S.
           Row      rate               transition rate       for deported       Unauthorized Authorized
           1        Baseline           Baseline              No                 0.6521           0.1051
           2        Baseline           Baseline              Yes                0.6516           0.1048
           3        10%                Baseline              No                 0.3527           0.1050
           4        10%                Baseline              Yes                0.3524           0.1050
           5        10%                1%                    Yes                0.3015           1.0610
           6        Baseline           1%                    Yes                0.5575           1.0750

We compute the total number of person-years spent in the US as an authorized and unauthorized immigrant. We divide this
by the total number of people in the sample.




                                   Table 9: Counterfactuals: Temporary visas


          Legal status         Temporary         Migration rate (m-us)           Years unauth.        Total years
          transition rate      visas             Never deported                  in U.S.              in U.S.
          1%                   No                0.5529%                         0.1397               1.3625
          Baseline             Yes               0.5008%                         0.1197               0.7300

Both rows apply a 10% deportation rate and the legal entry ban policy for those previously deported. The first row corresponds
to row 5 in counterfactual Tables 6 ­ 8. The second row assumes the baseline rate of obtaining permanent legal status, but
additionally creates a 3-year temporary visa program. The probability of receiving this visa is 5% per year. The column labeled
"Migration rate (m-us), Never deported" presents the migration flow measure for those without prior deportation shown in
Table 6. The column labeled "Years unauth. in U.S." shows the incentive-only stock measure for unauthorized immigrants
from Table 7. The column labeled "Total years in U.S." shows the sum of the last two columns of Table 8, reporting the total
immigrant stock measure including authorized and unauthorized immigrants.




                                                              31
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                       Kovak and Lessem


Online Appendices
(Not for publication)

A Identification of net utility parameters                                                         33

B Data                                                                                             36
  B.1 Migration Data Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    36
  B.2 Border Enforcement Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     38
  B.3 Interior Apprehension Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40




                                                 32
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                         Kovak and Lessem


A     Identification of net utility parameters
We use a 2 period model to show how the net utility parameters are identified. We denote living in
Mexico with m, and living in the U.S. with us. We abstract from legal status and characteristics, so
this section can be interpreted as demonstrating the identification for a fixed set of characteristics.
    We will work backwards, so first consider the period 2 decision. In the data, we see the share of
people who make each location choice. First consider the people who start the period in Mexico.
            -m                                                    -us
Denote pm 2    as the share of them who stay in Mexico and pm   2     as the share that move to the
                                                                                   -m
U.S. Next considering the people who start the period in the U.S., denote pus    2     as the share of
                                    us-us
them who return to Mexico and p2          as the share of them who stay in the U.S. We know the
following relationship between these shares:


                                           -m          -us
                                        pm
                                         2    = 1 - pm
                                                     2
                                            -m           -us
                                        pus
                                         2     = 1 - pus
                                                      2                                           (10)

    Next we consider the choice probabilities derived from the model. We normalize the cost of
moving to be 0 when not switching locations. Denote vt (t |t-1 ) as the deterministic value of living
in location t after living in location t-1 in the previous period. Since period 2 is the terminal
period, this just consists of the current utility from the location choice, as there is no continuation
value since we assume VT +1 = 0. Denote um as the utility from living in Mexico and uus as the
utility from living in the US. The cost of moving from Mexico to the U.S. is cm-us and the cost of
return migration is cus-m . Then for the terminal period,


                                      v 2 ( m | m ) = um
                                      v2 (us|m) = uus - cm-us
                                      v2 (m|us) = um - cus-m
                                     v2 (us|us) = uus                                             (11)

To make our identification arguments, we will rewrite the utility and moving costs in terms of net
utilities, defining the u
                        ~ terms as follows


                                        ~m-m = um
                                        u
                                       ~m-us = uus - cm-us
                                       u
                                       ~us-m = um - cus-m
                                       u
                                      ~us-us = uus
                                      u                                                           (12)

If we can identify the u
                       ~ terms, we can back out the u and c terms.
    Since we assumed a discrete choice model with extreme value shocks, the choice probabilities
have a logit form. Denote the model-implied probability of choosing location 2 when you start the
period in location 1 as P2 (2 |1 ). For example, consider the probability that someone starting in




                                                  33
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                         Kovak and Lessem


Mexico chooses to stay there:

                                                             um-m )
                                                        exp (~
                                P2 ( m | m ) =                                                 (13)
                                                      um-m ) + exp (~
                                                 exp (~             um-us )

We observe this moment in the data, so

                                      -m                 um-m )
                                                    exp (~
                                   pm
                                    2    =                                                     (14)
                                                  um-m ) + exp (~
                                             exp (~             um-us )

We can also calculate the probability that a person moves from Mexico to the US:

                                                             um-us )
                                                        exp (~
                                P2 (us|m) =                                                    (15)
                                                      um-m ) + exp (~
                                                 exp (~              um-us )

Again, using the observed data moments,

                                      -us                 exp (~um-us )
                                   pm
                                    2     =
                                                       um-m ) + exp (~
                                                  exp (~                 um-us )
                                    -m                    exp (~um-us )
                             1 - pm
                                  2    =
                                                       um-m ) + exp (~
                                                  exp (~                 um-us )
                                                          exp (~u m -m )
                                      -m
                                   pm
                                    2    =                 -
                                                                                               (16)
                                                  exp (~
                                                       u m  m ) + exp (~ um-us )
                                                                           -m         -us
Comparing equations (14) and (16), we see that using both moments pm     2    and pm2     yield the
same equation since they are co-linear, so we have to make a normalizing assumption. We set
~m-m = 0. This allows one to identify u
u                                        ~m-us using equation (16) based solely on the observed
migration rate in period 2.
   We can also consider decisions for people who start the period in the U.S. In this case,

                                                  exp (~uus-m )
                            P2 (m|us) =
                                                uus-m ) + exp (~
                                           exp (~               uus-us )
                                    -m            exp (~uus-m )
                                pus
                                 2       =                                                     (17)
                                                uus-m ) + exp (~
                                           exp (~               uus-us )

Absent additional information, we would need to impose an additional normalization to identify
~us-m or u
u        ~us-us . However, as we will show, we can use the period 1 migration rates combined with
equation (17) to identify the remaining parameters.
    We now consider the period 1 decision, and assume that the period 0 location is exogenously
given. Denote  as the extreme value shocks,  as Euler's constant, and  as the discount rate. We
can write the value function for a person who starts period 1 living in Mexico as follows.

              V1 ( m ) =       ~m- +  + E1 Vt ()
                           max u
                           =m,us

                      =        ~m- +  +  log exp u
                           max u                 ~-m + exp u
                                                           ~-us                    +           (18)
                           =m,us

We can then use equation (18) to write the log probability that a person who starts the period in


                                                      34
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                               Kovak and Lessem


Mexico chooses to stay in Mexico.


                         ~m-m +  log exp(~
log (P1 (m|m)) = log exp u               um-m ) + exp(~
                                                      um-us ) + 
                                ~m-m +  log exp(~
                      - log exp u               um-m ) + exp(~
                                                             um-us ) + 
                      +        ~m-us +  log exp(~
                           exp u                uus-m ) + exp(~
                                                              uus-us ) + 
                                             um-us )
                      = log exp  log 1 + exp(~
                                             um-us )
                      - log exp  log 1 + exp(~                        ~m-us +  log exp(~
                                                                + exp u                uus-m ) + exp(~
                                                                                                     uus-us )
                                                                                                             (19)

      We can now calculate the log odds ratio of staying in Mexico between periods 1 and 2:

       P1 ( m | m )
log                       = log (P1 (m|m)) - log (P2 (m|m))
       P2 ( m | m )
                                                 um-us )
                          = log exp  log 1 + exp(~
                                                 um-us )
                          - log exp  log 1 + exp(~                     ~m-us +  log exp(~
                                                                 + exp u                uus-m ) + exp(~
                                                                                                      uus-us )
                                    um-m )) + log exp(~
                          - log(exp(~                 um-m ) + exp(~
                                                                   um-us )
                                                 um-us )
                          = log exp  log 1 + exp(~
                                                 um-us )
                          - log exp  log 1 + exp(~                     ~m-us +  log exp(~
                                                                 + exp u                uus-m ) + exp(~
                                                                                                      uus-us )
                                        um-us )
                          + log 1 + exp(~
                                                um-us )
                          = (1 +  ) log 1 + exp(~
                                                                                                           -m
                                                 um-us )
                          - log exp  log 1 + exp(~                     ~m-us +  log exp(~
                                                                 + exp u                uus-m ) -  log(pus
                                                                                                        2     )
                                                um-us )
                          = (1 +  ) log 1 + exp(~
                                                                                       -m -
                          - log            um-us )
                                   1 + exp(~                               ~us-m )(pus
                                                              um-us ) exp( u
                                                        + exp(~                     2    )                       (20)

Note that we have already identified u    ~m-us using equation (16) and the normalization u   ~m-m = 0.
                                                                                  -m
In equation (20), the odds ratio on the left-hand side is observed, as is pus   2    , meaning that (20)
allows us to identify u
                      ~ us - m                                                                    ~us-us ,
                               . Given that, we can identify the remaining net utility parameter, u
using (17). Intuitively, identification is achieved in the dynamic setting because the incentive to
move changes over time in a way that depends on the net utility parameters.
    The two period model is sufficient to estimate the US baseline utility and moving cost parame-
ters. However, in our model we also have some additional parameters that vary over time: the effect
of border enforcement on moving costs and the time fixed effects in the relative utility of living in
the U.S. To estimate these parameters, we require data from multiple years. Intuitively, the effect
of border enforcement on moving costs comes from variation in migration rates as enforcement
levels change. The time fixed effects in utility are identified based on time variation in migration
rates that is unrelated to border enforcement.




                                                           35
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                          Kovak and Lessem


B      Data
B.1     Migration Data Coverage
The following figure shows a map of the communities covered by the MMP as of our sample.

                                Figure B1: Communities surveyed in the MMP




MMP Communities map produced by the MMP and obtained from https://mmp.opr.princeton.edu/research/maps-en.aspx.
Black dots represent communities available in the current data extract (MMP170) and utilized in this study. Red dots will be
available in subsequent data releases.




                                                            36
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                        Kovak and Lessem


   The following table compares the demographic and educational composition of the MMP data
and the year 2000 Mexican Census. For consistency across the two datasets, we restrict the MMP
sample to observations pertaining to the year 2000 for those resident in Mexico and restrict the
Census to household heads. The share female, age distribution, and education distribution are
quite similar across the two datasets, showing that although the MMP disproportionately samples
high-migration areas, the demographic and educational composition of these regions is similar to
that of household heads across Mexico as a whole.
                    Table B1: Comparison of MMP and Census Samples, Year 2000.


                                                                          MMP        Census
                                 Share female                             0.150       0.186
                                 Age distribution
                                     18-29                                 0.225      0.197
                                     30-39                                 0.265      0.297
                                     40-49                                 0.244      0.248
                                     50-59                                 0.185      0.176
                                     60-65                                 0.081      0.083
                                 Education distribution (years)
                                     0-2 (low)                             0.162      0.168
                                     3-11 (middle)                         0.662      0.600
                                     12+ (high)                            0.176      0.232

Authors' calculations based on Mexican Migration Project data and year 2000 Mexican Census data. In order to have corre-
sponding samples in the two datasets, we restrict the MMP data to observations for the year 2000 and for those residing in
Mexico and restrict the Census data to household heads. Census data weighted using person-level sampling weights.




                                                           37
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                      Kovak and Lessem


B.2    Border Enforcement Resources
Figure 2 provides various measures of border enforcement resources over time. We show the budget
of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and the combined budgets of Customs and
Border Protection (CBP) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), which took on the
enforcement duties of the INS after the creation of the Department of Homeland Security in 2003.
Both budget series are reported in year-2015 dollars using the CPI-U yearly price deflator (shown
on the left axis). We also show the number of Border Patrol officers assigned to the Southwest
Sectors of Big Bend (formerly Marfa), Del Rio, El Centro, El Paso, Laredo, Rio Grande Valley
(formerly McAllen), San Diego, Tucson, and Yuma. As is clear in the figure, these series track each
other quite closely over time. Since the budget data span our entire sample period, we use them
to generate a measure of border enforcement intensity over time. We simply proportionally rescale
the CBP + ICE Budget series so that it coincides with the INS Budget series in 2003, the year in
which we have observations for both series. The resulting series, appearing in Figure B2, is used
to measure border enforcement in the moving cost function in (7).




                                                38
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                   Kovak and Lessem




                                   Figure B2: Border Enforcement Series
             

    

 
           

                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             




Sources: Combines the INS Budget and CBP + ICE budget series shown in Figure 2 by proportionally rescaling the CBP +
ICE series to equal the INS series in 2003.




                                                        39
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                      Kovak and Lessem


B.3    Interior Apprehension Rate
We measure the intensity of interior immigration enforcement as the interior apprehension rate,
which we calculate as the yearly number of interior apprehensions divided by the estimated unau-
thorized immigrant population.
     The bold black line in Figure B3 shows a measure of interior immigrant apprehensions covering
1991 to 2017, compiled from Yearbooks of Immigration Statistics, published by the Department of
Homeland Security's Office of Immigration Statistics. Interior immigration enforcement responsi-
bility moved from the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) in 2003 with the creation of the Department of Homeland Security. The data
therefore aggregate the number of apprehensions falling under relevant INS and ICE programs in
each year (see the note for Figure B3 for details). Because this series only extends back to 1991,
we additionally plot total yearly removals reported in the 2017 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics,
shown with the gray dashed line. These data cover formal removals both in the interior and at the
border, but they nonetheless provide a measure of enforcement intensity in years prior to 1991. In
order to construct a consistent series for interior apprehensions throughout our sample period, we
proportionally rescale the Total Removals series to coincide with the Interior Apprehensions series
in 1991 and use this rescaled measure as a proxy for interior apprehensions for years prior to 1991.
The resulting series is shown in Figure B3 with hollow circles and a thin black line. This series
forms the numerator of our interior apprehension rate measure.
     Figure 1 shows two alternative measures of the unauthorized immigrant population of the
U.S. We show estimates of the unauthorized population from the Pew Research Center and from
official estimates produced by the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Department
of Homeland Security. In both cases, the unauthorized population is estimated using a "residual
methodology" in which researchers use estimates of the total foreign-born population of the U.S.
and subtract the population of authorized immigrants as measured in administrative data. The
total foreign-born population is measured using either the American Community Survey (ACS)
or the March Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS), with appropriate adjustments
for potential undercount of unauthorized immigrants. The population of authorized immigrants
comes from administrative data published by the Department of Homeland Security's Office of
Immigration Statistics. In spite of slight differences in the samples and various measurement
choices, the two data sources provide remarkably similar estimates for the unauthorized population
in each year. We therefore focus on the Pew data, since they span our entire sample period. We
fill in the missing years by linearly interpolating values based on the adjacent years.
     Finally, we combine the interpolated series on the unauthorized immigrant population with
the combined apprehension series in Figure B3 to calculate the interior apprehension rate for
unauthorized immigrants in each year. The resulting series, appearing in Figure B4, is used to
measure the yearly probability of deportation for unauthorized immigrants living in the U.S., as
discussed in Section 5.1.




                                                40
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                        Kovak and Lessem




                                 Figure B3: Interior Apprehension Measures

               
                                                                                
  
               


               


               


               


               


               


               


               


                


                   
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         



Sources: Interior Apprehensions are measured as follows. For 1991-2005 they reflect apprehensions by the INS Office of
Investigations or ICE Homeland Security Investigations. For 2006-2007 they reflect apprehensions by ICE Homeland Security
Investigations, Detention and Removal Operations, and the Criminal Alien Program. For 2008-2017 they reflect apprehensions
ICE Homeland Security Investigations and Enforcement and Removal Operations. These measures come from various Yearbooks
of Immigration Statistics, available at https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/yearbook and the ICE Fiscal Year 2008
Annual Report, available at https://www.hsdl.org/?abstract&did=35723. Total Removals reports departures based on a
formal order of removal, using data from the 2017 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics. Although these data cover formal
removals in the interior and at the border, they provide information on enforcement intensity in years prior to 1991.




                                                           41
How do U.S. Visa Policies Affect Unauthorized Immigration?                                     Kovak and Lessem




                                   Figure B4: Interior Apprehension Rate
           

             
 


                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     




Source: Combined apprehension series from Figure B3 as a share of unauthorized population from the Pew Research Center
series in Figure 1, including linearly interpolated values in missing years.




                                                         42
