                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INTERTEMPORAL PRICE DISCRIMINATION IN
                        SEQUENTIAL QUANTITY-PRICE GAMES

                                      James D. Dana Jr.
                                      Kevin R. Williams

                                      Working Paper 26794
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26794


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




A previous version of this paper circulated under the title "Oligopoly Price Discrimination: The
Role of Inventory Controls." We would like to thank Heski Bar-Isaac, Iwan Bos, Johannes
Hörner, Aniko Öry, Robert Phillips, Maher Said, Kathryn Spier, Jidong Zhou and participants at
the 2016 International Industrial Organization Conference, the 2016 INFORMS Revenue
Management and Pricing Conference, and the Tuck School of Business operations management
workshop for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by James D. Dana Jr. and Kevin R. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intertemporal Price Discrimination in Sequential Quantity-Price Games
James D. Dana Jr. and Kevin R. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 26794
February 2020
JEL No. D21,D43,L0,L13

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper develops an oligopoly model in which firms first choose capacity and then compete in
prices in a series of advance-purchase markets. We show that when the elasticity of demand falls
across periods, strong competitive forces prevent firms from utilizing intertemporal price
discrimination. We then enrich the model by allowing firms to use inventory controls, or sales
limits assigned to individual prices. We show that competing firms can profitably use inventory
controls. Thus, although typically viewed as a tool to manage demand uncertainty, we show that
inventory controls can also facilitate price discrimination in oligopoly.


James D. Dana Jr.
Northeastern University
301 LA, Economics Department
360 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
j.dana@northeastern.edu

Kevin R. Williams
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
kevin.williams@yale.edu
1   Introduction

In many oligopoly markets, such as in the airline, entertainment, hotel, and sports in-
dustries, firms choose capacity long before they set price. Seminal research by Kreps and
Scheinkman (1983) and Davidson and Deneckere (1986) analyzes sequential quantity-price
games and characterizes when the Cournot model is a valid prediction in these sequential
quantity-price games. However, an important limitation of this research is that it considers
only one pricing or sales period, yet, the aforementioned industries are all clearly ones in
which consumers purchase in advance and firms adjust their prices over time.
    We consider an oligopoly model in which firms first choose capacity and then com-
pete in prices in a series of advance-purchase markets. We use the model to characterize
the pricing behavior of firms competing in multiple advance-purchase markets--more
specifically, we explore the incentives for intertemporal price discrimination to arise in an
oligopoly setting. We highlight the broad conditions under which Kreps and Scheinkman
(1983) and Davidson and Deneckere (1986)'s results are unchanged by incorporating mul-
tiple sales periods.
    We highlight two main contributions. First, absent additional commitments made by
firms, strong competitive forces drive equilibrium prices--advance-purchase prices--to be
flat over time. That is, Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) and Davidson and Deneckere (1986)
are robust to breaking up sales into multiple periods because the existence of multiple
sales periods creates a costless arbitrage opportunity in which a firm increases profits
by shifting sales in lower-priced periods to rivals and increasing its own sales in higher-
priced periods. This results in intense price competition and prevents firms from setting
increasing prices when demand in later periods is more price inelastic. It also prevents
firms from setting decreasing prices when demand in later periods is more elastic.
    Second, we enrich the model by incorporating inventory controls, or sales limits as-
signed to set prices. We show that firms will choose to set inventory controls in order to
engage in intertemporal price discrimination, but only if demand becomes more inelastic


                                             1
over time. Inventory controls allow for increasing prices as well as higher profits for firms,
even when there is no uncertainty about demand. Thus, although inventory controls have
been extensively studied in the context of demand uncertainty, we show that they can
also be used for a different purpose: they can be used to facilitate price discrimination in
oligopoly markets.
   In our baseline model, firms sell a homogeneous good and have no private information.
Firms first choose capacity levels--a capacity constraint that is common across selling
periods--and then compete in price in a series of sequential markets. In each period,
firms' remaining capacities are observed, and then firms simultaneously choose prices.
Consumers then make their purchase decisions. After the final period, no further sales
can take place and unsold inventory is worthless.
   For tractability, we assume only two advance-purchase sales periods, although we do
discuss extending the analysis to any finite number of periods in an extension. We assume
that there are a continuum of consumers who are each assigned to one of two sequential
markets, though consumers assigned to the early market can wait and purchase in the later
market. We allow the elasticity of demand to change over time and emphasize the case in
which demand becomes more inelastic over time, though we also establish results under
the case of increasing elasticity of demand. The decreasing elasticity case is appealing for
two reasons. First, it is clear that a monopolist would set increasing prices in this scenario,
and second, prices tend to rise in several industries in which firms compete in sequential
quantity-price setting. This includes airlines, trains, and hotels.
   The challenge in solving our game, and the sequential quantity-price games studied
by Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) and Davidson and Deneckere (1986), is that quantity-
constrained price games often have mixed-strategy equilibrium. Solving our game is
even more challenging because we consider more than one sales period. We make the
analysis simpler and more intuitive by focusing on sufficiently high costs of capacity so
that equilibrium capacity choices are sufficiently small and that the equilibrium strategies



                                              2
in the price game are pure strategies both on and off the equilibrium path.
   Our first main result is that there exist strong competitive forces that prevent intertem-
poral price discrimination. Equilibrium prices are flat over time, even when consumers
who arrive later have a higher willingness to pay. Equilibria with increasing prices do
not exist because individual firms have an incentive to raise their price in the early pe-
riod, shifting early sales to its competitors, in order to sell more in the later period, when
consumers are less price-sensitive and the equilibrium price is higher. Equilibria with
decreasing prices do not exist when demand becomes more elastic because consumers
would wait to purchase at the lower price. However, additionally, individual firms have
an incentive to lower price in the early period, shifting high-priced sales to itself and later
low-priced sales to its rivals.
   Because firms can costlessly shift their capacity across periods (or markets), our result
may not seem surprising. But, recall that if firms could choose how much of their capacity
to allocate to each market, then firms will equate the marginal revenues in the two markets,
and not equate the prices. We show that with more than one pricing period, the sequential
capacity-then-price game is different from the Cournot model even though it is the same
as the Cournot model with just one pricing period.
   We characterize sufficient conditions under which uniform prices arise as the unique
pure-strategy equilibrium outcome. With a uniform price, sales are equal to the Cournot
quantity associated with aggregate demand--the sum of demands over time. Although
the flattening of prices occurs whether the elasticity of demand is increasing or decreasing
over time, we show there exists important asymmetries in the sufficient conditions for
uniform pricing in the two scenarios.
   We then enrich the model by allowing firms to implement unit-sales limits, or inven-
tory controls, in conjunction with price setting. Inventory controls have been studied
extensively in the context of demand uncertainty as a means to more efficiently allocate
scarce capacity (Talluri and Van Ryzin 2006, McGill and Van Ryzin 1999). We show that



                                              3
they can be used to facilitate intertemporal price discrimination. We analyze a game that
differs from the baseline model in the price stage. In the game with inventory controls,
firms simultaneously decide sales limits as well as prices in each of the sequential markets.
We show that firms commit to the use of inventory controls in order to increase profits
when the elasticity of demand decreases over time. In this case, equilibria exist in which
prices are increasing because inventory controls curtail firms' abilities to shift demand to
their competitors in the early, lower priced period. Firms sell their Cournot output in each
period, and so prices rise over time because demand becomes less elastic. Indeed, several
competitive industries, including airlines, hotels, theaters, and trains, all utilize inventory
controls.1
       In summary, we identify strong competitive effects that curtail the ability of firms to
price discriminate over time. Instead, firms charge a uniform price and sell the Cournot
output as if sales occurred in just one period. However, when firms can use inventory
controls, then as long as demand becomes more elastic over time, firms shield themselves
from strong competitive effects and sell the Cournot output in each period. Prices increase
over time.
       We also discuss a number of extensions. One important extension is to consider
product differentiation. When products are differentiated, prices are no longer uniform
across time as firms benefit from the inability to shift all of the demand using very small
price changes. However, the strategic incentives explored in this paper are still present.
We provide an example which shows that products must be highly differentiated for prices
to increase substantially across periods. Our results suggest that inventory controls are
particularly valuable when products are close substitutes; they allow firms to target the
market in which consumers are less price-sensitive. We also discuss extending the model
to include aggregate demand uncertainty and more than two sales periods. Finally, we
consider more general assumptions about inventory controls.
   1
   Fare increases in the final weeks before departure are consistent with intertemporal price discrimination,
and also consistent with theoretical models of demand uncertainty (Prescott 1975, Eden 1990, Dana 1999).


                                                     4
1.1      Related Literature

This paper contributes to three strands of the economics literature.
       First, we analyze a model of price competition with capacity constraints (Levitan
and Shubik 1972, Allen and Hellwig 1986, Osborne and Pitchik 1986, Klemperer and
Meyer 1986, Acemoglu, Bimpikis, and Ozdaglar 2009). As in Kreps and Scheinkman
(1983) and Davidson and Deneckere (1986), our firms choose capacity and then price,
but unlike earlier research, we consider more than one pricing period. Our results are
also related to Van den Berg, Bos, Herings, and Peters (2012), who consider a two-period
quantity game with capacity constraints, with and without commitment. However, our
main focus is on the way firms use prices to shift rivals sales from the higher-price period to
the lower-price period, which does not happen in their sequential quantity game because
quantity decisions do not affect the way their rivals' capacity is allocated across periods,
as prices decisions do in our model.2
       Second, we analyze intertemporal price discrimination. Stokey (1979) is a seminal
paper that shows that monopoly intertemporal price discrimination is not always feasible.
Much of the literature on intertemporal price discrimination finds that Coasian forces
constrain price discrimination (Öry 2016, Dilmé and Li 2018), however, in our setting,
the key constraint on price discrimination is competition (Champsaur and Rochet 1989).
Other papers consider environments with deadlines and limited capacity and find that
price adjustments over time are profitable (Gallego and van Ryzin 1994, Su 2007, Möller
and Watanabe 2010, Board and Skrzypacz 2016). This is particularly true when consumers
learn their preferences over time, as in Akan, Ata, and Dana (2015) and Ata and Dana
(2015).
       Important empirical contributions to the literature on intertemporal price discrimina-
tion, and more generally price adjustments over time, include Nair (2007) on video games,
   2
    Also see Benassy (1989) and Reynolds and Wilson (2000) for related pricing games, Aguirre (2017) for a
related quantity games, and De Frutos and Fabra (2011) for a related price and capacity game.




                                                    5
Sweeting (2012) on stadium seats, and Hendel and Nevo (2013) on storable goods. Much of
our focus is on prices that increase as a deadline draws closer (such as a scheduled event or
a scheduled departure time), a pattern that has been found in several airline studies (Puller,
Sengupta, and Wiggins 2012, Lazarev 2013, McAfee and te Velde 2007, Williams 2018).
        Finally, our work is related to the literature on inventory controls (Littlewood 1972,
Belobaba 1987, Belobaba 1989, Weatherford and Bodily 1992).3 This large and important
literature emphasizes that inventory controls can be an effective tool for managing aggre-
gate demand uncertainty. Notably, our work is the first paper to establish that inventory
controls can also be used to facilitate intertemporal price discrimination in oligopoly.



2        The Model

Consider an oligopoly with n firms selling a homogeneous good to a continuum of con-
sumers in a series of advance-purchase sales markets. For tractability, we consider just
two selling periods, or stages, labeled t = 1, 2. Some consumers arrive in Stage 1 and
others arrive in Stage 2. We assume that consumers who arrive earlier can buy in either
Stage 1 or Stage 2, while consumer who arrive later can only purchase in Stage 2.4
        We represent preferences using market demand functions, denoted by D1 (p) and D2 (p)
respectively, which we assume are strictly decreasing and differentiable functions. We let
P1 (q) and P2 (q) denote the inverse demands associated with D1 (p) and D2 (p). Note that
throughout the paper we use pi
                             t to denote Firm i's price; we use pt to denote the vector of

all firms' prices; and we use p2 to denote the Stage 2 price when all Stage 2 transactions
are at the same price.
        We let Dtot (p) = D1 (p) + D2 (p) denote the total demand when prices are the same in both
    3
     Talluri and Van Ryzin (2006) and McGill and Van Ryzin (1999) provide an overview of research on
inventory controls.
   4
     Alternatively, following Dana (1998) and Akan, Ata, and Dana (2015), we could have assumed that some
consumers do not learn their demands until Stage 2 and then make additional mild assumptions that imply
that these consumers would never want to purchase in Stage 1 even if they were able to.




                                                   6
periods (or when Stage 1 consumers wait and purchase in Stage 2), and Ptot (q) denote the
associated inverse total demand when q units of total output are sold at a uniform price.
We also assume that the market demand functions are associated with concave revenue
functions. That is, we assume Pt (qt )qt + 2Pt (qt ) < 0, t = 1, 2, where qt denotes total sales
in Stage t. We let t (p) = Dt (p)p/Dt (p) denote the price elasticity of demand in Stage t.
   Each firm's strategy consist of three choices, capacity and two prices, denoted by Ki ,
pi
 1
   , and pi
          2
            , where subscripts denote time, and, when necessary, superscripts denote the
individual firm. The game proceeds in three stages (see Figure 1). First, in Stage 0, firms
simultaneously choose their capacities, Ki  0. The vector of initial capacities is denoted
by K. The cost per unit of capacity for all firms is c  0. We assume that the marginal cost of
production for each unit sold is zero. Then, in Stage 1, firms simultaneously choose prices
denoted by the vector p1 . Consumers who arrive in Stage 1 then make their purchase
decisions. Sales, q1  0, are constrained only by the firms' first period capacities, K1 = K,
and firms' residual capacities, K2 = K - q1  0, are carried forward to the next period.
That is, capacity can be sold in either period, and the capacity constraint is common across
periods. In Stage 2, firms simultaneously choose prices, denoted by the vector p2 , and
then consumers who arrive in Stage 2 (or waited) make their purchase decisions. Sales,
q2  0, are constrained only by the firms' residual capacities, K2 . Capacity not used in
Stage 2, K2 - q2 , has zero value (it is scrapped at no cost). We ignore discounting.
   We now describe how Firm i's individual demand is derived from these market de-
mand functions, given the prices and capacities of the other firms. Products are homo-
geneous, so consumers purchase at the lowest price available, as long as their valuation
exceeds the price. If firms set different prices, then a firm with a higher price can have
positive sales only if all of the firms with lower prices have sold all of their capacity. If two
or more firms charge the same price, then those firms divide the sales equally, subject to
their capacity constraints. That is, demand is divided equally among these equally-priced
firms until the firm with the least capacity sells out, and then it is divided equally among



                                               7
                                                                                                                   -q
                                                                                                                        1

                                                 =K                                                       =   K1
                                        y   K1                p   1                               K   2
                                                                                                                        p2
                                    cit                   ose                                city                  se
                                 pa                    o                                  pa                    oo
                              Ca                     ch                    ed        Ca                       ch
                                                 s                 iz                                 s                     ized
                                            Firm              real                               Firm                   eal
        Firms choose K                                     is                                                       is r
                                                      q1                                                       q2



      Stage 0      Stage 1                                     Stage 2                                                       END

                                   Figure 1: Timing of the Game


the remaining firms until the firm with the least capacity sells out, and so on.
   How much the firm with the higher price sells--that is, the residual demand that is
left after the lower priced firm sells all of its capacity--depends on the rationing rule. The

                                         t ; pt , Kt , where the arguments are Firm i's
residual demand function is written RDt pi    -i   -i


own price, pi
            t , and vectors of all of the other firms' prices and current capacities, denoted

p- i    -i                                                            i
 t and Kt , respectively. This is the total residual demand at price pt , which is split among

all firms charging pi
                    t.

   Our results hold for both the efficient rationing rule and the proportional rationing
rule. The efficient rationing rule specifies that the lowest price unit for sale (after other
lower priced units are gone) goes to the remaining consumer with the highest willingness
to pay. Equivalently, under the efficient rationing rule, the residual demand function is

                                                                                      j
                               t ; pt , Kt ) = Dt (pt ) -
                         RDt (pi                                                    Kt , t = 1, 2,
                                    -i   -i         i
                                                                                                                                   (1)
                                                                            j
                                                                      j:   pt <pi
                                                                                t



where the summation is over all firms j that charge a lower price that Firm i, and where
-i denotes all other firms.
   The proportional rationing rule specifies that lowest price unit for sale (after all other
lower priced units are gone) is equally likely to be sold to every remaining consumer whose


                                                           8
willingness to pay exceeds the price. Equivalently, under the proportional rationing rule,
the residual demand function is
                                                                               
                                                                          j
                                                                       Kt      
                   RDt (pi     -i
                                  ,  -i
                                          = D   pi  1 -                         , t = 1, 2.
                                                                               
                           ;
                         t t p      Kt  )     (
                                             t t  )                         j 
                                                                                              (2)
                                                                      Dt (pt ) 
                                                                               
                                                          j:p j <pi
                                                    


   In both cases, the residual demand describes demand at the price pi
                                                                     t . If only Firm

i charges the price pi                                i
                     t , then the Firm i's demand at pt is given by the residual demand

function, and its sales are the smaller of the residual demand and its capacity. If more
than one firm charges pi
                       t , then the residual demand is divided equally among those firms,

subject to each firm's capacity constraint.
   Note that the rationing rules determine how sales are allocated to different firms
within each period, but not how sales are allocated across periods. If consumers who
arrive early have higher valuations, then it is natural to think that rationing is efficient
and that demand becomes more elastic over time. Similarly, when demand is less elastic
in Stage 2, then proportional rationing may be more compelling. However, we do not
assume a link between rationing rules and the change in the demand elasticity. Instead,
we derive results that are independent of the rationing rule, but do depend on whether
demand becomes more or less elastic over time.
   If there were just one pricing period, and the game ended at the end of Stage 1, then we
know from Kreps and Scheinkman (1983), who analyze efficient rationing, and Davidson
and Deneckere (1986), who analyze proportional rationing, that the pricing subgame has
a unique Nash equilibrium. Both of these papers characterized the equilibrium profits of
the pricing subgame for all capacity choices, including subgames in which the equilibrium
prices were in mixed strategies.




                                                  9
3       Restriction to Pure Strategies

Quantity-price games, including Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) and Davidson and De-
neckere (1986), are known to have mixed strategy equilibrium off of the equilibrium path
which makes them difficult to solve. However, both Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) and
Davidson and Deneckere (1986) show that when firms choose sufficiently small capacity,
then the pricing subgame has a unique pure-strategy equilibrium in which all prices equal
the market-clearing price. They also show that for sufficiently high capacity costs, every
pricing subgame in which firms earn positive profits has a pure-strategy equilibrium. Far
from being a special case, the sufficient conditions are just that the cost of capacity is large
enough so that firms never find it profitable to choose so much capacity that the marginal
revenue function is negative. That is, firms collectively choose capacities smaller than the
revenue maximizing capacity.
        A particularly enlightening example is the case of constant elasticity demand, or p(q) =
q1/ . In this case, marginal revenue is strictly positive for all q if | | > 1, because p(q)+p (q)q =
(1 + 1/ )q1/ . This means that in both Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) and Davidson and
Deneckere (1986)'s models, with constant elasticity demand and | | > 1, the equilibrium
of every pricing subgame is the market-clearing price. This holds regardless of the firms'
capacity choices in Stage 1. The pricing subgame never has a mixed-strategy equilibrium,
so the unique equilibrium of the quantity-price game is the Cournot equilibrium. This is
true regardless of the rationing rule (Madden 1998).
        Because we have two pricing periods, characterizing the equilibria of the pricing
subgame is considerably more challenging than in Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) and
Davidson and Deneckere (1986). To simplify our analysis, we assume that capacity costs
are sufficiently large so that all of the pricing subgames have pure-strategy equilibria.5
    5
     In addition making it easy to derive the equilibrium prices and profits in all of our subgames, another
benefit of assuming that capacity costs are high is that we can easily derive identical results for both the
efficient and proportional rationing rules. Recall that in both Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) and Davidson
and Deneckere (1986), when firms' capacities are small--specifically, smaller than the revenue maximizing



                                                    10
    We are able to restrict attention to games with pure-strategy equilibria in all of the
pricing subgames by assuming that capacity costs are sufficiently large, or equivalently,
Stage 0 capacity choices are sufficiently small. Specifically, we assume that


                                         argmax P2 (q)q >          Ki .
                                             q                 i


    Formally, we do this with two assumptions. The first is that argmaxq P2 (q)q > Dtot (c),
which guarantees that marginal revenue is positive in the second pricing period, even
in the event that every firm chooses not to sell any of its capacity in the first period
(Assumption 1).

Assumption 1. The total competitive output with capacity costs c is smaller than the capacity
that maximizes industry revenue, or equivalently, smaller than the second period monopoly output
when the firm has zero capacity costs. That is,


                                        argmax P2 (q)q > Dtot (c).
                                             q


    We provide two examples to highlight the potential restrictiveness, and lack thereof,
of Assumption 1.
    Example 1: With constant elasticity demand, i.e., P(q) = q1/ each period and | | > 1,
a monopolist with zero cost of capacity produces an infinite output so Assumption 1
is trivially satisfied. Marginal revenue is strictly positive for all q, so marginal revenue
is positive in Stage 2 for q = Dtot (c), for any value c > 0. Formally, this is because
P(q) + P (q)q = (1 + 1/ )q1/ , which is strictly positive for all < 1 and for all finite q > 0.
    Example 2: To see that Assumption 1 can be restrictive, but not unreasonably so,
consider the case of linear demand, P(q) = a - bq, and assume that demand is the same in
capacity, or equivalently smaller than a monopolist's output if capacity were free--then the price is always
equal to the market-clearing price and this is independent of the rationing rule. This is because the marginal
revenue is positive in the pricing stage even when firms act as a monopolist, which implies that marginal
revenue must be positive individually for every firm. Thus, firms can never increase their profits by setting a
price above the market-clearing price.


                                                      11
both periods. Then Dtot (c) = 2 · ((a - c)/b) and the monopoly output in the second period
(with zero capacity costs) is a/(2b). Thus, Assumption 1 holds if, and only if, c > (3/4)a.
    Although the above assumption is about the underlying parameters of the model,
the second assumption that we impose places a mild and intuitive restriction on firms'
strategies. We assume that the firms' total capacity does not exceed the capacity that
would be produced if the market were perfectly competitive. That is, total capacity is less
than Dtot (c).

Assumption 2. Firms' capacities are less than total demand at the perfectly competitive price, or
       i
  iK        Dtot (c).

    By imposing Assumption 2, we limit the firms' strategy sets to strategies that yield
profits we can evaluate. Specifically, we characterize the unique equilibrium within this
restricted strategy set and then show that this equilibrium is in the interior of the set, i.e.,

  iK
       i   < Dtot (c). Although we do not formally show that every deviation outside of this
set is not profitable, we do show that profits are zero and decreasing in capacity for all
strategic choices on the boundary of this set.
    We impose Assumption 2 in order to avoid evaluating profits in subgames with no
pure strategy equilibria. This assumption, along with Assumption 1, lets us show that the
Stage 2 price is always the market-clearing price, which simplifies our analysis and the
intuition for our results.
    Assumption 2 is difficult to relax because characterizing firms' profits and their sub-
game equilibrium mixed strategies in a model with two pricing periods is difficult. We
believe that dropping Assumption 2 does not change the equilibria of the game, or intro-
duce any new equilibria. That is, we believe that no equilibrium exists in which firms
choose more capacity than would be chosen in a perfectly competitive market. If firms
produced that much capacity and sold all of it, total profits would be negative. And it is
also difficult to see how firms could benefit from such large capacity if when it is not all
sold. Of course, unused capacity might be an effective off-the-equilibrium path instrument

                                               12
for punishment; however that is not the case here.
    Note that there are alternatives to Assumption 2. For example, we could have instead
assumed that each firm's capacity is less than Dtot (c)/n to obtain the same result. This
alternative, and others like it, are stronger and still place restrictions on firm's strategies,
but this assumption does have the appealing property that the restrictions do not depend
on other firms' strategic choices.
    Another alternative to Assumption 2 is to assume that the Stage 0 profit function is
strictly decreasing in Ki for Ki  Dtot (c) -      j iK
                                                         j,   where profit is clearly equal to 0 and
locally decreasing for Ki = Dtot (c) -    j iK
                                                 j.   This of course is a property of the profit
function normally derived from assumptions on other parameters, which we cannot do
easily, but this assumption nevertheless is highly reasonable in this setting.
    Together, Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that the firms' total capacity is always less than
argmaxq p2 (q)q, which implies that the firms' remaining capacity in Stage 2 is always less
than argmaxq p2 (q)q, and that the equilibrium price in the final pricing period is always
the market-clearing price. This means that both on and off of the equilibrium path, every
final period subgame has a unique pure-strategy equilibrium. We will maintain these
assumptions throughout our analysis.



4   A Benchmark Result

Before characterizing the equilibrium of our game, we consider a useful benchmark.
Imagine that firms set price just once, or more precisely, that firms are constrained to set
the same price is Stage 2 as in Stage 1--that is, pi
                                                   2
                                                     = pi
                                                        1
                                                          , i. Firms choose K in Stage 0 and
p1 in Stage 1 and the price in Stage 2 is constrained to also be p1 . Then, K must be the
symmetric Cournot output (the Cournot output when demand is D1 + D2 ). This is because
Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that the equilibrium price in the pricing subgame is always
equal to the market clearing price, so the Stage 0 capacity game reduces to a standard
Cournot model. We show this in the following lemma. All proofs, except Lemma 3, are in

                                               13
the Appendix.

Lemma 1. When firms are constrained to choose the same price in Stage 1 and Stage 2, under either
the efficient or the proportional rationing rule if Assumptions 1 and 2 hold (capacity is constrained
by Assumption 2), then the equilibrium price in every Stage 1 and Stage 2 pricing subgame is the
market clearing price (the price such that D1 (p) + D2 (p) =    iK
                                                                     i)   and the equilibrium capacities
chosen in Stage 0 are the Cournot capacities associated with demand equal to D1 (p) + D2 (p).

      Since we obtain the Cournot model output levels, as the number of firms goes to
infinity, the price converges to the cost of capacity, c, and the total capacity and sales
converges to D1 (c) + D2 (c). Hence, we refer to c as the competitive price.
      In the next section, we consider the model when firms can set different prices in each
period, and when the elasticity is higher (or lower) in Stage 2 so that setting different prices
generates higher profits.



5     Equilibrium Characterization

We now solve for the subgame perfect equilibrium of the full model, as described in
Section 2, starting with Stage 2 and working backwards to Stage 0.


5.1     The Final Pricing Period

We first characterize equilibrium prices in Stage 2, the final pricing period. Lemma 2 states
that in the second period, firms set prices to clear the market.

Lemma 2. Under either the efficient or the proportional rationing rule, if Assumption 1 and
Assumption 2 hold, then in any subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) of the three-stage game, the
price in the second selling period clears the market.

      Lemma 2 is important because it allows us to easily characterize all of the pure-strategy
subgame-perfect equilibria of the pricing subgame. And note that it holds even if only

                                                 14
one firm remains, because that firm has sunk its capacity costs and because capacity costs
are large enough (by Assumption 1) that the firm wants to sell all of its capacity.
      Also, note that we refer to an equilibrium as unique when all of the equilibria have the
same outcomes and payoffs for all players. This is particularly important to remember
because if prices decline over time, but every consumer buys in the last period, we will
say this is a uniform-price equilibrium because payoffs are the same as the uniform-price
equilibrium which exhibits constant prices over time and across firms.
      Lemma 2 shows that the unique equilibrium of the second stage subgame is a uniform
price (for firms with positive capacity), so no equilibria exist in which firms play mixed
strategies in Stage 2.


5.2     The Absence of Price Discrimination in Symmetric Equilibria

Lemma 3 highlights why competing firms find it difficult to price discriminate over time.
It highlights the competitive force that tends to equalize prices.

Lemma 3. No symmetric equilibrium of the pricing subgame exists in which prices are different
in the two periods. Equivalently, in any symmetric equilibrium, pi
                                                                 1
                                                                   = pi
                                                                      2
                                                                        , i = 1, ..., n.

                                                                         j             j
Proof. If pi
           1
             < pi
                2
                  , and all of the firms charge the same price (pi
                                                                 1
                                                                   = p1 and pi
                                                                             2
                                                                               = p2 ), then any
firm could profitably deviate to a slightly higher price in Stage 1. The deviating firm's
Stage 1 sales would fall discretely (possibly to zero); its Stage 2 sales would rise discretely;
and the transaction price in Stage 2 would change by an arbitrarily small amount. So the
deviating firm's profits would be strictly higher.
      A similar argument can be made if pi
                                         1
                                           > pi
                                              2
                                                , and all of the firms charge the same price.
In that any firm could profitably deviate to a slightly lower price in Stage 1. The deviating
firm's period 1 sales would rise discretely (possibly rise to its capacity); its Stage 2 sales
would fall discretely; and the transaction prices in both periods would change by an
arbitrarily small amount. So the deviating firm's profits would be strictly higher.


                                                15
      However, clearly pi
                        1
                          > pi
                             2
                               is also not feasible in a symmetric equilibrium because all of
the consumers would wait to purchase until Stage 2 and buy at the market clearing price,
which will necessarily be lower than pi
                                      1
                                        .

      Lemma 3 demonstrates the strong competitive forces in the model. If prices changed
over time (in a symmetric equilibrium), individual firms could change their prices in order
to increase their sales in the higher-priced period. Prices cannot rise over time because
firms can raise their Stage 1 price to shift sales to rivals in Stage 1 and therefore sell more
in Stage 2. Lemma 3 also means price cannot fall over time, but even a monopolist cannot
benefit from declining prices, because in our model consumers can wait until prices are
lower in Stage 2 to make their purchases. As we now show, this does not mean that prices
must be uniform.
      Next, we characterize pure-strategy equilibria of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 pricing sub-
game. We consider the increasing and decreasing elasticity of demand cases separately.


5.3     Decreasing Elasticity of Demand

5.3.1    The Pricing Subgame

Proposition 1, below, shows that there are two types of pure-strategy subgame perfect
equilibria in the pricing subgame when the elasticity of demand decreases over time. In a
uniform-price equilibrium, transaction prices are the same for all firms and all consumers
as well as across the two pricing periods. Since the market clears in Stage 2 (see Lemma 2
above), any uniform-price equilibrium must satisfy D1 (p ) + D2 (p ) =     iK
                                                                                i,   so the uniform
price is unique (as in Lemma 1). Note that because all Stage 1 consumers can wait and
purchase in Stage 2, a uniform-price equilibrium with declining offer prices may exist, but
transactions prices are uniform.
      In an asymmetric-price equilibrium, a single firm sells in Stage 1; the Stage 1 price is
lower than the Stage 2 price; and all other firms sell only in Stage 2. Let Firm i be the firm



                                               16
that sells in the first period, and let pi
                                         1
                                           and qi
                                                1
                                                  denote its first-period price and quantity,
where
                                                                          
                                                                          
                     1 = argmax pD1 (p) + P2 
                    pi                                         Ki - D1 (p) K - D1 (p) ,
                                                                           i
                                                                                               (3)
                        p[P1 (K ),]
                             i
                                             
                                                           i

or, equivalently,                                                       
                                                                        
                         qi   = argmax P1 (q)q + P2                 i
                                                                         K -q .
                                                                         i
                                                                   K - q
                                                    
                          1
                                                                                               (4)
                                 q[0,K ]
                                    i
                                                    
                                                               i

In both expressions, Firm i's first-period sales do not exceed Ki . The second-period price
is higher than pi
                1
                  and is given by

                                                                   
                                                                   
                                           P2        Ki - D1 (pi   .
                                                                   
                                              
                                                               1 ) 
                                                                                               (5)
                                                 i


   Note, however, that Proposition 1 holds regardless of whether the elasticity is increas-
ing or decreasing.

Proposition 1. Under either the efficient or the proportional rationing rule, if Assumptions 1 and
2 hold, then every pure-strategy subgame-perfect equilibrium of the pricing subgame is either a
uniform-price equilibrium or an asymmetric-price equilibrium satisfying Equations (3), (4) and
(5). When a uniform-price equilibrium exists, it is the unique pure-strategy subgame-perfect
equilibrium.either a uniform-price equilibrium exists, or uniform-price equilibrium does not exist
and between one and n asymmetric-price equilibria exist.

   Intuitively, asymmetric-price equilibria exist because a lower price in Stage 1 increases
sales in the Stage 1, leading to less output sold and a higher price in Stage 2. But a firm
can increase its profit in this way only if the elasticity is decreasing (so increasing prices is
desirable) and only if it has sufficient capacity to meet all of the demand in Stage 1 plus
enough additional capacity to profit from selling at the higher price in Stage 2. Other firms
free ride and sell only in Stage 2 at the higher price.


                                                      17
   Asymmetric-price equilibria are more likely to exist when one firm chooses more
capacity than its rivals in Stage 0. The uniform-price equilibrium is less likely to exist
when one firm chooses significantly more capacity than its rivals. The incentive to deviate
to a lower price is increasing in the deviating firm's capacity, decreasing in the rival firms'
capacity, increasing in the elasticity of first-period demand, and decreasing in the size of
Stage 1 demand.
   Proposition 1 suggests that whether the demand elasticity is increasing or decreasing,
price competition puts pressure on firms to equalize prices across the two markets. That
is, equilibrium prices are either uniform, or, if one firm is sufficiently large, the large
firm unilaterally implements an asymmetric-price equilibrium. And although Proposi-
tion 1 shows that asymmetric-price equilibria of the pricing subgame may exist, we can
now show that under relatively mild additional assumptions, the unique equilibrium is
a uniform-price equilibrium even when the elasticity of demand is decreasing. Assump-
tion 3, stated below, is a sufficient condition to guarantee that asymmetric-price equilibria
do not exist.
   Assumption 3 requires that demand in Stage 2 not be too inelastic relative to demand in
Stage 1. While demand in the Stage 2 is less elastic than demand in Stage 1, Assumption 3
limits how inelastic demand in Stage 2 can be. This relatively weak assumption implies
that no firm has enough capacity to profitably deviate from the symmetric uniform-price
equilibrium.

Assumption 3. The elasticities of demand and capacities satisfy

                              2 (p)       Ki
                                    >            , p   > 0, i = 1, ..., n.                     (6)
                              1 (p)      n
                                         j=1 K
                                               j



Proposition 2. When the elasticity of demand is decreasing over time, or |1 (p)| > |2 (p)|, p > 0,
then under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, the unique subgame-perfect pure-strategy equilibrium of the
Stage 1 and Stage 2 pricing subgame is a uniform-price equilibrium.


                                               18
       Intuitively, when the elasticity is decreasing, deviating to a lower price from a uniform
price is profitable for a monopolist if it raises the Stage 2 profit by more than it lowers the
Stage 1 profit. However, since rivals free ride and sell only in Stage 2, an oligopoly firm
that deviates from a uniform price, by lowering its Stage 1 price, earns at most 1/nth of the
Stage 2 industry profits. The oligopoly firm that deviates cannot increase its profit unless
it can increase the Stage 2 industry profits by at least n times the decrease in its Stage 1
profit. For such a deviation to be profitable, the Stage 1 demand must be at least n times
more elastic than the Stage 2 demand. Assumption 3 guarantees that such a deviation is
not profitable.
       Proposition 2 is an important result. It shows that oligopoly firms are unable to
price discriminate even when a monopolist would clearly price discriminate under these
conditions.6 The unique subgame-perfect pure-strategy equilibrium of the Stage 1 and
Stage 2 pricing subgame is a uniform-price equilibrium.


5.3.2     Initial Capacity Choice

We now consider the full game, including the initial capacity choice. We replace Assump-
tion 3 with Assumption 4, which is weaker. It is equivalent to Assumption 3 when the
firms' capacities are symmetric. Proposition 3 establishes that Assumption 4 is sufficient to
guarantee that when firms choose their capacities in Stage 0, the unique subgame perfect
equilibrium is still a uniform-price equilibrium.

Assumption 4. The elasticity of demand satisfies

                                           2 (p) 1
                                                > , p > 0.
                                           1 (p) n


   6
   We also conclude prices are uniform when the elasticity of demand is increasing, but that is a setting in
which a monopolist would also set uniform prices because consumers can postpone their purchases in our
model.




                                                    19
Proposition 3. If the elasticity of demand is decreasing, then under Assumptions 1, 2 and 4
the unique pure-strategy subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of the full game is a uniform-price
equilibrium, and equilibrium capacity and profits are equal to the Cournot capacity and profits
given demand D1 (p) + D2 (p).

      Proposition 3 implies that except in more extreme cases (i.e., when Assumption 4 is
violated) intertemporal price discrimination is impossible when demand becomes more
inelastic over time.


5.4     Increasing Elasticity of Demand

We now establish results under the case in which the elasticity of demand is increasing
over time. Note that when the elasticity of demand is increasing over time, consumers
have an incentive to wait to purchase. These Coasian forces can prevent even a monopolist
from using intertemporal price discrimination.
      The following proposition establishes that prices are always uniform in the pricing
subgame when the elasticity of demand is increasing.

Proposition 4. When the elasticity of demand is constant or increasing, |1 (p)|  |2 (p)|, p > 0,
then under either the efficient or the proportional rationing rule, if Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then
the unique pure-strategy subgame-perfect equilibrium of the pricing subgame is a uniform-price
equilibrium.

      This result holds for two reasons. First, the same competitive forces that constrain
firms when the elasticity of demand is increasing--firms want to shift lower priced sales
onto their rivals--constrain firms when the elasticity of demand is decreasing. Second,
and more importantly, prices are constrained by the fact that consumers can wait and
purchase in Stage 2 if prices decline over time.




                                                 20
5.4.1      Initial Capacity Choice

Proposition 5. When the elasticity of demand is increasing, |1 (p)|  |2 (p)|, p > 0, then under
Assumptions 1 and 2 the unique pure-strategy subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of the full game is
a uniform-price equilibrium and equilibrium capacity and profits are equal to the Cournot capacity
and profits given demand D1 (p) + D2 (p).

        Proposition 5 is trivial to establish given all the previous results. When the elasticity
of demand is increasing, Assumption 4 is always satisfied. Hence, we do not need any
additional assumptions--when the elasticity of demand is increasing, the Cournot model
is even more robust to breaking up demand into multiple pricing periods. However, this
is largely because consumers have the option to wait.7



6       Inventory Controls

In the previous section, we showed that firms typically produce the same Cournot capacity
and set the Cournot price in both periods, as if there were just one period with demand
D1 (p) + D2 (p). This is true even though profits would be higher if firms use intertemporal
price discriminate.
        We now show that inventory controls make it possible for firms to price discriminate
and earn higher profits, but only if demand becomes more inelastic over time. We model
inventory controls as an upper bound on quantities sold, and we allow firms to set
inventory controls when they set their price. That is, firms first choose their initial capacity,
and then, in each of the two subsequent periods, simultaneously choose both their price
and an inventory control. The game is shown in Figure 2.
        Inventory controls allow firms to limit the number of units available so that its avail-
ability exactly matches the number of units it expects to sell in period one. Thus, by
    7
   In an earlier version of the paper, we assumed that consumers did not have the option to wait and we
showed that a pure-strategy equilibrium might not exist under increasing elasticity of demand.



                                                  21
                                                                                                              -q
                                                                                                                    1
                                                                              C1
                                                     =K                    dI                        =   K1                 d   IC 2
                                                 1                     an                                                an
                                        yK                       p   1                         K   2
                                       t                   se                             ty                        p2
                                p  aci                ho
                                                         o
                                                                                     pa
                                                                                        ci
                                                                                                          oo
                                                                                                             se
                              Ca                     c
                                                                        zed        Ca               sc
                                                                                                         h
                                                                                                                           zed
                                              ms                       i                                                  i
                                           Fir                     eal                       Fir
                                                                                                 m                    eal
       Firms choose K                                          is r                                               is r
                                                          q1                                                 q2



     Stage 0        Stage 1                                          Stage 2                                             END

                    Figure 2: Timing of the Game with Inventory Controls


utilizing inventory controls, firms can ensure that if a rival deviates to a higher price in
Stage 1, their own sales will not increase.
    The logic above only holds when demand becomes more inelastic over time because
inventory controls place a cap on sales and not a floor. Thus, inventory controls highlight
another natural asymmetry that arises between increasing and decreasing elasticity of
demand: Inventory controls can prevent a rival from increasing a firm's sales by deviating
to a higher price, but they cannot prevent a rival from lowering a firm's sales by deviating
to a lower price.

Proposition 6. When the elasticity of demand is decreasing, then under Assumptions 1, 2 and 4,
and under either the efficient or the proportional rationing rule, a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
of the model with inventory controls exists in which all firms set the Cournot price and set inventory
controls equal to the Cournot quantity in each selling period. Profits are strictly higher in this
equilibrium than in the uniform-price equilibrium.

    In the equilibrium described in the above proposition, firms commit to inventory con-
trols which are equal to each firm's equilibrium sales in each period. Inventory controls
do not restrict output on the equilibrium path, but they do act as a strategic commitment
device because they constrain the firm's off-the-equilibrium-path output. In the equilib-


                                                               22
rium, firms sell their Cournot output in each period, and so prices rise over time because
demand becomes less elastic. Without inventory controls, firms set a constant price across
the two periods and sales are equal to the Cournot quantity associated with the aggregate
demand, D1 (p) + D2 (p). In the equilibrium with inventory controls, firms set prices equal to
the Cournot quantities in each period, that is, the Cournot output associated with demand
D1 (p1 ) in Stage 1 and the Cournot output associated with demand D2 (p2 ) in Stage 2.
   The model with inventory controls does have other equilibria. In particular, the
symmetric capacity, uniform-price equilibrium characterized in Proposition 3 may still be
a subgame perfect equilibrium of the inventory control game. Even when it is not, there
are many different increasing price paths that can be supported with inventory controls.
We think that it is natural for firms to coordinate on the Cournot quantities, but the point
is that they can price discriminate and earn higher profits using inventory controls.
   Example: We illustrate the impact of inventory controls on prices and profits in an
example with linear demand, Pt (qt ) = at - bt qt , and constant cost per unit of capacity, c.
Suppose that the firms could choose capacity independently for each period (as if the two
periods were separate markets). Then the Cournot profits with price discrimination are
given by
                                        (b2 (a1 - c)2 + b1 (a2 - c)2 )
                             discr. =
                                               (b1 b2 (n + 1)2 )

and the Cournot profits with uniform pricing are

                                                                b2 a1 +b1 a2
                                  (b2 (a1 - c) + b1 (a2 - c))      b1 +b2      -c
                      uniform =                                                     .
                                               (b1 b2 (n + 1)2 )




                                                23
And profits are higher with discrimination (see the Appendix for more details),

                                                                                    b2 a1 + b1 a2
    discr. - uniform = b2 (a1 - c)2 + b1 (a2 - c)2 - (b2 (a1 - c) + b1 (a2 - c))                  -c
                                                                                       b1 + b2
                            1
                       =         (b2 (a1 - c)(b1 (a1 - a2 ) + b1 (a2 - c)b2 (a2 - a1 ))
                         b1 + b2
                          b1 b2                                                  b b2
                       =         ((a1 - c)(a1 - a2 ) + (a2 - c)(a2 - a1 )) = 1          (a1 - a2 )2 > 0.
                         b1 + b2                                                b1 + b2


7     Model Extensions

7.1     Alternative Timing of Inventory Controls

Inventory controls could also be modeled other ways, including allowing firms to commit
to inventory controls before setting price. If firms could commit to inventory controls
before announcing prices, inventory controls serve two functions. First, they prevent
rival firms from raising their price in order to increase our sales when the price is low.
And second, they limit our own sales in Stage 1. The latter is important and impacts
equilibrium strategies, but collectively firms want to set increasing prices and sell more in
Stage 1 than they do in the uniform-price equilibrium, so commitment does not help firms
to unilaterally increase profits in obvious ways.
      If firms could announce and commit to their inventory controls each period before any
firm sets price, then Proposition 4 still holds. In this case, if each firm sets an inventory
control equal to the Cournot output, this would result in the Cournot prices, and no
unilateral inventory control deviation would effect the subsequent prices. But this timing
may also eliminate the uniform price equilibrium. In a duopoly model, a unilateral
inventory control would curtail the rival's incentives to raise price and cause the rival
to equate marginal revenue across the two periods, even when the rival hadn't set an
inventory control itself.




                                                   24
7.2     Product Differentiation

Differentiation does not alter firms' incentive to attempt to shift demand to competitors in
the early period. However, product differentiation makes it more costly to shift demand.
With undifferentiated products, a small price change shifts all of the demand. With
differentiated products, a firm's price increase must be larger, and have a first-order effect
on its profits, in order to have a significant impact on a rival's sales.
      Product differentiation also introduces increased complexity, so we focus our attention
on two firms in a symmetric environment, and give intuition instead of analyzing the
equilibrium of the model. We also maintain the assumption that capacity is sufficiently
small so that firms always set market-clearing prices in the second period.

   Figure 3: Intertemporal Price Discrimination as a Function of Product Differentiation
                 (a) Prices Across Periods                          (b) Competition vs. Joint-Profit Maximization




Notes: Example constructed using a random utility model (logit) with two firms and two periods. Product differentiation
is increasing towards the right of the plots. (a) The light dashed line corresponds to the own-price elasticity for a constant
price offered by both firms. As products become increasingly differentiated, the difference between p1 and p2 increases. (b)
Shows the change in price (p2 - p1 ) of competition model versus the joint-profit maximization model. Prices are flatter in
the competition model, as the gap between the two models grows with the degree of differentiation.




      Product differentiation results in equilibrium subgame prices that are no longer uni-
form over time; however, prices are flatter--as a function of the degree of product
differentiation--than joint-profit-maximizing prices (see Figure 3 for an example, where
the left plot shows increasing differences in prices across periods as product differenti-


                                                             25
ation increases). To see this, consider two firms, A and B, and let the inverse demand
functions be PA
              1
                qA , qB , PB
                 1 1       1
                             qA , qB , PA
                              1 1       2
                                          qA , qB , and PB
                                           2 2           2
                                                           qA , qB . Joint-profit-maximizing
                                                            2 2

firms would set marginal revenue equal to the shadow cost of capacity in each of the
                               j    j       -j
                            Pi qt ,qt             j     j   j    -j
four product markets, so                j        qt + Pt qt , qt      = , t = 1, 2; j = A, B. Suppose that the
                                   qt
joint-profit-maximizing prices are increasing over time.
      Contrast these prices with the prices that would be set by two competing firms given
the same initial capacity. If Firm A sets a higher price than the joint-profit-maximizing
firm, it will sell less in the first period and, hence, more in the second period. Sales for
Firm B are higher in the first period, and it has less to sell in the second period; thus, in
the second period, its price is higher and Firm A's demand is higher. Because it ignores
the loss for Firm B, Firm A has an incentive to set a higher first-period price than the joint-
profit-maximizing monopolist. Firm B has a similar incentive, and, in equilibrium, both
firms' prices will be flatter relative to joint-profit-maximizing prices (see the right panel in
Figure 3). It is also worth noting that prices might still be perfectly flat if sufficiently many
consumers were indifferent between the firms--a symmetric increasing price equilibrium
does not exist because either firm could strictly increase profits with an arbitrarily small
price increase.


7.3     Aggregate Demand Uncertainty

Inventory controls are generally described as a tool for managing demand uncertainty, so
it is important to describe how the model can be extended to include such uncertainty. To
generate intuition, we describe an extension in which just first-period demand is uncertain.
A monopolist sets the first-period price before learning the first-period demand and sets
a second-period price to clear the market.
      A simple way to add uncertainty to the model is assume realized demand can be high
or low in the first period, but is known to be high in the second period. In this case
a monopolist choosing capacity optimally would set a lower price (based on expected


                                                                26
demand) in the first period.
      However, the monopoly prices are not an equilibrium with competing firms, even
if the firms have the same capacity as the monopolist. Because the monopoly prices
increase in expectation, competing firms prefer to sell more of their capacity in the second
period, when the expected price is higher. And any firm can shift a discrete amount of its
first-period sales to its rival through an arbitrarily small price increase in the first period.
Thus, expected prices must be equal in the two periods in any symmetric pure-strategy
equilibrium.


7.4     Many Periods

An obvious limitation of the paper is that we consider only two pricing periods. One
challenge to extending Propositions 2 and 3 to many periods is that it requires stronger
assumptions than Assumptions 1 and 2 in order to ensure firms play pure strategies for
all histories of the game. Another limitation is the potential for multiple equilibria.
      One way to consider many periods is to focus on a duopoly model with constant
elasticity demand, but allow the demand elasticity to become more inelastic over time.
Then, sufficient conditions could be derived under which the last m periods have a uniform
price equilibrium for all capacities. Then, going from m to m + 1 periods is similar to going
from one to two periods in our previous analysis, because the m-period-subgame price is
always the market-clearing price. The only challenge is those sufficient conditions are no
longer on the initial capacities.
      In particular, consider a three-period model. Here, it is possible to describe conditions
under which a uniform-price is the unique outcome: on the equilibrium path, the final two
pricing periods of the three-period game are equivalent to our analysis above, so prices
must be equal in the final two periods as long as capacities are sufficiently equal. More
importantly, the intuition that firms can profit from shifting lower-price sales to the rivals
still holds, which is why sustaining increasing prices is difficult.


                                               27
8   Conclusion

We establish that inventory controls can facilitate intertemporal price discrimination in
oligopoly. We consider an advance-purchase, sequential-pricing model with complete
information. When a single firm serves the market and demand becomes more inelastic
over time, the firm can clearly charge higher prices to late arriving consumers. However, in
our oligopoly model, strong competitive forces arise. Individually, firms have an incentive
to move their capacity to the period with a highest price. That is, firms have an incentive
to shift sales to their rivals in early periods, when consumers have lower willingness to
pay, in order to capture increased sales in later periods when consumers have higher
willingness to pay. Consequently, we find that firms will compete on price until prices
are equalized across the selling periods even though firms have market power and would
earn higher profits if prices were increasing.
    In order for firms to coordinate price increases when late arriving consumers have
higher willingness to pay, they must shield themselves from these strong competitive
forces. By committing to a cap on their sales in each of the sequential markets, which they
can do with inventory controls, competing firms are able to implement increasing prices.
There is extensive research in economics and operations research on the use of inventory
controls as a tool to manage uncertain demand, but here we show that inventory controls
are also a tool to facilitate intertemporal price discrimination.


References
Acemoglu, D., K. Bimpikis, and A. Ozdaglar (2009): "Price and Capacity Competition,"
  Games and Economic Behavior, 66(1), 1­26.

Aguirre, I. (2017): "Cournot Oligopoly, Price Discrimination and Total Output," working
  paper.

Akan, M., B. Ata, and J. D. Dana (2015): "Revenue management by sequential screening,"
  Journal of Economic Theory, 159, 728­774.



                                              28
Allen, B., and M. Hellwig (1986): "Bertrand-Edgeworth oligopoly in large markets," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 53(2), 175­204.

Ata, B., and J. D. Dana (2015): "Price discrimination on booking time," International Journal
  of Industrial Organization, 43, 172­181.

Belobaba, P. P. (1987): "Air travel demand and airline seat inventory management," Ph.D.
  thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

       (1989): "OR practice-application of a probabilistic decision model to airline seat
  inventory control," Operations Research, 37(2), 183­197.

Benassy, J.-P. (1989): "Market size and substitutability in imperfect competition: A
  Bertrand-Edgeworth-Chamberlin model," The Review of Economic Studies, 56(2), 217­
  234.

Board, S., and A. Skrzypacz (2016): "Revenue Management with Forward-Looking Buy-
  ers," Journal of Political Economy, 124(4), 1046­1087.

Champsaur, P., and J.-C. Rochet (1989): "Multiproduct duopolists," Econometrica: Journal
  of the Econometric Society, pp. 533­557.

Dana, J. D. (1998): "Advance-Purchase Discounts and Price Discrimination in Competitive
  Markets," Journal of Political Economy, 106(2), 395­422.

       (1999): "Equilibrium Price Dispersion under Demand Uncertainty: The Roles of
  Costly Capacity and Market Structure," The RAND Journal of Economics, 30(4), 632­660.

Davidson, C., and R. Deneckere (1986): "Long-run competition in capacity, short-run
  competition in price, and the Cournot model," The RAND Journal of Economics, pp.
  404­415.

De Frutos, M.-A., and N. Fabra (2011): "Endogenous capacities and price competition:
  The role of demand uncertainty," International Journal of Industrial Organization, 29(4),
  399­411.

Dilme
    ´ , F., and F. Li (2018): "Revenue Management without Commitment: Dynamic Pricing
  and Periodic Flash Sales," The Review of Economic Studies, p. forthcoming.

Eden, B. (1990): "Marginal cost pricing when spot markets are complete," Journal of Political
  Economy, pp. 1293­1306.

Gallego, G., and G. van Ryzin (1994): "Optimal Dynamic Pricing of Inventories with
  Stochastic Demand over Finite Horizons," Management Science, 40(8), 999­1020.



                                             29
Hendel, I., and A. Nevo (2013): "Intertemporal price discrimination in storable goods
  markets," American Economic Review, 103(7), 2722­51.

Klemperer, P., and M. Meyer (1986): "Price Competition vs. Quantity Competition: The
  Role of Uncertainty," The RAND Journal of Economics, 17(4), 618­638.

Kreps, D. M., and J. A. Scheinkman (1983): "Quantity precommitment and Bertrand
  competition yield Cournot outcomes," The Bell Journal of Economics, pp. 326­337.

Lazarev, J. (2013): "The welfare effects of intertemporal price discrimination: an empirical
  analysis of airline pricing in U.S. monopoly markets," Discussion paper, New York
  University.

Levitan, R., and M. Shubik (1972): "Price Duopoly and Capacity Constraints," International
  Economic Review, 13(1), 111­122.

Littlewood, K. (1972): "Forecasting and control of passenger bookings," Airline Group
   International Federation of Operational Research Societies Proceedings, 1972, 12, 95­117.

Madden, P. (1998): "Elastic demand, sunk costs and the Kreps­Scheinkman extension of
 the Cournot model," Economic Theory, 12(1), 199­212.

McAfee, R. P., and V. te Velde (2007): "Dynamic pricing in the airline industry," Handbook
 on Economics and Information Systems, Ed: TJ Hendershott, Elsevier.

McGill, J. I., and G. J. Van Ryzin (1999): "Revenue management: Research overview and
 prospects," Transportation Science, 33(2), 233­256.

Moller
 ¨     , M., and M. Watanabe (2010): "Advance purchase discounts versus clearance
 sales," The Economic Journal, 120(547), 1125­1148.

Nair, H. (2007): "Intertemporal price discrimination with forward-looking consumers:
  Application to the U.S. market for console video-games," Quantitative Marketing and
  Economics (QME), 5(3), 239­292.

Öry, A. (2016): "Consumers on a Leash: Advertised Sales and Intertemporal Price Dis-
  crimination," working paper.

Osborne, M. J., and C. Pitchik (1986): "Price competition in a capacity-constrained
  duopoly," Journal of Economic Theory, 38(2), 238 ­ 260.

Prescott, E. C. (1975): "Efficiency of the natural rate," Journal of Political Economy, 83(6),
  1229­1236.

Puller, S. L., A. Sengupta, and S. N. Wiggins (2012): "Does scarcity drive intra-route price
  dispersion in airlines?," NBER Working Paper, 15555.

                                             30
Reynolds, S. S., and B. J. Wilson (2000): "Bertrand­Edgeworth competition, demand
  uncertainty, and asymmetric outcomes," Journal of economic theory, 92(1), 122­141.

Stokey, N. L. (1979): "Intertemporal Price Discrimination," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 93(3), 355­371.

Su, X. (2007): "Intertemporal Pricing with Strategic Customer Behavior," Management
  Science, 53(5), 726­741.

Sweeting, A. (2012): "Dynamic Pricing Behavior in Perishable Goods Markets: Evidence
  from Secondary Markets for Major League Baseball Tickets," Journal of Political Economy,
  120(6), 1133­1172.

Talluri, K. T., and G. J. Van Ryzin (2006): The Theory and Practice of Revenue Management,
  vol. 68. Springer Science & Business Media.

Van den Berg, A., I. Bos, P. J.-J. Herings, and H. Peters (2012): "Dynamic Cournot duopoly
  with intertemporal capacity constraints," International Journal of Industrial Organization,
  30(2), 174­192.

Weatherford, L. R., and S. E. Bodily (1992): "A taxonomy and research overview of
 perishable-asset revenue management: Yield management, overbooking, and pricing,"
 Operations Research, 40(5), 831­844.

Williams, K. R. (2018): "Dynamic Airline Pricing and Seat Availability," Cowles Foundation
  Discussion Paper, No 2103R.




                                             31
A    Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1:

Proof. Suppose not, so some firm is charging a price not equal to the market-clearing price
and trade takes place at that price.
    Suppose that some firm is charging a price strictly below the market-clearing price
with strictly positive probability. Let pL be the lowest price offered by any firm. Clearly
any firm offering to sell at pL sells all of its capacity. The firm either sells all of its capacity
in Stage 1, or its sales in Stage 1 are equal to D1 (pL ) and then in Stage 2 the demand for its
product is D2 (pL ). And since pL is below the market clearing price, it follows that D1 (pL ) +
D2 (pL ) strictly exceeds the firms' total capacity, which in turn clearly exceeds the capacity
of the firm charging pL . But if the firm sells all of its capacity, then there must exist a price
strictly higher than pL at which the firm also sells all of its capacity and the firm earns
strictly higher profits, which is a contradiction.
    Now suppose instead that some firm sets a price strictly greater than the market-
clearing price with strictly positive probability. Let pH be the highest price offered in
equilibrium with positive probability, which implies that at least one firm offering to sell
at pH does not sell all of its capacity. If two or more firms set a price of pH with strictly
positive probability, then a firm that does not sell off of its capacity can decrease its price
to pH - and strictly increase its sales and profits, which is a contradiction.
    If at most one firm charges the price pH with strictly positive probability, then the firm
charging pH earns a profit equal to pH RD1 (pH ; p-i , K-i ) + D2 (pH ), where p-i and K-i are
the other firms' prices and capacities, if it's sales are positive in Stage 1; in this case every
other firm sells all of its capacity in Stage 1 so the firm is the only seller in Stage 2. And the
firm charging pH earns a profit equal to pH RD2 (pH ; p-i , K-
                                                             2
                                                               i ), where K-i is the other firms'
                                                                           2

remaining capacity at the start of Stage 2, if it has zero sales in Stage 1.
    Clearly the firm will not sell all of its capacity in either case, because pH exceeds the



                                                32
market-clearing price and, as we have shown above, other firms are all setting prices at or
above the market-clearing price, so total consumption must be less than available capacity.
    Consider the profits of the firm charging pH under the assumption that the firms
rivals are playing pure strategies. Under the efficient rationing rule, if the firm charg-
ing pH has positive sales in Stage 1, then the derivative of profit with respect to price is
RD1 (pH ; p-i , K-i )+pH D1 (pH )+D2 (pH )+pH D2 (pH ), which is negative because RD1 (p; p-i , K-i ) <
D1 (p), because pD1 (p) + D1 (p) < 0, and because pD2 (p) + D2 (p) < 0. The second and third
statements are true because, by Assumption 1, D1 (pH ) + D2 (pH ) is less than the revenue-
maximizing output (marginal revenue is positive). So, lowering price below pH increases
profit, which is a contradiction. Under the efficient rationing rule, if the firm charg-
ing pH has zero sales in Stage 1, then the derivative of profit with respect to price is
D2 (pH ) + pH D2 (pH ), which is negative because, by Assumption 1, D2 (pH ) is less than the
revenue-maximizing output (marginal revenue is positive). So, lowering price below pH
increases profit, which is a contradiction. However, rival firms may be playing mixed
strategies, so the firm's expected profits is a weighted average of the profit functions
above, all of which are higher at a lower price, so we have a contradiction.
    Under the proportional rationing rule, if the firm charging pH has positive sales in
Stage 1, then the derivative of profit with respect to Firm i's price is


  RD1 (p; p-i , K-i ) + pH RD1 (pH ; p-i , K-i ) + pH D2 (pH ) + D2 (pH ) =
                                                                                   
                                                                         K   j 
                                     pH D1 (pH ) + D1 (ph )                         + pD2 (p) + D2 (p)
                                                                                   
                                                              1-                                         (7)
                                                                                   
                                                                               j
                                                                                   
                                                             
                                                                  j i
                                                                      D  2 ( p   ) 


which is negative because pH D1 (pH ) + D1 (pH ) < 0 and pH D2 (pH ) + D2 (pH ) < 0. These are
both true because, by Assumption 1, D1 (pH ) + D2 (pH ) is less than the revenue-maximizing
output. So lowering price below pH increases profit, which is a contradiction. Under
the proportional rationing rule, if the firm charging pH has zero sales in Stage 1, then the



                                                    33
derivative of profit with respect to Firm i's price is


  RD2 (p; p-i , K-
                 1 ) + pH RD2 (pH ; p , K1 ) =
                   i                 -i  -i
                                                                             
                                                                      Kj 
                                  pH D1 (pH ) + D1 (ph )                      + pD2 (p) + D2 (p)
                                                                             
                                                          1-                                       (8)
                                                                             
                                                                          j
                                                         
                                                               j i
                                                                     D2 (p ) 


which is negative because pH D1 (pH ) + D1 (pH ) < 0 and pH D2 (pH ) + D2 (pH ) < 0. This is true
because D1 (pH ) + D2 (pH ) is less than the revenue-maximizing output. So lowering price
below pH increases profit, which is a contradiction. Again, if rivals are playing mixed
strategies than the firm's expected profit is a weighted average of the pure-strategy profit
functions above, all of which are higher at a price below pH , so we have a contradiction.


Proof of Lemma 2:

Proof. Suppose not, so some firm is charging a price not equal to the market-clearing price
in Stage 2.
   Suppose that some firm is charging a price strictly below the market-clearing price
with positive probability. Let pL be the lowest price offered in equilibrium with positive
probability. Clearly any firm offering to sell at pL sells all of its capacity (because pL is below
the market clearing price), but then there must exist a strictly higher price at which the
same firm sells all of its capacity and earns strictly higher profits, which is a contradiction.
   Now suppose instead that some firm charges a price strictly above the market-clearing
price with positive probability. Let pH be the highest price offered in equilibrium with
positive probability. Clearly at least one firm offering to sell at pH does not sell all of its
capacity (because pH is above the market clearing price). If two or more firms charge
pH with strictly positive probability, then at least one of the firms does not sell all of its
capacity, and that firm can decrease its price to pH -         and strictly increase its sales and
profits, which is a contradiction. If zero or one firm is charging the price pH with strictly
positive probability, and if other firms are playing pure strategies, then a firm charging pH

                                                 34
earns profits equal to pRD2 (p; p-i , q-i ), where p-i and q-i are the other firms' prices and
remaining capacities.
    Under the efficient rationing rule, the derivative of profit with respect to price is
RD2 (p; p-i , q-i ) + pD2 (p), which is negative because RD2 (p; p-i , q-i ) < D2 (p) and because
pD2 (p) + D2 (p) < 0. This is true because, by Assumptions 1 and 2, D2 (p) is less than
the revenue-maximizing output. So, lowering price below pH increases profit, which is a
contradiction.
    Under the proportional rationing rule, the derivative of profit with respect to Firm
                                                                                      qj
i's price is RD2 (p; p-i , q-i ) + pRD2 (p; p-i , q-i ) = pD2 (p) + D2 (p) 1 -   j i D2 (p j )   , which is
negative because pD2 (p) + D2 (p) < 0. This is true because D2 (p) is less than the revenue-
maximizing output. So lowering price below pH increases profit, which is a contradiction.
    Finally, because the firm charging pH earn high profits at a lower price regardless of
what prices the rivals set, the argument above also holds when rivals are playing mixed
strategies.


Proof of Proposition 1:

Let pL = mini pi
               1
                 denote the lowest equilibrium price offered in Stage 1. And recall that
by Lemma 2, under Assumption 1 and 2 all firms with positive remaining capacity in the
Stage 2 charge the market-clearing price. The proof of the proposition proceeds as a series
of six claims.


1) In any pure strategy equilibrium of the pricing subgame that has positive sales in both stages,
pL  p2 .

If a pure strategy equilibrium exists in which pL  p2 , then all consumers who arrive in
Stage 1 must be waiting to purchase until Stage 2. So sales are zero at pL , which is a
contradiction.




                                                 35
2) In any pure strategy equilibrium of the pricing subgame, if pL is offered by two or more firms in
Stage 1, and if sales at pL are strictly positive, then pL = p2 .

Suppose not. Then pL < p2 (by Claim 1), and pL is offered by two or more firms. Let Firm
i be one of these firms. Then Firm i's profit can be written as pL xi + P2 Ki - xi , where
xi = min RD1 pL ; pL ,     j i|p j =pL   K j , Ki is Firm i's sales at pL .
    If Firm i deviates to a slightly higher price pL + , its profit is

                                                                
                                                                
  (pL + ) min     pL + ; pL ,                           j
                                                          ,   i
                                                                
              RD                                       K    K
                                                                
                1 
                                                                
                                                                
                                           i|p j =pL
                                                         
                              j
                                                                
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                             
                                                   +P
                                                    ^ 2 (·) max   i      p + ; p ,                                      j
                                                                                                                          ,   , (9)
                                                                                                                             
                                                                K   - RD                                               K
                                                                         
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                             
                                                                        1 L     L                                        
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                           i|p j =pL
                                                                         
                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                             


      ^ 2 (·) is the market clearing price in period 2, which is a continuous and decreasing
where P
function of the total capacity remaining after Stage 1.
    If xi = Ki , then Firm i's profit is clearly higher since pL + > pL and P
                                                                            ^ 2 (·) > pL , so all of

Firm i's sales are at a higher price, and its sales volume doesn't change.
    If, on the other hand, xi < Ki and RD1 (pL ; pL ,              j i|p j =pL   K j ) < Ki , then the same deviation
is still profitable for Firm i because
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                       i 
                 lim RD1  pL + ; pL ,                      Kj  RD i 
                                                                  1
                                                                    pL ; pL ,
                                                                                                 Kj < Ki ,
                  0                                                                                
                                             j i|p j =pL                           j i|p j =pL
                                                                                                   


since RD is decreasing in price (for either rationing rule), and so the limit of (9) as                                       goes
to 0 is                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                
               pL lim RDi  p; pL ,                 K j + P               1 (p; pL ,
                                                              Ki - lim RDi                                 K j ) .
                                                                                                                
                        1                                  2                                                    
                  ppL                                              ppL                                          
                                     j i|p j =pL                                             j i|p j =pL
                                                                                                                

Profits are higher because the firm sells more units at p2 and fewer units at pL and p2 > pL .
A deviation is profitable, which is a contradiction.


                                                             36
3) If pL = p2 , then the equilibrium is a uniform-price equilibrium.

Suppose not, so some Firm j sets a price p j > pL = p2 in Stage 1. Because consumers
can wait, it follows that Firm j's sales are zero, so the equilibrium is a uniform-price
equilibrium.


4) There exists, at most, one uniform-price equilibrium of the pricing subgame (the total sales and
the transaction price is unique).

Given the capacity, the price and volume of sales in a uniform-price equilibrium are
uniquely defined, because only one price satisfies D1 (p) + D2 (p) =        iK
                                                                                 i.




5) All pure-strategy subgame perfect equilibria are either a uniform-price equilibrium or an asym-
metric price equilibrium, and either a uniform-price equilibrium or an asymmetric price equilibrium,
exists, but not both.

As above, consider the unique candidate uniform-price equilibrium. Suppose this equi-
librium does not exist. Then it must be that either deviating in Stage 1 is profitable. But
deviating to a higher price in Stage 1 is never profitable. Consumers prefer to wait and buy
at the market clearing price in Stage 2. So deviating to a lower price must be profitable.
    If deviating from the uniform-price to a lower price in Stage 1 is profitable for some
firm, then it is clearly also profitable for the firm that has the largest capacity. Let i denote
the firm with the largest capacity; let pi
                                         1
                                           denote the firm's profit-maximizing deviation in
                 ^2 denote the resulting second-period market-clearing price.
Stage 1; and let p
    Then it follows that pi
                          1
                                ^2 must define an asymmetric-price equilibrium. Firm i
                            and p
sells in both periods (otherwise the deviation isn't profitable) so all other firms muse sell
only in Stage 2. Clearly Firm i has no incentive to deviate since by construction pi
                                                                                   1
                                                                                     is its
best response to the other firms' strategies. And if any other firm could increase its profits
by charging a price less than pi
                               1
                                 , then it follows that Firm i could also increase its profit



                                                 37
by deviating to that same price (because Firm i has more capacity), in which case pi
                                                                                   1
                                                                                     is not
Firm i's profit-maximizing price, which is a contradiction.
   Similarly, if an asymmetric price equilibrium exists, then pi
                                                               1
                                                                 must be the best response
for Firm i to other firms prices, even if they were all charging p2 in Stage 1. So a uniform-
price equilibrium does not exist.


6) There exist at most n asymmetric-price equilibria.

We show that there exists, at most, one asymmetric-price equilibrium in which Firm i is
the low-priced firm in period one (or, more strictly speaking, such equilibria differ only in
the prices of firms with zero sales).
   In an asymmetric-price equilibrium, if Firm i is the low-price firm, then it is the only
firm with positive sales in Stage 1. Let p denote Firm i's equilibrium price. As in Claim 5 let
pi
 1
   denote Firm i's best response when rival firm's are charging the unique uniform-price
equilibrium price, which is the same as its optimal price when rivals are setting the market
clearing price in Stage 2.
   However, if p > pi
                    1
                      , then Firm i can profitably deviate to pi
                                                               1
                                                                 because regardless of what
price it sets, its rivals are selling at the market clearing price in Stage 2. And, if p < pi
                                                                                            1
                                                                                              ,
then because (p) is concave and maximized at pi
                                              1
                                                , it follows that Firm i is strictly better off
increasing its price. So, p cannot be an asymmetric-price equilibrium price unless p = pi
                                                                                        1
                                                                                          .
   Therefore, the only one asymmetric-price equilibrium that can exist in which Firm i is
the low-price firm in the first period and that equilibrium is given by (3) and (5). Since
there are n firms there are at most n asymmetric-price equilibria.


Proof of Proposition 2:

Proof. Let Ki denote each firm's capacity, and let p
                                                   ~ denote the unique uniform price defined
                                  n
         ~) = D1 (p
by Dtot (p        ~) + D2 (p
                           ~) =        i
                                  i=1 K .

                                                                             ~)  maxi Ki ,
   Consider a deviation to a lower price in the first pricing period. If D1 (p


                                                38
then a deviation to a lower price is not profitable, because any firm that cuts its price in
Stage 1 will sell all of its capacity at the lower deviation price and hence earn strictly lower
profits.
            ~) < maxi Ki , then for any Firm i such that Ki  D1 (p
     If D1 (p                                                    ~), a deviation to a lower price
is not profitable by the same argument. When Ki > D1 (p
                                                      ~), then a deviation to a lower price
could increase the market-clearing price in period 2, and could increase the firms profits,
but only if demand is becoming less elastic over time so firms jointly prefer to set prices
that increase over time.
     Let Firm i be the deviating firm, and let p2 (·) denote the second-period market-clearing
price as a function of remaining capacity. Firm i's problem is to choose a price pi < p
                                                                                      ~, or
equivalently, a quantity qi = D1 (pi ) to maximize
                                                                 n
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                     ~, K) = qi p1 (qi ) + P2 
                           ^ i (qi ; p                                 Ki - qi  K -q ,
                                                                                i   i
                                                              
                                                                                                                      (10)
                                                                 i=1


                   ~), Ki ­ higher output levels are not feasible, and lower output levels
subject to qi  D1 (p
are inconsistent with a lower first period price. The first-order condition is
                                                      n
                                                                                   n
                                                                                                
      d        ~, K)
       ^ (qi ; p                                                                                
                     = P1 (qi ) + qi P1 (qi ) - P2          K i - qi                   K i - qi  (K - qi ) = 0,
                                                                                                 i
                                                                      - P2 
                                                                           
                                                                                                                      (11)
           dq
                                                                                                
                                                      i=1                     i=1

or

           d        ~, K)
            ^ (qi ; p                          1
                          = P1 (qi ) 1 +                                                                              (12)
                dq                       1 (P1 (qi ))
                                     n                                                                       
                                                                         1                          K i - qi 
                                           i     i 1 +                                                        = 0.
                                                                                                             
                             - P2        K     q
                                    
                                             -                                                               
                                                                                                n
                                                  
                                                                         n                            i - qi 
                                                            2 P2                                    K
                                                  
                                                                               i   - qi
                                                   
                                                                         i=1 K                  i=1
                                                                                                             
                                    i=1


Clearly, the objective function, equation (10), is concave, so (12) implies that a devia-
                                                                                       d     ~,K)
                                                                                        ^ (q;p
tion to a lower price is profitable if and only if limqD1 (p
                                                           ~)                              dq        > 0, or equivalently,




                                                            39
        d          ~,K)
         ^ (D1 (p);p
limpp
    ~         dq          > 0. But clearly

             d           ~, K)
              ^ (D1 (p); p                                1
     lim                       < P1 (D1 (p
                                         ~)) 1 +
         ~
        pp          dq                            1 (P1 (D1 (p~))
                                      n                                                                            
                                     
                                             i
                                                          
                                                          1 +                         1                      Ki    
                                - P2       K     D    ~
                                                      p
                                     
                                               -
                                                         
                                                    (   )                                                          
                                                  1
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                            n
                                                         
                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                   
                                                              2 P2                                              K
                                                         
                                                                                         i
                                                          
                                                                                   i=1 K           ~)
                                                                                             - D1 (p        i=1
                                                                                                                   
                                      i=1


               Ki -q            Ki                                      n
because       n            <. Since P1 (D1 (p
                               n     i      ~)) = P2                    i=1 K
                                                                              i         ~) = p
                                                                                  - D1 (p    ~, it follows that a
         (    i=1 Ki -q)       i=1 K

deviation to a lower price is not profitable if

                1                            1                     Ki                         2 (p
                                                                                                 ~)       Ki
                        -                                                   < 0                     >             ,   (13)
         1 (P1 (D1 (p
                    ~))) 2 P2            n     i         ~)
                                                                  n
                                                                  i=1 K
                                                                        i                     1 (p
                                                                                                 ~)       n
                                                                                                          i=1 K
                                                                                                                i
                                         i=1 K     - D1 (p

or, equivalently, if Assumption 3 holds. If demand in the second period is too much more
inelastic, a deviation will be profitable.
                                                      ~) <
   Now consider a deviation to a higher price. If D1 (p                             j iK
                                                                                           j,   for all i, then no firm's
deviation to a higher price can have any effect on first or second period sales. The firm's
                                                           ~.
that don't deviate can meet all of the demand at the price p
                            ~) >
   If on the other hand D1 (p                j iK
                                                    j,   for some i, then some firm or firms can deviate to
a higher price and have positive sales, however even a monopolist would not find such
a deviation profitable when demand is becoming less elastic over time, so no firm will
deviate to a higher price.


Proof of Proposition 3:

Proof. Under Assumptions 1, 2 and 4, if a subgame perfect equilibrium exists in which
every firm chooses K units of capacity, then, by Proposition 2, the unique subgame perfect
equilibrium of the pricing subgame is a uniform-price equilibrium. Moreover, for all firm
capacities in a neighborhood of K , Assumption 4 and Proposition 2 imply that the unique
subgame perfect equilibrium of the pricing subgame is a uniform-price equilibrium, so


                                                            40
the first-stage profit function for Firm i can be written as
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                 u (Ki ; K-i ) =             K j     K,
                                                                     i
                                                                    
                                                 Ptot            - c                          (14)
                                                                
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                         j


where K-i is the capacity of the other firms.
   Firm i's capacity, Ki , maximizes Firm i's profits only if Ki = K is the solution to

              u (Ki ; K )
                          = Ptot ((n - 1)K + Ki ) - c + Ptot ((n - 1)K + Ki )Ki = 0,          (15)
               K  i


which is concave and has a unique solution, Ki (K ), which is decreasing in K . So, (15)
uniquely defines a symmetric solution K , and it is easy to see that K must be exactly equal
to the Cournot quantity associated with n firms, production cost c, and demand Dtot (p).
So we have shown that Ki = K is local best response. Next, we show that Ki = K is the
global best response when rival firms choose K .
   Suppose that Ki < K . If a uniform price equilibrium exists when Firm i chooses Ki and
other firms choose K , then Firm i's profits are given by (14), and so Firm i's profits at Ki
are strictly lower than at K .
   If a uniform-price equilibrium does not exist, then by Proposition 1 an asymmetric-
price equilibrium must exist. Under Assumption 4, Firm i cannot profit by deviating from
the uniform-price equilibrium even if its capacity is K , so Firm i is not the low-priced firm
in the first period. The only asymmetric-price equilibrium that can exist is one in which
one of Firm i's rivals is the firm that sells at the low price in the first period. There are n - 1
such equilibria because any of the n - 1 firms with capacity K could set the low price in
the first period.
   Firm i's profit in all of these asymmetric-price equilibria is


                       a (Ki ; K ) = P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - D1 (p1 ) - c Ki ,                     (16)



                                                  41
where p1 is the price charged in the first period, and so p1 maximizes


                       D1 (p1 )p1 + P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - D1 (p1 ) K - D1 (p1 ) .              (17)


Firm i's first order-condition is

                                              dp1
   P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - D1 (p1 ) 1 - D1 (p1 )      i
                                                   + P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - D1 (p1 ) - c = 0.   (18)
                                              dK

Because p1 < p2 , D(p1 ) is greater than first-period sales at the uniform price. This implies
                                                  ~)/n in period 2, where p
that n - 1 firms are each selling less than K - D(p                       ~ is the uniform
price. In this case, ignoring the impact of Ki on p1 , Firm i's best response is greater than
      ~)/n, which implies that Ki > K , which is a contradiction. And, as Ki increases, the
K - D(p
optimal first-period price falls (dp1 /dKi < 0). Thus, ignoring the impact of Ki on p1 does
not alter the result. Deviating to a lower Ki is still not profitable.
   Now suppose that Ki > K . Again, the equilibrum of the pricing subgame may be
an asymmetric-price equilibrium or a uniform-price equilibrium. If it is a uniform-price
equilibrium, then by the same argument, profits are strictly lower.
   If it is an asymmetric-price equilibrium, then it must be an asymmetric-price equilib-
rium in which Firm i sets a low price in the first period. This is because an asymmetric-price
equilibrium exists only if a firm wants to deviate from the uniform-price equilibrium, and
equation (13) tells us that a firm wants to deviate only if 2 (p)/1 (p) exceeds its share of
capacity. But by Assumption 4, this happens only if the capacity share exceeds 1/n and
only Firm i's share of capacity exceeds 1/n.
   So, if Firm i deviates to Ki > K , then its profit must be


                 max D1 p1 p1 + P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - D1 p1           Ki - D1 p1 .
                  p1




                                                 42
Rewriting this as a function of quantity yields


                       max P1 (q1 )q1 + P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - q1 Ki - q1 .                   (19)
                             q1


Thus, the firm's profit in stage one is


                   max P1 (q1 )q1 + P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - q1 Ki - q1 - cKi ,                 (20)
                     q1


and its maximized profit in stage one is


                   max P1 (q1 )q1 + P2 (n - 1)K + Ki - q1 Ki - q1 - cKi ,                 (21)
                    q1 ,K1


which we can rewrite using a change of variables (q2 = Ki - q1 ) as


                          max P1 (q1 )q1 - cq1 + P2 (n - 1)K + q2 q2 - cq2 .              (22)
                          q1 ,q2


Therefore, q1 is the first-period monopoly output. and q2 is the second-period best response
to (n - 1)K . But this is not an equilibrium unless p1 < p2 , or equivalently the Lerner index
in the first period is smaller than the Lerner index in period 2, or

                                   P1 (q1 )q1       P2 (n - 1)K + q2 q2
                                                <                                         (23)
                                    P1 (q1 )         P2 (n - 1)K + q2

                                      1         1            q2
                                            <                                             (24)
                                   |1 (p1 )| |2 (p2 )| (n - 1)K + q2

or
                                        2 (p2 )       q2
                                                <             ,                           (25)
                                        1 (p1 ) (n - 1)K + q2

which violates Assumption 4 because q2 < K . So, this is a contradiction. Hence there
exists no profitable deviation for any firm.




                                                       43
Proof of Proposition 4:

This follows immediately from Proposition 1, which shows that a pure strategy equilibrium
exists and that any pure strategy equilibrium must be a uniform-price equilibrium or an
asymmetric price equilibrium in which the Stage 1 price is strictly lower than the Stage 2
price. But if the elasticity of demand is increasing, an asymmetric price equilibrium cannot
exist. The firm selling in Stage 1 prefers to sell all of its capacity at the market clearing
price is stage 2.


Proof of Proposition 5:

By Proposition 4 all transactions take place at the same price, and by Lemma 1 this implies
that firms must set the Cournot capacities as if there were one combined sales period.


Proof of Proposition 6:

            i denote the inventory control for Firm i in period t.
Proof. Let kt
   Consider an equilibrium in which, on the equilibrium path, firms choose capacity
equal to the sum of the Cournot capacity in each period, qC
                                                          1
                                                            + qC
                                                               2
                                                                 , and then set the Cournot

        t in each period, and set kt = qt in each period, so inventory controls equal to the
price, pC                          i    C


Cournot output in each period.
   Off of the equilibrium path, firms set the market-clearing price in the last period. In
the first period, given capacity, firms set the price pi
                                                       1
                                                                                    i which
                                                         and the inventory control k1
correspond to the Cournot price and quantity. That is, firms allocate their capacity across
periods one and two as if they were playing a Cournot game in each period with a capacity
constraint across the two periods. The set price equal to the Cournot price associated with
the firms' allocations and the set the inventory control equal to that allocation. More
formally, firms equate the marginal revenue of output across the two periods.
   Clearly no deviation is profitable in the final period. That is, in every subgame firms
set the market clearing price and set a non-binding inventory control. This is because

                                             44
Lemma 2 holds, so any second-period price not equal to the market-clearing prices are not
sequentially optimal ­ the presence of inventory controls does not change this result.
     Now consider a deviation by Firm i to a lower price in the first selling period. De-
creasing demand elasticity implies that pC
                                         1
                                           < pC
                                              2
                                                , so a small decrease in its first-period price
discontinuously increases Firm i's first-period sales, decreases Firm i's second-period sales,
and decreases Firm i's profits. More generally, if Firm i had a profitable deviation to a
lower price in period one, then that price would define an asymmetric price equilibrium,
but by Proposition 2 an asymmetric-price equilibrium does not exist. So no deviation to a
lower price is profitable.
     Suppose, instead, that Firm i deviates to a higher price in the first period. Under
the efficient rationing rule, the residual demand function facing the deviating firm is
RDi
  1
    (pi ; p - i1 , q - i1 ) = D1 (p) - (n - 1)qC
                                               1
                                                 . This is because rival firms' inventory controls,
 j                                                         j
k 1 = qC
       1
         (if any firm deviate in stage zero, then k1 equals then adjust Cournot output given
the new capacity constrain.
     Since the shadow cost of capacity is c on the equilibrium path (and, more generally,
is equalized across both periods), Firm i's first-period profit function is (D1 (pi ) - (n -
1)qC
   1
     )(pi - c) or, equivalently, (p1 ((n - 1)qC
                                              1
                                                + qi ) - c)qi where p1 is the first period inverse
demand function. Thus, the optimal price deviation is given by the first-order condition,
which is

                                     1 + q q + P1 (n - 1)q1 + q = c.
                          P1 (n - 1)qC                    C



But this implies that q = qC
                           1
                             and that the optimal price and quantity is the first-period
Cournot output (or, more generally, is the output that equalizes the marginal revenue
across the two periods), so no deviation to a higher price is profitable.
     Under proportional rationing, the deviating firm's residual demand function is

                                                         (n - 1)qC
                                                                    
                                                                  1   1
                        1 (p ; p1 , q1 )
                      RDi                  = D1 (p )                 = D1 (pi ),
                            i C C                 i
                                                                    
                                                     1 -
                                                                    
                                                               C      n
                                                          D1 (p1 )
                                                     



                                                      45
since D1 (pC
           1
             ) = nqC
                   1
                     . The shadow cost of capacity is c on the equilibrium path (and, more
generally, is equalized across the two periods), so Firm i's first-period profit function is
1
n D1 (p)(p - c), or equivalently, p1 (nq) - c)q.         The first-order condition is P1 nq + P1 nq q = c,
which implies that q = qC
                        1
                          , so no deviation to a higher price is profitable.
    In stage zero, firms choose capacity expecting to equalize marginal revenue across
periods 1 and 2, and it is easy to see that Ki = qC
                                                  1
                                                    + qC
                                                       2
                                                         is a best response to K j = qC
                                                                                      1
                                                                                        + qC
                                                                                           2
                                                                                             for
all j    i.


Cournot Model with linear demand and with and without discrimination

First, suppose that P(q) = a - bq, firms have constant cost c, and that there are n frms.
Cournot output for each of n firms is (a - c)/b(n + 1), so the total Cournot output is
(a - c)n/b(n + 1), the Cournot price is (a + nc)/(n + 1), and the Cournot profit of each firm
is (a - c)2 /b(n + 1)2 .
    Now consider two markets and suppose firms sell in two markets and demands are
P1 (q1 ) = a1 - b1 q1 and P2 (q2 ) = a2 - b2 q2 . Then if the demands are combined into one with
the same price, demand is qtot = a1 /b1 + a2 /b2 - p               b1 + b2 or b1 b2 qtot = b2 a1 + b1 a2 - p b1 + b2
                                                                    1       1
                                                                                                                  (         )
           a1 +b1 a2                                              a1 +b1 a2
or p = b2 b 1 +b2
                     - bb1 b2
                        1 +b2
                               qtot , so Cournot profit is ( b2 b  1 +b2
                                                                             - c)2 (b1 + b2 )/(b1 b2 (n + 1)2 ) or (b2 a1 +
                         a1 +b1 a2                                                           a1 +b1 a2
b1 a2 - (b1 + b2 )c)( b2 b 1 +b2
                                   - c)/(b1 b2 (n + 1)2 ) or (b2 (a1 - c) + b1 (a2 - c))( b2 b1 +b2
                                                                                                       - c)/(b1 b2 (n + 1)2 )
    If the markets are separate and firms set different quantities (and prices) in each market,
then the Cournot profits are (a1 - c)2 /(b1 (n + 1)2 ) + (a2 - c)2 /(b2 (n + 1)2 ) or equivalently
 b2 (a1 - c)2 + b1 (a2 - c)2 /(b1 b2 (n + 1)2 ).




                                                            46
