                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SECURED CREDIT SPREADS AND THE ISSUANCE OF SECURED DEBT

                                       Efraim Benmelech
                                         Nitish Kumar
                                        Raghuram Rajan

                                      Working Paper 26799
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26799


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2020, Revised December 2020




The authors thank Dave Brown, Mark Flannery, Chris James, Gregor Matvos and Michael
Schwert and seminar participants at the Kellogg School of Management and SMU Cox for very
helpful comments and discussions. Sanhitha Jugulum and Manvendra Tiwari provided
outstanding research assistance. Rajan thanks the Fama Miller Center, IGM, and the Stigler
Center at the University of Chicago Booth School for research support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Efraim Benmelech, Nitish Kumar, and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Secured Credit Spreads and the Issuance of Secured Debt
Efraim Benmelech, Nitish Kumar, and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 26799
February 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. E44,E51,G21,G23,G33

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that after accounting for selection, credit spreads for secured debt issuances are lower
than for unsecured debt issuances, especially when a firm's credit quality deteriorates, the
economy slows, or average credit spreads widen. Yet firms tend to be reluctant to issue secured
debt when other forms of financing are available, as we demonstrate with an analysis of security
issuance over time and in particular around the COVID-19 pandemic shock in the United States
in early 2020. We find that for firms that are rated non-investment grade and that have few
alternative sources of financing in difficult times, the likelihood of secured debt issuance is
positively correlated with the spread between traded unsecured and secured bonds. It is not
correlated for firms that are investment grade. This pattern of issue behavior is consistent with
theories that see collateral as a form of insurance, to be used only in extremis.


Efraim Benmelech                                Raghuram Rajan
Kellogg School of Management                    Booth School of Business
Northwestern University                         University of Chicago
2001 Sheridan Road                              5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu            raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

Nitish Kumar
Warrington College of Business
University of Florida
PO Box 117168
Stuzin 312
Gainesville, FL 32611
Nitish.Kumar@warrington.ufl.edu
A vast theoretical and empirical literature in corporate finance and law focuses on the role that
collateral plays in corporate lending. 1 Creditors require firms with higher credit risk to secure their
borrowing with collateral (see, for example, Bradley and Roberts (2015), and Rauh and Sufi
(2010)). In this paper, we attempt to understand secured debt issuance better. By how much do
borrowers lower their cost of debt financing if they use secured debt? Under what circumstances
is security especially valued? Do we see greater security issuance under those circumstances? By
whom?
     At one level, it is clear why security plays such a central role in credit markets: it consists of
hard assets that are not subject to asymmetric valuations in markets and that the borrower cannot
alter easily. Collateral gives comfort to a lender that even if the lender does little to monitor the
borrower's activity and the borrower's cash flows prove inadequate to service the debt, the lender's
claim is protected by underlying value. In particular, the creditor's ability to seize and sell
collateral when a borrower defaults on a promised payment allows the lender to realize repayment,
at least in part. And at the corporate level, all else being equal, firms that pledge more liquid
collateral find it easier not only to obtain credit but to obtain it at a reduced interest rate (Benmelech
and Bergman (2009)).
     Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020) show that while the issuance of collateralized debt by
modern US corporations has fallen over the twentieth century, the cyclicality of secured debt
issuance continues despite this trend decline. Firms tend to issue more secured debt when their
credit quality is low or at times when economic growth is slower. 2 These are times when firm cash
flows may fall, creditors may fear greater stockholder-debtholder conflicts (as in Jensen and
Meckling (1976), Myers (1984), and Smith and Warner (1979)), and creditors may fear conflicts
with other creditors over priority if the firm cannot repay them all. Under these circumstances,
borrowers may need to collateralize debt issuances in order to regain access to funding (see Stulz
and Johnson (1985)). Moreover, with new lenders unwilling to lend without the comfort of
collateral, existing lenders might rush to secure their claims so as not to be diluted (Donaldson,
Gromb, and Piacentino (2019), and Rauh and Sufi (2010)).



1
  Aghion and Bolton (1992), Bolton and Scharfstein (1996), Boot, Thakor, and Udell (1991), Hart and Moore (1994,
1998), Hart (1995), Jackson and Kronman (1979), Stulz and Johnson (1985), and Williamson (1985).
2
  For prior evidence that firms issue collateral when distressed, see, for example, Badoer, Dudley, and James (2020)
Colla, Ippolito, and Li (2013), Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2012), and Rauh and Sufi (2010).

                                                                                                                  1
         However, this leads then to the opposite question to the one we just asked. If collateral is
so effective in establishing priority and diminishing inter-creditor conflicts, why don't firms issue
secured debt all the time? To understand when, by whom, and why secured debt is issued, we need
to delve deeper. We start by determining how security is priced in debt contracts.
         Specifically, if collateral matters to creditors for the enforcement of debt claims, we should
see it reflected in the pricing of secured claims vis-à-vis unsecured claims. However, finding direct
empirical evidence in support of this notion has proven to be challenging. The difficulty in
identifying the effects of security on debt pricing derives from the circumstances under which it is
offered. Since riskier firms will offer security at riskier times, a comparison across firms of rates
offered by secured debt issuances versus rates offered by unsecured debt issuances, or by the same
firm over time, will tend to find higher rates for secured debt issuances (Berger and Udell (1990,
1995), John, Lynch, and Puri (2003)). 3 While the authors recognize the selection problem inherent
in these findings, correcting for it has proven more difficult.
         In this paper, we use three different data sets and variations of the same identification
strategy to get at the true pricing of secured debt, stripped as best as possible of the selection
problem (that creditors will demand collateral from riskier borrowers, especially during times in
which they become even riskier). For ceteris to remain paribus, our identification strategy
compares spreads on secured and unsecured credit issued by the same firm and at the same point
in time.
         The first data set we use is the Thompson Reuters DealScan database, which contains
detailed information about bank loans made to U.S. corporations. Multiple loan facilities are often
part of a single deal (or package) governed by a master loan agreement, and some of these facilities
may be secured while others are unsecured. We examine the spread difference between secured
and unsecured debt within the same package to get a sense of the spread associated with security
alone.




3
  Strahan (1999) shows that non-price terms of loans are systematically related to pricing; secured loans carry higher
interest rates than unsecured loans, even after controlling for publicly available measures of risk, suggesting that there
is an important selection problem. Benmelech and Bergman (2009) overcome the problem of selection in secured debt
yields by analyzing the intensive, rather than the extensive, margin of collateral, using underlying collateral liquidity
to estimate its effect on the cost of debt. Booth and Booth (2006) use a two-step procedure to account for selection
and find that secured bonds have predicted spreads substantially lower than if they had been made on an unsecured
basis.

                                                                                                                        2
        Second, we use the Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD), containing over
140,000 bond issuances, to examine the difference in spreads between secured and unsecured
bonds issued by the same firm in the same year. Finally, starting in 2002, the Trade Reporting and
Compliance Engine (TRACE) database reports dates, implied yields, and prices at which bonds
trade. We examine the differences in implied spreads between a firm's secured and unsecured
bonds, as reflected in secondary market trades, at a point in time. This methodology allows us
some relief from the requirement that both kinds of debt should be issued by the firm close
together, which enables us to measure the effect of collateral using a larger sample of bonds.
        We conclude from regressions using all these different datasets that the selection bias is
important, and correcting for it suggests that security is valuable to creditors ­ the spread difference
between unsecured bonds and secured bonds issued by the same firm, also termed the secured
spread, is positive. More specifically, across firms, we find that investors do not value the securing
of a bond with collateral as much when the firm is large, has low leverage, and a substantial portion
of its assets are tangible. Intuitively, if security protects a lender's claim in bankruptcy, the lender
will not give up much interest rate spread for it if she is confident bankruptcy is a low probability
event or she will come out whole anyway because asset values will not get eroded. Relatedly, we
find that for highly rated firms, creditors pay little for the added protection afforded by security,
whereas for low-rated firms, they pay a lot. Yields on bonds issued by investment grade firms
(those with an S&P rating of BBB- or better) are roughly 2 basis points lower when secured,
whereas this yield differential (unsecured less secured) jumps to 55 basis points for a firm having
a non-investment grade rating. Similarly, implied yields from bond trades in the secondary market
suggest that investors are willing to give up almost 129 basis points in spread for the added
protection of security for non-investment grade issuers, whereas they reduce spreads by
insignificant amounts for the added protection of security in the case of investment grade issuers.
        Equally important, as a firm's credit quality deteriorates, we see spreads on secured claims
improve relative to unsecured claims, suggesting that security becomes more valuable. Examining
credit rating transitions for a given firm, we find that a transition from a broad rating category of
A to a broad rating category of BBB does not economically or statistically change the yield
differential between an unsecured and a secured bond (holding firm and other bond characteristics
fixed). However, a transition from BBB to BB, from BB to B, and from B to CCC increases the



                                                                                                      3
credit spread between unsecured and secured bond by an additional 92 basis points, 21 basis
points, and 131 basis points respectively, highlighting the contingent importance of security.
       We also find that secured bond issuance by non-investment grade firms increases as the
economy's health ­ as reflected in GDP growth -- or credit market health ­ as reflected in the Baa­
Aaa spread ­ deteriorates. A one standard deviation increase (reduction) in Baa­Aaa spread (GDP
growth) increases the probability of issuance of secured bond by non-investment grade firms by
an additional 5.2 (5.3) percentage points. So creditors seem to value security more when offered
by higher credit risk firms in situations of systemic economic or financial stress. For investment
grade firms, however, we do not find any increase in secured bond issuance when economic or
financial conditions deteriorate.
        What might explain the timing of secured debt issuances? From the firm's perspective, a
key factor governing issuance is whether security is priced adequately or not (see, for example,
Myers and Majluf (1984)). We estimate the secured spreads for firms and compare them with the
estimated and perfect foresight probabilities of their default. If anything, we find that secured
spreads for highly rated firms, though small, overcompensate for the expected probability of
default. Secured spreads for moderately and low rated firms are much more likely to be within a
plausible range indicating fair pricing. This then deepens the puzzle. Why do highly rated firms
not issue secured debt, since the marginal issuer would benefit from the decline in debt costs?
       The interesting possible answer comes from examining corporate and market responses to
the unexpected pandemic shock, which hit US firms and financial markets in March 2020. Prior
to the massive US Federal Reserve intervention on March 23, 2020, all manner of risk spreads
blew out. Investment grade firms, however, issued enormous amounts of unsecured bonds in
March, April, and May, even though unsecured bond spreads had increased substantially. They
issued a relatively small portion of secured bond. In contrast, non-investment grade firms issued
very little unsecured bonds in March, and substantial amounts of secured bonds in April, May, and
June (with the fraction of secured bonds issued decreasing as credit conditions eased over time
after the Fed intervention). Interestingly, for investment grade bonds, the secured spread did not
move much over this episode, while it increased significantly in magnitude for non-investment
grade firms during the period of extreme stress, and then declined slowly.
       The natural conclusion from all this is that unsecured bond markets shut down for non-
investment grade firms as the pandemic hit, so they had to resort to secured bond issuances in

                                                                                                  4
order to obtain any funding at all. The ability to access such funding in times of stress was a lifeline,
which enabled them to make high value-added investments -- such as avoiding costly bankruptcy.
If available collateral is a form of lifeline in bad times for stressed firms, it would suggest why
investment grade firms prefer to keep collateral unimpaired by issuing unsecured debt so long as
they have access. In other words, untapped collateral is financial slack. 4 Unlike Myers and Majluf
(1984), however, firms will preserve collateral as insurance against extreme outcomes (as in
Rampini and Vishwanathan (2010, 2013)) rather than use it in the normal course to reduce adverse-
selection costs (also see Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007), Bjerre (1999), Li, Whited, and
Wu (2016), Mello and Ruckes (2017), and Schwarcz (1997) for related ideas).
      All this suggests that for non-investment grade firms, variations in the secured spread reflect
both the relative interest costs of secured debt issuance vis a vis unsecured debt issuance, as well
as in the extreme, a lack of access to the unsecured debt market. When the secured spread increases
in magnitude, therefore, it should predict secured debt issuance by non-investment grade firms,
despite the inclusion of other measures of tightness in credit markets such as the Baa-Aaa spread.
On the other hand, it should have little power to predict secured debt issuance by investment grade
firms. The empirical evidence is consistent with these implications.
        We are obviously not the first to note that collateral is more important in distressed
situations. A large literature explores the use of covenants in debt contracts and how they vary
with the state of the firm and the cycle (see, e.g., Begley (1994), Bradley and Roberts (2015), and
Malitz (1986)). In particular, Bradley and Roberts (2015) use DealScan data to examine the timing
and pricing of covenants, including security. Although their method of correcting for selection is
different, they find as we do that covenants are priced by lenders and are more likely to be used in
business cycle troughs. Our contribution is to focus on collateral, to use a more direct method of
correcting for selection bias, to show that collateral is also priced in public debt issuances, and
finally to offer an explanation for the reluctance of highly rated firms to issue secured debt.
        Our paper's methodology to deal with selection is closely related to Luck and Santos
(2020), who use a comprehensive sample of loans by large banks to get at the pricing of collateral.
Although our conclusion that collateral is priced for riskier firms is similar to theirs, we also offer


4
 Of course, any cost to the borrower of issuing collateralized debt ­ including the transactions costs of perfecting
collateral ­ could explain why the small pricing benefit to investment grade issuers is swamped. However, staying
unsecured could also entail transactions costs, such as the costs of monitoring negative pledge clauses. This is why
we appeal to more significant costs and benefits to explain the differences in issuance.

                                                                                                                  5
an explanation for the pattern of issuance of secured debt across firms and over time. Similarly,
Schwert (2020) investigates the pricing of bank loans relative to bonds using a similar approach
with bonds and loans matched at the firm-level. The focus of our papers is, however, very different.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section I outlines our identification strategy and
describes the data sets used. Section II discusses baseline estimates of the effects of secured debt
on credit spreads. Section III analyzes how the secured credit spread varies with a firm's
characteristics. Section IV examines the behavior of issuance and spread over the business cycle.
In Section V we examine spreads and issuance during the early days of the Covid pandemic, and
draw on theory to explain corporate issuance behavior. We then relate the issuance of secured debt
more systematically to credit spreads. We conclude in Section VI.


                             I.     Data and Empirical Strategy
Let us start by describing the identification strategy for measuring the secured spread, and show
that with the appropriate identification strategy, it is indeed positive.

A. Identification Strategy
        The difficulty in identifying the effects of security on debt pricing derives from the
circumstances under which it is offered. The selection effect, in which riskier firms will offer
security at riskier times, makes it difficult to analyze the impact of security on credit spreads.
Indeed, in a comparison of rates offered by secured debt issuances against rates offered by
unsecured debt issuances across firms, a number of studies have found a positive relation between
security and credit spreads despite attempting to control for issuer quality.
        Given that creditors will demand collateral from risky borrowers, and more so during
downturns when they become even riskier, our identification strategy attempts to compare spreads
on secured and unsecured credit of the same firm and at the same point in time. We facilitate this
strategy by including three time-varying firm effects depending on the dataset: firm × year, firm ×
year × quarter, and firm × year × month fixed effects. To ensure that our results are not driven by
other characteristics that might vary systematically between secured and unsecured debt, we
control for such debt characteristics as seniority, maturity, loan amount, presence of covenants,
and callability. We estimate the following regression specification:
                          ,, =   ,, + ,, +  , +  ,, ,                                           (1)


                                                                                                  6
where ,, is the spread for debt i of firm j at time t. The variable ,, is a dummy
that equals one if debt i is secured, and zero otherwise. The variable ,, controls for debt
characteristics, while  , represents firm × time fixed effects. We use three main data sets to
estimate regression (1): DealScan, Mergent, and TRACE. We draw on supplementary sources to
complement our analysis.

B. DealScan Loan Data
         We obtain information on corporate loans from the Thompson Reuters DealScan database,
which contains detailed information about bank loans made to U.S. and foreign corporations, with
coverage starting in the mid-1980s. Because DealScan coverage is limited and information on
contract characteristics is sporadic before 1994, we restrict our analysis to the 1994 to 2018 time
period. 5 The basic unit of observation in DealScan is a loan facility. Multiple loan facilities are
often part of a single deal (or package). 6 The data contain information on the different attributes
of a loan facility, such as the amount, promised yield, maturity, security, and seniority. What is
important here is that the same loan deal may contain both a secured facility and an unsecured
facility.
         We apply three filters to the DealScan data. First, we restrict our analysis to dollar-
denominated loans granted to nonfinancial U.S. firms. 7 Second, since we focus on measuring the
cost of secured debt, we require the all-in-drawn spread and secured status for loans to be available.
Finally, given that our identification strategy for the DealScan data relies on within-package
variation, we exclude loan facilities originated more than a month after the first facility in a
package is originated. 8 Our final data set contains 50,614 facilities from 32,420 loan packages.
Panel A of Table I provides summary statistics on key variables from DealScan used in our
analysis. Spread is measured as the promised yield minus the maturity-matched LIBOR at
issuance. The mean (median) spread in our sample is 285 (255) basis points. About 85% of
facilities are secured, and the mean (median) maturity of a loan facility is 3.9 (4.1) years. A


5
  Chava and Roberts (2008) also restrict their analysis to the time period beginning 1994.
6
  According to Sufi (2007): "... the actual syndicated loan contract is drafted at the deal level, and covenants and all
lenders are listed together on this contract, even if a lender loans only on one tranche. While the maturity and pricing
of the loan tranches can vary within a syndicated loan deal, there is one contract, and all lenders are chosen on the
tranches collectively, not independently".
7
  We drop financial firms (SIC codes 6000­6999) and government agencies (SIC codes 9000­9999).
8
  This ensures that issuing firm's fundamentals do not change between the issuance of multiple facilities. The results
are not sensitive to this restriction as only a small percentage of facilities are originated with significant delay.

                                                                                                                      7
negligible number of facilities (55 of 50,614) are subordinated or junior loans. Covenant is a
dummy that equals one if the loan contract contains one or more financial covenants, and zero
otherwise. One or more financial covenants were contained in 53% of loan facilities.

C. Mergent Bond Data
          We obtain information on bond issuances from the Mergent Fixed Income Securities
Database ­ a comprehensive database of publicly offered U.S. bonds. The FISD contains detailed
information on more than 140,000 bonds. Although the Mergent data set also includes bonds
issued before the 1960s, its more comprehensive coverage starts around 1960. 9 Mergent uses seven
broad categories to classify the security level of bonds: (i) junior, (ii) junior subordinate, (iii)
senior, (iv) senior subordinate, (v) subordinate, (vi) senior secured, and (vii) none. We classify
bonds as secured if Mergent assigns them to the senior secured category. We supplement
Mergent's classification of secured bonds with a textual analysis of bond names, searching for the
following strings: "EQUIP," "MTG," "BACKED," "COLL," and "1st."
          We omit bonds issued by financial firms and government agencies. We drop convertible
bonds and bonds with floating rates. We further require the offer-yield at issuance and the bond
maturity to be available. Spread is calculated as the yield spread at issuance over the maturity-
matched treasury (see Gurkaynak, Sack and Wright (2007)). We drop bonds with maturity greater
than 30 years because we cannot match them with similar-maturity treasury securities. This results
in a sample of 30,041 individual bond offerings from 1980 to 2018. Panel B of Table I provides
summary statistics on key variables from Mergent used in our analysis. The mean (median) spread
in our sample is 208 (124) basis points. About 15% of bonds are secured, and the mean (median)
maturity of a bond is 11 (10) years. A bond is classified as senior if Mergent assigns it to the senior
or senior secured categories. Of the bonds, 91% are senior (including all the secured bonds), 67%
are callable, and 40% have one or more covenants protecting bondholder interest.
          We have issuer rating information for 22,541 bond issues. Non-IG is a dummy that takes
the value of one if the issuing firm had a non-investment-grade rating (BB+ or worse) from S&P
at the time of bond issuance. At the time of issuance, 24% had a non-investment-grade issuer
rating.




9
    See Benmelech, Kumar and Rajan (2020).

                                                                                                     8
D. TRACE Data
        We supplement the issuance data with information on secondary bond trades from the
TRACE database. 10 TRACE reports dates, implied yields, and prices at which bonds trade. We
follow Bessembinder, Kahle, Maxwell, and Xu (2009) and Dick-Nielsen (2009) in cleaning the
data. In particular, we exclude trades that are canceled or corrected, and we discard all but one
transaction when multiple similar trades occur very closely in time. For a given bond, we calculate
trade-volume weighted implied yield at the daily frequency using all transactions for the bond
taking place each day. We augment the data with information on bond characteristics (security,
seniority, and so on) from Mergent. Our cleaned and merged TRACE data set contains 3,675,393
observations at the bond-date level.
        Panel C of Table I provides summary statistics on key variables from TRACE used in our
analysis. Spread is calculated as the difference between implied yield from secondary trade prices
and the yield on maturity-matched treasury. The mean (median) spread in our sample is 212 (142)
basis points. Around 8% of observations are for secured bonds, and the mean (median) remaining
maturity of a bond at the time of trade is 8.9 (6) years. A bond is classified as senior if Mergent
assigns it to either the senior or senior secured categories. Senior bonds comprise 99% of
observations, while 93% of observations are for bonds that are callable and 90% are of bonds that
have one or more covenants protecting bondholder interest. Non-IG is a dummy that takes the
value of one if the issuing firm had a non-investment-grade rating (BB+ or worse) from S&P at
the time of the secondary trade. We have issuer rating information for 2,777,603 observations. Of
these, 21% are for bonds that had a non-investment-grade issuer rating. We augment trade data
with information on firm characteristics from Compustat. Size is measured as the logarithm of the
total value of assets in millions of dollars, Age is number of years since the firm's first entry in
Compustat, ROA is calculated as operating income scaled by total assets, Leverage is total debt
scaled by total assets, and Tangibility is net plant, property and equipment scaled by total assets.


                                   II. Secured Debt Spread
        We analyze the three data sets in turn: (i) DealScan, to estimate the effect of security on
credit spreads of bank loans; (ii) Mergent, to examine the credit spreads of secured corporate

10
  Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine was introduced by FINRA in July 2002. All broker-dealers who are FINRA
member firms have an obligation to report transactions in corporate bonds to TRACE under an SEC-approved set of
rules.

                                                                                                             9
bonds at the time of issuance; and (iii) TRACE, to study the effect of security on credit spreads
in the secondary bond market.

A. DealScan Bank Loans
         We begin our analysis by demonstrating the difficulty in empirically estimating the effect
of security on credit spreads. Figure 1 displays the median spread over LIBOR at origination for
secured and unsecured loans by year of origination. 11 As Figure 1 demonstrates, the credit spread
of secured loans are between 150 and 200 basis points higher than those of unsecured loans, with
the secured-unsecured spread increasing during the Great Recession. As we have just argued, the
observed higher credit spread of secured debt is driven by selection across and within firms, which
we address next in our empirical analysis.
         In column (1) of Table II, we report the results from estimating Regression (1) using the
DealScan loan data. The regression includes year × month fixed effects to control for time-varying
effects, and facility-type fixed effects to control for differences across loan facility types. 12 Starting
with the main variable of interest, the coefficient on Secured suggests that the credit spread on
secured loans is higher by 100 basis points compared to an unsecured loan. The positive coefficient
on the secured dummy illustrates the selection problem of secured debt: creditors will demand
collateral precisely from those borrowers who are riskier (Benmelech and Bergman (2009) and
Strahan (1999)). The addition of firm fixed effects in column (2) does reduce the coefficient from
100.8 to 57.9, suggesting that some of the selection problem is indeed cross-sectional in nature
and driven potentially by differences in risk across firms. However, though the coefficient on
Secured is smaller when firm fixed effects are added to the regression, it is still positive and
statistically significant, suggesting that there is also within-firm selection in the timing of secured
debt issuance. Indeed, borrowers are likely to be more inclined to issue collateralized debt, or
equivalently, lenders are more likely to demand collateral, when the borrower is experiencing
difficult circumstances such as financial distress.




11
   In addition to the all-in-drawn-spread used in this paper to measure cost of borrowing, bank loan contracts can
contain one or more fees. Berg, Saunders, and Steffen (2016) argue that fees are compensation to lenders for providing
valuable drawdown options to borrowers, which are typically exercised when firm quality deteriorates. Banks should
arguably demand a larger fee for this option when a firm draws down on an unsecured basis. Consequently, ours is a
conservative estimate of the pricing benefit of offering security.
12
   Dealscan broadly groups facilities into credit lines, bank term loans, institutional term loans, and others.

                                                                                                                  10
        We address the joint selection problem ­ that the firms that issue collateralized debt are
possibly riskier and that they also issue collateral under adverse financial circumstances ­ by
estimating the differential effect of security on loan spread after including firm × year fixed effects.
The inclusion of firm × year in addition to year × month fixed effects enables us to compare loan
facilities issued by the same firm within a year, correcting for overall conditions in the month of
issuance. In total, there are 938 observations where the same firm obtained at least one secured
and one unsecured loan facility in the same year. Indeed, as column (3) of Table II shows, once
we include firm × year fixed effects, the coefficient on Secured is negative and statistically
significant. The point estimate suggests that the credit spread on secured loans is, on average, 40.6
basis points lower than that on unsecured loans controlling for loan characteristics.
        In column (4) we estimate our most exhaustive specification that includes package fixed
effects. Here, we essentially compare spreads on secured and unsecured loan facilities that are part
of the same loan deal. In total, there are 285 observations where the same loan package contains
at least one secured and one unsecured loan facility. Since the price of all facilities of the loan are
negotiated and finalized at almost same time, we ensure that spread difference across facilities is
not driven by changing firm quality. 13 Similar to the results in column (3), the coefficient on
Secured is negative and statistically significant. The point estimate on the secured dummy suggests
that the spread on a secured loan is 72 basis points lower compared to unsecured loans within the
same credit facility. The fact that the secured spread is larger (in absolute value) in this
specification compared to column (3) suggests that even within a firm-year, there is selection in
the timing of secured debt issuance.
        Turning to the other explanatory variables in column (4), the coefficient on Senior suggests
that the credit spread on senior loans is lower by 150 basis points compared to the spread on (the
very few) junior or subordinated loans. Note that for a senior secured loan, both Secured and Senior
dummies equal one, implying that the spread on a senior secured loan is 222 basis points lower
than that on a junior unsecured loan. The coefficient on Maturity suggests that a one standard
deviation increase in a loan facility's maturity increases the spread by 19 basis points. Notice that
the sign on this coefficient is negative in columns (1) and (2), which is probably also due to



13
  We require all facilities of a package to have been originated within a one-month time period. If we do not impose
this restriction, there would be 301 observations (as against 285) where the same loan package contains at least one
secured and one unsecured loan facility.

                                                                                                                11
selection, as better borrowers are likely to be able to borrow for longer maturities, while a
deterioration in borrower health is likely to shorten maturities (Helwege and Turner (1999)).
Consistent with this intuition, the sign of this coefficient changes from negative to positive once
we control for time-varying firm characteristics in columns (3) and (4), which is consistent with
lenders perceiving greater risk in lending for a longer term to a borrower. Finally, the coefficient
on Amount suggests that doubling the loan amount is associated with a 7 basis point lower spread.

B. Mergent Bond Issuance
       Next, we estimate the secured credit spread of corporate bonds at origination. Unlike bank
loans, which are an important source of credit for younger firms, corporate bonds are typically
issued by more established firms with a longer credit history (Diamond (1991)). Kashyap, Stein,
and Wilcox (1993) and Becker and Ivashina (2014) show that firms that have access to both bank
loans and public debt markets switch from loans to bonds when there is a contraction in bank-
credit supply. Hence, our examination of secured credit spread in the corporate bond market should
complement our analysis of secured credit spread in bank loans. Moreover, the Mergent sample
goes back to 1980, compared to the DealScan sample, which begins in 1994. It thus enables us to
study the evolution of secured credit spreads over a longer time-series.
       In Figure 2, we plot the median spread at issuance of bonds over maturity-matched treasury
from 1980 to 2018. As Figure 2 demonstrates, and similar to what we document in Figure 1 for
syndicated loans, the credit spread of secured bonds is, on average, 35 basis points higher than that
of unsecured bonds. The secured-unsecured difference widens during times of economic
contraction, such as during the NBER defined recessions of 1981 to 1982 (80 basis points), 2001
(57 basis points), and the Great Recession of 2008 to 2009 (136 basis points). We now turn to
empirically analyze the secured debt spread in the bond market.
       We estimate regressions based on Equation (1) using the bond maturity-matched credit
spread as a dependent variable and report the results in Table III. There are 30,041 individual bond
offerings from 1980 to 2018 in our final sample. The regression in column (1) includes year ×
month fixed effects to control for time-varying effects, as well as bond characteristics such as
seniority, maturity, callability, the amount issued, and whether covenants are attached to the bond.
       Similar to column (1) of Table II, the coefficient on Secured in column (1) of Table III is
positive and statistically significant suggesting that the credit spread on secured bonds is higher by
60 basis points compared to an unsecured loan. Again, as in Table II, adding firm fixed effects
                                                                                                   12
slightly reduces the coefficient, but the positive and significant coefficient still remains (column
(2)). As before, our identification strategy hinges on the inclusion of firm × year fixed effects,
which enables us to compare secured and unsecured bonds issued by the same firm within a year.
Column (3) of Table III confirms our empirical strategy: once we include firm × year fixed effects,
the point estimate on Secured suggests that the credit spread on secured bonds is, on average, 35.2
basis points lower than that on unsecured bonds. This is similar in magnitude to the 40.6 basis
points spread we found for DealScan loans (column (3) of Table II).
       While there are more than 30,000 individual bond offerings in the data, we achieve
identification from a much smaller subset of the sample: the 706 observations in which the same
firm issued at least one secured and one unsecured bond in the same year. In robustness tests
reported in Appendix Table A.I we use an even tighter set of firm × year × quarter (instead of firm
× year) fixed effects and find that the credit spread of secured bonds is 48.6 basis points lower than
unsecured bonds. However, the number of observations with both secured and unsecured bonds
issued by the same firm within the same year-quarter declines to 284.
       The coefficient on Senior in column (1) suggests that the credit spread on senior bonds is
lower by 104 basis points compared to the spread on junior bonds. Once again, there seems to be
selection in this estimate. Higher credit-quality firms issue senior unsecured bonds, so when we
include firm fixed effects in column (2), the magnitude of the Senior coefficient estimate falls to
almost a third of its earlier estimated magnitude. The addition of firm × year fixed effects does not
change this, suggesting that while higher credit-quality firms issue senior unsecured bonds, this
issuance, on average, is not strongly correlated with changes in firm quality over time. Later, we
will argue that the picture is different when we focus only on non-investment grade firms.
       The coefficient on Maturity in column (1) suggests that a one standard deviation increase
in a bond's maturity is associated with a 34 basis points lower spread. However, the sign as well
as the magnitude of this coefficient changes once we control for time-varying firm characteristics
in column (3), once again suggesting that firms have to pay for pushing out the maturity of their
debt and thus obtaining insurance against illiquidity. The coefficient on Maturity in column (3)
implies that a one standard deviation increase in a bond's maturity is associated with a 16 basis
points higher spread. The magnitude of the coefficient is much smaller than in Table II, column
(4). The coefficient on Callable in column (1) suggests that callable bonds have spreads that are
79 basis points higher than non-callable bonds, but there is selection again here. In column (3), the

                                                                                                   13
coefficient is small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. Similarly, with the presence of
covenants in the bond contract, the coefficient in column (3) is small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero. Finally, the coefficient on Amount is statistically not different from
zero in column (1), but the coefficient in column (3) is positive and suggests that doubling the
issuance amount is associated with a 1.6 basis points increase in spread.
       The difference in coefficient estimates on maturity and covenants between Tables II and
III is interesting. For bank debt (Table II), longer-maturity loans imply significantly less lender
control (the average maturity is 3.91 years, so an additional year is a significant extension) and
perhaps therefore require higher spreads. For bonds (Table III), maturities are long anyway, and
as suggested by Diamond (1991), little control is exercised by bondholders. So the cost of an
additional year of maturity in spread terms is small. A similar narrative is suggested by covenants.
Banks value covenants because of the control they exert, and there is a significant spread reduction
associated with them in Table II, column (3), while bondholders do not, and there is an
insignificant spread reduction associated with them in Table III, column (3).

C. TRACE Secondary Market Bond Trades
       We supplement our results for loan originations and bond issuances with an analysis of
trades of corporate bonds in the secondary market. Secondary market trades in corporate bonds
allow us to examine a broader sample of bonds while still identifying from within-firm-within-
time variation.
       Although the median firm in the Mergent bond issuance sample issues only one bond in a
given year (and hence gets dropped in the firm × year fixed effects specification), the median firm
had 67 bond observations in TRACE in a given year, providing secondary market prices for bonds
issued by the firm in the past. Essentially, as long as a firm has at least one secured bond and one
unsecured bond outstanding, the availability of secondary market prices allows us to examine the
effect of security on spreads using bond trades of the same firm at the same point in time. Given
the richness of the TRACE data, we can further restrict a comparison of secured versus unsecured
bonds to same firm × year × month instead of same firm × year. In total, there are 152,265
observations where secondary market trades for at least one secured and one unsecured bond issued
in the past by the same firm occur in a given year and month.




                                                                                                 14
         Similar to the analysis of loan origination and bond issuance, we run regressions based on
equation (1). However, with the TRACE data we can also incorporate firm × year × month fixed
effects. We report the results in Table IV. The dependent variable in these regressions is the
difference between the implied yield from secondary trade prices and the yield on a maturity-
matched treasury.
         In column (1), we include year × month fixed effects in addition to bond characteristics.
Similar to the results documented in Tables II and III, the coefficient on Secured is positive (91.4
basis points) and statistically significant. The addition of firm fixed effects in column (2) flips the
sign of the coefficient on Secured from positive to negative. The spread on secured bonds is now
45.2 basis points lower compared to unsecured bonds. Interestingly, we find this significant
negative effect even before we include firm × time fixed effects. This is because the selection
problem over time in this setting is mitigated since we are likely to have yields for both secured
and unsecured bonds at relatively close points in time. In other words, even if a firm issues secured
bonds when its conditions are bad, those bonds could trade in good times as well. There also will
be secondary trades in its unsecured bonds that were issued in the past. Take, for example, an
extreme case of a firm that always has one secured and one unsecured bond outstanding. To the
extent that there is selection in the timing of secured versus unsecured issuance but no such
selection in secondary trades of secured versus unsecured bonds, a simple comparison of spreads
implied by trades of all secured and unsecured bonds of the firm should suffer from less serious
selection problems.
         We correct for any residual effects of issuance timing in column (3), where we include firm
× year × month fixed effects to compare implied yields from secondary trades in a given month on
bonds that were issued by the same firm in the past. As might be expected, the coefficient estimate
on Secured is both economically larger in magnitude and statistically more significant than the
estimate in column (2). The point estimate suggests that spreads on secured bonds are, on average,
62.6 basis points lower than those of unsecured bonds. There is little that is qualitatively different
and noteworthy about the coefficients on other variables, relative to what we saw in Table III, and
we will skip the discussion in the interests of space. In what follows, we will use the model
correcting for firm × time fixed effects. 14


14
   Are firms that issue multiple types of bonds different in any way from the rest? They may well be, but our concern
is to correct for firm credit quality while estimating the benefit of offering collateral, which our methodology does.

                                                                                                                  15
                 III. Firm Characteristics and Secured Debt Spread
         In the last section, we estimated that the secured spread, the difference between the yield
on an unsecured bond and the yield on a secured bond issued by the same firm at the same point
in time was positive, after we corrected for selection effects. In this section, we start exploring the
reasons for the selection bias in greater detail. We begin by focusing on firm characteristics that
are potentially correlated with financial constraints. We later analyze the direct effect of credit risk
­ measured by credit rating ­ on secured credit spreads.

A. Firm Characteristics and Secured Debt Spread
         In this section, we examine the relation between secured credit spreads and firm
characteristics. To do this, we estimate the following regression specification using TRACE data
on secondary market prices for bonds:

   ,, =   ,, +   ,,  ,-1 + ,, +  , + ,, ,                                                                     (2)

where ,, is the spread for bond i of firm j at time t. The variable ,, is a dummy
that equals one if bond i is secured, and zero otherwise. ,-1 is a vector of firm characteristics
measured during the quarter before a trade. The variable ,, controls for bond characteristics,
while  , represents firm × year × month fixed effects. Note that the direct effect of firm
characteristics gets absorbed in firm × year × month fixed effects. The key coefficient of interest
is  that measures the change in the secured spread for a unit change in firm characteristics.
         We report the results of this analysis in Table V, where in columns (1)-(5) we interact one
firm characteristics at a time; firm size, firm age, profitability, leverage, and tangibility, while in
column (6) we include all the interactions together. Recollect size is measured as the log of the
total value of assets in millions of dollars, age is number of years since the firm's first entry in
Compustat, ROA is calculated as operating income divided by total assets, leverage is total debt
divided by total assets, and tangibility is the proportion of property, plant, and equipment to total
assets. 15 Firm characteristics are measured at the end of the quarter before bond trades.




There could well be reasons unrelated to underlying business why firms issue multiple kinds of debt, such as targeting
different clienteles in the DealScan data or issuing at different points in time in the Mergent data.
15
   We winsorize these variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

                                                                                                                    16
         For brevity, we will only discuss the estimates in column (6). The coefficient on size
interacted with secured is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that the benefit from
pledging security is decreasing in firm size (the baseline coefficient on secured is negative). A one
standard deviation increase in firm size is associated with a reduction in the spread gap between
unsecured and secured bond of 50 bps. The coefficients on the interaction term of secured with
firm age is negative ­ perhaps the varying age of assets in older firms enhances the value of being
secured by a specific asset. The interaction with ROA is not statistically significant. The negative
coefficient estimate on the interaction term between secured and leverage suggests that security is
particularly valuable for highly levered firms, where the probability of financial distress is higher
as is the possibility of inter-creditor conflicts ­ a one standard deviation increase in firm leverage
is associated with a 43 basis points higher spread gap. The coefficient on the tangibility interaction
is positive, suggesting that firms with a greater proportion of tangible assets likely have a greater
proportion of asset value preserved in bankruptcy, so creditors benefit less from being secured by
specific assets ­ a one standard deviation increase in tangibility is associated with a 136 basis
points lower spread gap.
         Finally, we have included an indicator in all the regression specifications for whether a
bond is senior. The missing category is therefore whether the bond is subordinate and unsecured.
Senior bonds enjoy a 42 basis point lower spread than subordinate unsecured bonds. 16
         In sum, in firms that seem to have a lower probability of financial distress and that have
assets that retain value in distress, creditors seem to place a lower valuation on securing their debt.
Since these are all inputs into the credit ratings issued by rating agencies, we turn to those next.

B. Firm Credit Quality and Secured Debt Spread
         Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020) show that the ratio of secured debt to assets for firms
in Compustat increases with default probability--suggesting that firms issue more secured debt as
their financial conditions deteriorate (also see Badoer, Dudley, and James (2020) Colla, Ippolito,
and Li (2013), Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2012), and Rauh and Sufi (2010)). We reproduce the result
of Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020) in Figure 3, where we measure a firm's default probability
using the Merton distance to default model (see Vassalou and Xing (2004) and Bharath and



16
  Interestingly, the effect of seniority does not vary much with firm characteristics except leverage, unlike security
(estimates available from the authors).

                                                                                                                    17
Shumway (2008) for a detailed description of the methodology); this default probability reflects
both the volatility of a firm's underlying cash flows and the level of its debt. Firms are placed into
deciles based on their one-year default probabilities, with firms in decile one having the lowest
default probabilities and firms in decile ten having the highest default probabilities. The figure
suggests that the median ratio of secured debt to assets increases up to the decile closest to default,
and then it dips slightly.
         Let us turn now to ratings, another measure of credit quality and proximity to distress. We
obtain issuer ratings from S&P Capital IQ. Since many firms that rely on the syndicated loan
market do not have issuer credit ratings, we focus in this section on bond issuers, using data from
Mergent and TRACE.
         We begin by analyzing secured spread at issuance for bonds issued by investment grade
and non-investment-grade firms. 17 We report the results of this analysis in Table VI, including
firm × year fixed effects, as in column (3) of Table III. As reported in column (1), the coefficient
of Secured in the subsample of investment grade bonds in the Mergent data set is small and
statistically insignificant ­ suggesting that investment grade issuers do not find that securing debt
reduces rates. On the other hand, the coefficient of Secured in the non-investment-grade subsample
suggests that non-investment-grade issuers reduce their cost of debt by a statistically significant
55.3 basis points. 18 Similarly, columns (3) and (4) examine secured spread for investment grade
and non-investment-grade issuers using TRACE, and they suggest a similar conclusion, with the
coefficient for investment grade bonds small and insignificant, whereas the coefficient for non-
investment-grade bonds is -129 basis points and significant at the 1% level.
         Next, we exploit the richness of TRACE secondary trade data to further examine secured
spread across firm quality in a more granular manner. We split our TRACE sample into five
mutually exclusive groups based on the issuer's S&P credit rating at the time of trade: (i) AAA to




17
   Firms with an S&P rating of BBB- or better are considered investment grade.
18
   The discussion of credit quality also allows us to address one concern readers may have, despite our attempt at
addressing the selection issues: is it possible that firms that issue both secured and unsecured bonds within a short
time span are different in quality from other secured issuers in our sample? After all, although 15% of bonds in our
sample are secured, our tight identification of secured spread comes from the 706 observations in which the same firm
issued both secured and unsecured bond in the same year. We look at the distribution of secured plus unsecured issuers
(from whom our spread is identified) against the remaining secured issuers across rating buckets. The Pearson's chi-
squared test cannot reject the null hypothesis that the distribution of firms in each of the two categories (only secured
vs both secured and unsecured) was drawn from the same underlying data generating process.

                                                                                                                     18
A-, (ii) BBB+ to BBB-, (iii) BB+ to BB-, (iv) B+ to B-, and (v) CCC+ to CCC-. We then
estimate the following regression specification:
                       5

     ,, =    ,,  __, + ,, + , +  ,, ,                                                                        (3)
                     =1

where __, (k=1, 2...5) are a set of dummies that equal one when firm j at time t
belongs to rating group k, and zero otherwise. All other variables are defined as before. The direct
effect of the ratings dummy gets absorbed by firm × year × month fixed effects (, ). In Figure
4A, we plot the negative of the coefficients on the five secured dummies ( ), representing secured
spreads for firms belonging to each of the rating categories. 19 As can be seen from the figure,
collateralizing a bond does not seem to affect its credit spread until firm quality is BB+ and below.
Spreads on secured bonds are 110 basis points lower than spreads on unsecured bonds for firms in
the B+ to B- rating range. For firms of lower quality ­ CCC+ or worse ­ the value attached to
having a bond with security, as measured in the secondary market for bonds, seems to increase
further. In particular, spreads on secured bonds are almost 270 basis points lower than spreads on
unsecured bonds for firms in the CCC+ to CCC- ratings range. In terms of statistical significance,
the estimates for the first two ratings ranges are statistically indistinguishable from zero, whereas
the estimates for the BB+ to BB-, B+ to B-, and the CCC+ to CCC- rating ranges are all
statistically significant at the 1% level.
        Next, we compare the secured spread for firms that move between two adjacent rating
groups during our sample period (we allow the firm to transition to other rating groups during the
sample period, in addition to the two adjacent groups in focus). The idea is to estimate the secured
credit spread conditional on credit rating transitions. Specifically, we estimate the following
regression specification:
 ,, =   ,, +   ,,  __, + ,, +  ,
                 +  ,, ,                                                                                    (4)
where __, is a dummy that equals one if firm j at time t belongs to the worse
of two adjacent rating groups. To estimate this, we keep only firms that transited between both
rating groups over the sample period (including those that fell and those that rose). We have


19
  We define secured spread as the difference between the yield on an unsecured bond and the yield on a secured
bond, and hence equals - .

                                                                                                                 19
secondary prices for both secured and unsecured bonds in each of the two adjacent rating groups.
Therefore, - measures the secured spread for the higher rating group, whereas - measures the
incremental secured spread when the same firm falls to the lower rating group.
       The coefficients on ,,  __, are plotted in Figure 4B. The
results suggest that as firms move from a BBB rating to a BB rating, the spread on secured bonds
falls by an additional 92 basis points relative to the spread on unsecured bonds. The coefficient is
statistically significant at the 1% level. Similarly, as firms move from a BB rating to a B rating in
Figure 4B, the spread on secured bonds falls by an additional 21 basis points relative to the spread
on unsecured bonds. Finally, as firms move from a B rating to a CCC rating, the spread on secured
bonds falls by an additional 131 basis points relative to the spread on unsecured bonds. The
coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% level. There does not seem to be any incremental
effect of security on spread as firm rating deteriorates from A to BBB.


                    IV. Secured Debt and the Business Cycle
       We have seen the impact of security on the spread increases as a firm's credit quality
declines. We now examine the issuance of secured debt over the cycle, and relatedly, the behavior
of the secured credit spread over the business cycle. Consistent with the selection effects noted
earlier, we would expect more issuance as economic and financing conditions deteriorate,
especially for non-investment-grade firms.

A. Secured Debt Issuance and the Business Cycle
       We begin by examining cyclical pattern in the issuance of secured debt. Using the Mergent
bond issuance data, we estimate the following regression for the period 1980 to 2018:
                  ,, =  +  , Z + , +  +  ,, ,                                                    (5)
    where  ,, is an indicator variable that equals one if bond i of firm j issued
at time t is secured, and zero otherwise. Z t represents a business cycle proxy. We use two measures
for the cycle: the Baa­Aaa credit spread ­ a commonly used measure of financial conditions ­ and
real gross domestic product (GDP).  , is a dummy that equals one if the firm has a non-
investment-grade ratings, and zero otherwise. The variable X, controls for time-varying firm
characteristics such as credit rating. Finally,  represents firm fixed effects to account for time-
invariant firm heterogeneity.

                                                                                                  20
       We report the results of this analysis in Panel A of Table VII. The coefficient on Baa-Aaa
spread in column (1) is small and statistically insignificant, suggesting that investment grade firms
do not base their choice of secured vs unsecured issuance on market conditions. The coefficient
on the interaction term, Non-IG × Baa-Aaa spread, is 0.148 and statistically significant at the 1%
level. The coefficient suggests that one standard deviation increase in Baa-Aaa spread increases
the probability of secured issuance by a non-investment grade firm by an additional 5.2 percentage
points (compared to investment grade issuers) ­ a 23.7% increase from the unconditional
probability of 0.219. Similarly, the coefficient on GDP growth in column (2) is small and
insignificant, suggesting that economic conditions do not influence choice of issuance for
investment grade firms. However, the interaction term, Non-IG × GDP growth, equals -3.678 and
is statistically significant at the 1% confidence level. The coefficient suggests that one standard
deviation fall in GDP growth increases the probability of secured issuance by a non-investment
grade firm by an additional 5.3 percentage points (compared to investment grade issuers) ­ a 24.2%
increase from the unconditional probability of 0.219.
       In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is the dollar share of secured bond in
aggregate monthly bond issuances, calculated separately for investment and non-investment grade
issuers each month. The results paint a similar picture. The coefficient on the interaction term in
column (3) suggests that one standard deviation increase in Baa-Aaa spread increases the secured
share for non-investment grade firms by an additional 3.6 percentage points (compared to
investment grade issuers) ­ a 14.4% increase from its unconditional mean of 0.253. Similarly, the
interaction term in column (4) suggests that a one standard deviation fall in GDP growth increases
the secured share for non-investment grade firms by an additional 4.3 percentage points (compared
to investment grade issuers) ­ a 16.8% increase from its unconditional mean of 0.253. Overall, our
analysis suggests that secured bond issuance is countercyclical for non-investment grade firms.
Interestingly, investment grade firms' issuance choices do not seem to be influenced by market or
economic conditions. We will suggest an explanation of all this in the next section. Before we do
so, we examine the behavior of secured spread over business cycle in the next subsection.

B. The Cost of Secured Debt Issuance and the Business Cycle
       Having established that the issuance of secured bonds is countercyclical, we next use
Mergent's bond issuance data to examine how the cost of secured debt changes over the business
cycle. We estimate the following regression specification:
                                                                                                  21
,, =   ,, +   ,,  _ + ,, + ,
               + ,, ,                                                                            (6)
where ,, is the spread for bond i of firm j at time t. The results of this analysis are
presented in Panel B of Table VII. In column (1), we examine how secured bond spread varies
with the Baa­Aaa credit spread. Note that the direct effect of monthly credit spread on bond spread
gets absorbed by year × month fixed effects. The key variable of interest is the interaction term
Secured × Baa­Aaa spread. The coefficient on the interaction term is negative and statistically
significant at the 5% confidence level. In terms of economic magnitude, the coefficient suggests
that a one standard deviation increase in the Baa­Aaa spread reduces the spread on secured bonds
by an additional 13 basis points relative to the spread on unsecured bonds issued by the same firm
in the same year. Similarly, the coefficient in column (2) suggests that one standard deviation fall
in real GDP growth reduces the spread on secured bonds by an additional 5.6 basis points relative
to the spread on unsecured bonds issued by the same firm in the same year.
       Overall, the analysis suggests that collateral becomes more valuable as business conditions
deteriorate ­ firms are more likely to use secured borrowing during an economic downturn, and
such borrowing seems to provide a significantly lower cost of debt under adverse economic
conditions compared to unsecured borrowing.


               V. Spreads and Issuance: A Theory of Collateral Use
       We have documented that the magnitude of the secured spread is larger for riskier firms,
grows as firms get closer to distress, and increases in business cycle downturns. We also find that
firms tend to issue secured bonds when they have low ratings and in business cycle downturns ­
that is, when the economy is doing badly. In one sense, the link between the two phenomena may
seem obvious ­ firms issue secured bonds when the secured spread increases following a rise in
the probability of default. But if backing a bond with collateral reduces bond spreads appropriately,
there is no obvious reason why secured bonds should be issued only when the probability of default
rises. In a Modigliani Miller world, firms should be indifferent as to when they issue secured debt.
In a world with agency problems, levered firms should positively want to issue secured debt to
reduce agency problems (Stulz and Johnson (1985)) and even to dilute prior debt (Donaldson,
Gromb and Piacentino (2019)). Why then do they hold off issuing it?


                                                                                                  22
A. Is Secured Debt Underpriced?
         Even though the secured spread seems related to the price of default, perhaps it is the case
that secured debt is undervalued by the market? Assuming the loss given default for secured debt
relative to unsecured debt is constant over time for a particular firm credit rating, we can show
(see appendix B)
                             Sec=
                                ured Spread p ( LGDUn sec ured - LGDS ec ured )            (7)

where p is the one-year-look-ahead probability of default for that rating category and LGD is the
loss given default. We can estimate the secured spread for each firm over time from the TRACE
secondary bond trading dataset, and we can estimate the probability of default either using the
Merton model, or from actual defaults in that rating category in the following year. So in each
year, we can compute Secured spread/p for each firm. From (7), this equals the percentage by
which the loss given default of unsecured bonds exceeds secured bonds. We term this the LGD
Advantage of security. We do not know what this should be but we do know that it should not be
higher than 100% if the bond is fairly priced -- the secured bond can, at best, recover 100 percent
while the unsecured bond can at worst be a total write-off. If the LGD Advantage is higher, it
would suggest that the rate reduction a firm would get by issuing a secured bond rather than an
unsecured bond exceeds what might be suggested simply by the expected improvement in loss
given default from securing debt.
         In Figure 5A, we present the fraction of firms for which the LGD advantage exceeds 100%,
separately for the investment grade category and non-investment grade category, using the
estimated probability of default from the Merton model. 20 In Figure 5B, we use the S&P one-year-
ahead realized probability of default as a proxy for p for each rating category. What is clear is that
for the firms that issue secured bonds the least ­ the investment grade ones ­ the apparent
advantage of issuing secured bonds seems high (there are many more years in which the LGD
Advantage is greater than 100% for all the firms for which we have data), which makes the
question of why they don't issue even more puzzling.
         Indeed, when we plot the fraction of firms for which the LGD advantage exceeds 100% for
the BB, B, and CCC rating categories in Figure 5C using S&P one-year-ahead realized probability


20
   For instance, we divide the secured spread for a firm rated CCC by the realized one year default rate for CCC bonds
to get the LGD Advantage for that firm. We then calculate the fraction of firms in the particular category who have
an LGD Advantage greater than 100%.

                                                                                                                  23
of default, we find that a far smaller fraction of firms have ratios exceeding 100 percent for CCC
rated firms. Secured bond seems to be more reasonably priced for low rated firms that tend to be
the most reliable issuers of secured bonds, while it seems to be overpriced for higher rated issuers
that issue less frequently.
         There are some ways our methodology may introduce errors, but the errors should typically
be small, and be relatively larger for lower rated bonds. 21 Yet higher rated bonds seem more
"mispriced", at least in light of our methodology. If indeed it would be advantageous for higher
rated firms to issue such bonds but they do not, we need to ask why.
         One possibility is that there is a fixed cost of issuing secured debt, and the small saving in
spread, given the lower probability of default for investment grade issuers, is not worth it. While
there may indeed be costs of registering or perfecting collateral, it is likely to be small relative to
the size of bond issues. It is hard to imagine that it would be sufficient to deter firms from choosing
a cheaper form of finance.
         It may be that secured issues by highly rated firms are priced generously because they are
in low supply relative to demand ­ if some investors have a "preferred habitat" for ultra-safe
corporate bonds, they may gobble up any secured issues by highly rated firms. Yet this "preferred
habitat" argument would not explain why the marginal better-rated firm does not take advantage
of this unmet demand and issue more secured bonds. Why is it only the low rated firms that issue
enough to satisfy demand?
         That leaves the possibility that there is a cost of issuing secured debt, over and above the
interest cost, which is why higher rated firms that can issue unsecured debt prefer not to issue
secured. What might this cost be? Adverse selection costs are usually the reason firms forego
issuing a type of security, yet secured debt issued by a healthy firm is less likely to suffer from the
usual adverse selection costs (compared to unsecured debt).



21
   To derive (7) in Appendix B, we assume the rate at which repayments from the secured and unsecured bond are
discounted is equal. This is likely to not make much of a difference if investors are not very risk averse or if the bond
has low default risk. Also, the secured spread may overstate the value of issuing secured debt. Ideally, we should be
comparing the reduction in spread from issuing a secured bond and issuing an unsecured bond, ceteris paribus. But
the measured secured spread captures the difference between a secured bond and an unsecured bond which is further
behind in priority (because of the issuance of the secured bond). If an unsecured bond was issued instead, the yield on
the prior unsecured debt would not be pushed up so much. The advantage of issuing secured is the difference in rate
between a newly issued secured bond and a newly issued unsecured bond, ceteris paribus. The secured spread is a
proxy for it, a proxy that gets more exact the less risky the firm is. So both errors should be smaller, not larger, for
highly rated firms.

                                                                                                                     24
          Instead, following Rampini and Vishwanathan (2010, 2013), we conjecture that unused
collateral is a form of slack or insurance that firms like to preserve if they can issue other forms of
debt. They use collateralized debt only when new funds are desperately needed ­ for instance to
avert costly bankruptcy ­ and other avenues to raise capital have shut down. The lack of alternative
funding sources, and the high marginal value of any funds at such a juncture, may explain why
firms preserve their collateral in normal times despite the tempting pricing of secured debt.

B. The Pandemic Sudden Stop.
           The likely sudden stop imposed on risky unsecured corporate bond issuance in the early
phases of the coronavirus pandemic offers us a case study of this phenomenon at work. Before the
Federal Reserve stepped in on March 23 2020 with a wide range of measures intended to calm
financial markets, all manner of risk premia increased as the widespread impact of the coronavirus
pandemic in the United States became better understood. The Moody's BAA Corporate Bond
spread over to 10 year Treasuries went up from 210 basis points in early February to peak at 431
on March 23rd. 22 For B rated bonds, the spike was even more dramatic, with the spread going from
402 to 1189. 23 After March 23rd, and as the Federal Reserve continued fine-tuning these measures
over April and May, risk spreads came down. The BAA-Treasury spread was down to 260 basis
points by end July. For B rated bonds, it went back down to 539.
          We estimate the secured spread over this period, separately for investment grade and non-
investment grade firms in Figure 6. Secured spreads on investment grade firms continued to be
close to zero during this period. In contrast, for non-investment grade firms, secured spreads
increased from 40 basis points in January to 165 basis points in April before falling to 78 basis
points by June.
          The difference in behavior of the secured spreads for different categories of firms is
interesting. It probably reflects differential access to the markets. Markets were open to unsecured
investment grade bond issuances. In Figure 7, we display the value of aggregate bond issuances at
the monthly frequency from Jan 2019 to June 2020. The issuance of corporate bonds by investment
grade firms during March, April, May and June of 2020 was 406%, 184%, 63% and 226% higher,
respectively, compared to the same months of 2019, and they were predominantly unsecured. This


22
     https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/BAA10Y
23
     https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/BAMLH0A2HYB

                                                                                                    25
suggests the rise in yields for investment grade bonds was probably because of liquidity pressures
in the market, given the enormous issuance, than because of a rise in default probabilities.
       On the other hand, corporate bond issuance by non-investment grade firms declined in
March of 2020 relative to the previous year, highlighting the difficulties riskier firms face in raising
financing during bad times, especially if they want to issue unsecured debt. Indeed, given the low
issuance of unsecured bonds relative to the norm (and assuming a normal clientele exists for non-
investment grade bonds), it is hard to argue that liquidity was the reason spreads blew out so much.
Instead, it must be that fears of default and the shutdown of access to the unsecured bond market
fed on each other. The higher probability of default increased the secured spread in traded bonds
for this class of firms, making secured bond issuance the most attractive, and indeed perhaps the
only way to raise financing for most low rated firms in April.
       Perhaps as a result, even though we see corporate bond issuance by non-investment grade
firms rebounded in April and continued to be strong during May and June, it was almost entirely
secured in April and secured bonds still formed the majority of issuance in May and June as
financial conditions eased. Secured issuance by non-investment grade firms in April was more
than double the amount issued in any month in the past year. On the other hand, the fraction of
unsecured bond issuance was relatively low, suggesting this source of financing was difficult and
costly to access.
        Simply put then, when there are few secured bond issues, the measured LGD advantage of
secured bonds seems high, in part because there are very few secured bond issues to quench any
habitat demand. Yet firms do not want to issue more because they have access to the unsecured
bond market. If access to the unsecured bond market shrinks for a certain category of firm,
typically when the probability of default rises, the firm is forced to issue more secured bonds. The
secured spread increases because of the higher probability of default, and the LGD advantage of
secured bonds falls because more such bonds are issued into the market.
        What this case study suggests is that the variations in the secured spread are small and
matter little in the issuance decision for investment grade firms, even when financial markets
tighten. They have access to unsecured bond markets and have little desire to use up scarce
collateral when not needed ­ even if unsecured spreads rise for liquidity reasons. Matters are
different for lower rated non-investment grade firms. For them, a rise in the secured spread reflects



                                                                                                     26
a difficulty in accessing unsecured bond markets and a rise in the probability of default, and
variations in the secured spread should be more strongly correlated with issuance decisions.

C. The Issuance Decision
   To investigate whether the magnitude of the secured spread correlates more generally with the
lack of access of non-investment grade firms to unsecured bond markets, we analyze the timing of
bond issuances in Table VIII and investigate how it correlates with the secured spread. We estimate
the following regression specification:
           ,, =     + Z, +  +  ,, ,                                                              (8)
       where  ,, is an indicator variable that equals one if bond i of firm j
issued at time t is secured, and zero otherwise. The variable   represents the
monthly estimates of secured spread by running regression Eq. (1) using the TRACE bond trading
data. To avoid simultaneity bias, we drop bonds issued in a month in the estimation of that month's
secured spread. The variable Z, controls for time-varying firm characteristics such as credit rating.
Finally,  represents firm fixed effects to account for time-invariant firm heterogeneity.
       Highly rated firms typically do not see markets close to their unsecured issues, and would
not be influenced by the secured spread. In contrast, lower rated firms would be impelled to access
the secured bond market when secured spreads are greater, and the higher implied probability of
defaults makes it harder to access unsecured bond markets. Table VIII reports results of this
analysis. In Panel A, we look at the secured issuances of the sample of firms that are non-IG. The
coefficient on secured spread in column (1) is positive and statistically significant at the 1%
confidence level. The coefficient suggests that a 100 basis points increase in secured spread is
associated with a 4.3 percentage point increase in the chances that a bond issuance will be secured
­ a 15.9% increase from the unconditional probability of 0.27. The inclusion of ratings fixed effects
in column (2) yields similar results, suggesting that holding a firm's fundamentals constant, an
increase in secured spreads is associated with a firm tapping its secured debt capacity and issuing
a secured bond.
       While we view our secured spread measure as specifically measuring market's preference
for security as financial conditions change over time, it is possible that the variation in secured
spread has no additional information beyond simple measures of credit conditions such as the Baa-
Aaa credit spread. In column (3), we include the Baa-Aaa credit spread measure as an additional


                                                                                                  27
control and continue to find an economically strong and statistically significant effect of secured
spread on secured bond issuance choice. Similarly, in column (4), we use information from Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey and control for tightening standards for commercial and industrial
loans to large and middle-market firms. We continue to find a strong effect of our secured spread
measure in influencing firm's choice of secured vs unsecured bond issuance. Finally, we include
real GDP growth rate in column (5) to control of underlying economic conditions and continue to
find that secured spread can independently explain speculative grade firms' choice of secured vs
unsecured bond issuances.
       In Panel B, we repeat the same analysis for investment grade issuers. The coefficients on
secured spread in all five specifications are small and statistically indistinguishable from zero,
suggesting that investment grade borrowers do not base their issuance decision on the secured
spread in the market.

D. Discussion
       The analysis suggests that firms tend to view collateral as precious, not to be used in the
normal course but as a lifeline. Highly rated firms eschew the issuance of secured debt. Variations
in the secured spread, albeit small, have little influence on their issue decision.
       In contrast, low rated firms tend to have fewer options and are driven to issue secured debt
both when financial markets tighten and when economic conditions are adverse. The secured
spread is positively associated with secured debt issuance by such firms. Given the limited access
to other forms of borrowing than secured debt in adverse times, they attempt to preserve collateral
in normal times. This is not to say they are indifferent to the benefits of issuing higher priority
claims to reduce adverse selection (see Myers-Majluf (1984)). Their reliance on senior unsecured
debt issuance in normal times might reflect how they trade-off the cost reduction associated with
issuing high priority claims versus the insurance benefit of holding back super-high priority
collateral for use in times of extremis. Indeed, this is precisely what Badoer, Dudley, and James
(2020) and Rauh and Sufi (2010) document in the phenomenon of "priority spreading" by
distressed firms.


                                            VI. Conclusion
       We find that corporate borrowers are reluctant to issue secured debt to lenders in the United
States when a firm is far from distress or the economy is healthy. As a firm nears distress or the

                                                                                                 28
economy deteriorates, access to unsecured debt markets becomes more difficult and costly. Firms
then use the lifeline provided by available collateral to issue debt and access funding. It is precisely
to have a source of ready funding in bad times that they avoid the temptations of issuing secured
debt in good times or when they are highly rated.
        There is a broader point here. A firm's assets may be important in reassuring lenders that
they can collect repayment when financial infrastructure is underdeveloped ­ as Benmelech,
Kumar, and Rajan (2020) suggest was true in the United States in the early years of the twentieth
century, or as is still true in a number of countries across the world today. Collateral will be
"priced" then even in the normal course, and loan documents will emphasize the importance of
assets. As Lian and Ma (2019) show, Japan still emphasizes asset based lending.
        However, giving lenders power over assets comes at a cost (see, for example, Mello and
Ruckes (2017)). As a result, with financial development, borrowers would like to retain full control
over assets in the normal course, while lenders are willing to rely on structures that give them
control on a contingent basis (Aghion and Bolton (1992)). Financial development may make such
contingent issuance of collateral possible, for example through the effective enforcement of
negative pledge clauses that prevent the borrower from issuing secured debt to a favored party
without issuing it to all others (see Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020) and Donaldson, Gromb,
and Piacentino (2019)). Collateral may then not be pledged to back loans or bonds issued by
healthy firms, given that lenders have the ability to take collateral when truly needed, and can trust
the contractual system to ensure that it will not have already been pledged away when they want
it.
        A number of avenues are worth exploring. Does the pricing of collateral differ between
industries in which reorganization is the norm in bankruptcy and industries in which liquidation is
the norm (see the arguments in Lian and Ma (2019))? Also, is liquidity (alternatively, creditor risk
tolerance or optimism) as reflected in the stage of the financial cycle (see Borio (2014) and
Diamond, Hu, and Rajan (2020)), a factor in the value creditors see in protecting themselves with
collateral? There is ample scope for additional research.




                                                                                                     29
                                      REFERENCES
Acharya, Viral, Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello, 2007, Is cash negative debt? A hedging
    perspective on corporate financial policies, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515­554.
Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An incomplete contracts approach to financial
    contracting, Review of Economic Studies 59, 473­494.
Badoer, Dominique, Evan Dudley, and Christopher James, 2020, Priority Spreading of Corporate
    Debt, Review of Financial Studies, vol 33, no 1.
Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2014, Cyclicality of credit supply: Firm level evidence, Journal
    of Monetary Economics 62, 76­93.
Begley, Joy, 1994, Restrictive covenants included in public debt agreements: An empirical
    investigation, Working paper, University of British Columbia.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman, 2009, Collateral pricing, Journal of Financial
    Economics 91, 339­360.
Benmelech, Efraim, Nitish Kumar, and Raghuram Rajan, 2020, The decline of secured debt,
    Working paper, University of Chicago Booth School.
Berg, Tobias, Anthony Saunders, and Sascha Steffen, 2016, The Total Cost of Corporate
    Borrowing in the Loan Market: Don't Ignore the Fees, Journal of Finance 71, 1357-1392.
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 1990, Collateral, loan quality and bank risk, Journal of
    Monetary Economics 25, 21­42.
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 1995, Relationship lending and lines of credit in small
    firm finance, Journal of Business 68, 351­381.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, Kathleen Kahle, William Maxwell, and Danielle Xu, 2009, Measuring
    abnormal bond performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4219­4258.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting default with the Merton distance to
    default model, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339­1369.
Bjerre, Carl, 1999, Secured transactions inside out: Negative pledge covenants, property, and
    perfection, Cornell Law Review 84, 305­393.
Bolton, Patrick, and David Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal debt structure with multiple creditors,
    Journal of Political Economy 104, 1­26.
Boot, Arnoud W. A., Anjan V. Thakor, and Gregory F. Udell, 1991, Secured lending and default
    risk: Equilibrium analysis, policy implications and empirical results, Economic Journal 101,

                                                                                                30
    458­472.
Booth, James, and Lena Booth, 2006, Loan collateral decisions and corporate borrowing costs,
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 67­90.
Borio, Claudio, 2014, The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt? Journal of
    Banking and Finance 45, 182­198.
Bradley, Michael, and Michael R. Roberts, 2015, The structure and pricing of corporate debt
    covenants, Quarterly Journal of Finance 5, 1­37.
Chava, Sudheer, and Michael Roberts, 2008, How does financing impact investment? The role of
    debt covenants, Journal of Finance 63, 2085­2121.
Colla, Paolo, Filippo Ippolito, and Kai Li, 2013, Debt specialization, Journal of Finance 68, 2117­
    2141.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans and
    directly placed debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689­721.
Diamond, Douglas, Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram Rajan, 2020, Pledgeability, industry liquidity, and
    financing cycles, Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
Dick-Nielsen, Jens, 2009, Liquidity biases in TRACE, Journal of Fixed Income 19, 43­55.
Donaldson, Jason R., Denis Gromb, and Giorgia Piacentino, 2019, Conflicting priorities: A theory
    of covenants and collateral, Working paper, Washington University, St. Louis.
Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve:
    1961 to the Present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291­2304.
Hart, Oliver, 1995, Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure (Oxford University Press, New
    York).
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841­879.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of debt,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1­41.
Helwege, Jean, and Christopher Turner, 1999, The Slope of the Credit Yield Curve for
    SpeculativeGrade Issuers, Journal of Finance 54, 1869-1884.
Jackson, Thomas, and Anthony Kronman, 1979, Secured financing and priorities among creditors,
    Yale Law Journal 88, 1143­1182.



                                                                                                31
Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
    costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305­360.
John, Kose, Anthony W. Lynch, and Manju Puri, 2003, Credit ratings, collateral, and loan
    characteristics: Implications for yield, Journal of Business 76, 371­409.
Kashyap, Anil, Jeremy Stein, and David Wilcox, 1993, Monetary policy and credit conditions:
    Evidence from the composition of external finance, American Economic Review 83, 78­98.
Li, Shaojin, Toni M. Whited, and Yufeng Wu, 2016, Collateral, taxes, and leverage, Review of
    Financial Studies 29, 1453­1500.
Lian, Chen, and Yueran Ma, 2019, Anatomy of corporate borrowing constraints, Working paper,
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Luck, Stephen, and Joao Santos, 2020, The valuation of collateral in bank lending, Working paper,
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Malitz, Ileen, 1986, On financial contracting: The determinants of bond covenants, Financial
    Management 15, 18­25.
Mello, Antonio and Martin Ruckes, 2017, Collateral in Corporate Financing, Working paper,
    University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Myers, Stewart C., 1984, The capital structure puzzle, Journal of Finance 39, 574­592.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions
    when firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13,
    187­221.
Nini, Greg, David C. Smith, and Amir Sufi, 2012, Creditor control rights, corporate governance,
    and firm value, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1713­1761.
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, risk management, and the distribution
    of debt capacity, Journal of Finance 65, 2293­2322.
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2013, Collateral and capital structure, Journal of
    Financial Economics 109, 466­492.
Rauh, Joshua D., and Amir Sufi, 2010, Capital structure and debt structure, Review of Financial
    Studies 23, 4242­4280.
Schwarz, Steven L., 1997, The Easy Case for the Priority of Secured Claims in Bankruptcy, Duke
    Law Journal, Vol 47, No 3.



                                                                                              32
Schwert, Michael, Does Borrowing from Banks Cost More than Borrowing from the Market?
    Journal of Finance 75, 905-947.
Smith, W. Clifford, and Jerold B. Warner, 1979, On financial contracting: An analysis of bond
    covenants, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 117­161.
Strahan, Philip, 1999, Borrower risk and the price and nonprice terms of bank loans, Staff reports,
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Stulz, René M., and Herb Johnson, 1985, An analysis of secured debt, Journal of Financial
    Economics 14, 501­522.
Sufi, Amir, 2007, Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evidence from
    Syndicated Loans, Journal of Finance 62, 629-668.
Vassalou, Maria, and Yuhang Xing, 2004, Default risk in equity returns, Journal of Finance 59,
    831­868.
Williamson, Oliver E., 1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational
    Contracting (Free Press, New York).




                                                                                                33
                400
                300
          Spread (bps)
              200
                100
                0




                         1994   1998    2002         2006        2010         2014   2018
                                                     Year

                                            Unsecured               Secured




Figure 1. Loan spread ­ secured versus unsecured. This figure displays the median spread over LIBOR
at issuance for secured and unsecured loans by year of issuance. Source: DealScan.




                                                                                                34
                   250  200
           Spread (bps)
               150 100
                   50




                              1982   1986   1990   1994   1998 2002   2006   2010   2014   2018
                                                            Year

                                                   Unsecured           Secured



Figure 2. Yield spread ­ secured versus unsecured bond. This figure displays the median yield spread
at issuance over maturity-matched treasury for secured and unsecured bonds by year of issuance. Source:
Mergent.




                                                                                                    35
                0                2              4                 6               8               10
                                             Default probability decile


Figure 3. Secured debt and firm quality. This figure plots the median share of secured debt to total book
value of assets for firm-year observations in Compustat from 1981 to 2017 for different one-year default
probability deciles. One-year default probability is calculated using the Merton distance to default model.
The default probability incorporates both the volatility of a firm's asset value and the level of its debt. Firms
are grouped into ten deciles based on their default probability, and the median share of secured debt to
assets is calculated for each group. Source: authors' calculations using Compustat data.




                                                                                                              36
                  300200
            spread (bps)
           100    0


                           A- and better




                                                               BB+, BB, BB-




                                                                                            CCC+, CCC, CCC-
                                           BBB+, BBB, BBB-




                                                                              B+, B, B-
                                                             rating



Figure 4A. Implied secured yield spread by issuer rating categories. This figure reports results from the
following regression:
,, = 5
     =1   , ,  __, + ,, +  , + ,, ,

where __, (k=1, 2...5) is a set of dummies that equal one when firm j at time t belongs to
rating group k, and zero otherwise. The figure displays the secured spread for each rating category, i.e., the
negative of coefficients on the secured dummy interacted with the issuer's S&P rating group dummy (- ).
Spread is measured as the difference between the implied yield from the secondary trade price and a
maturity-matched treasury. The regression controls for seniority, maturity, callability, loan amount, and
presence of covenant. Note that the direct effect of issuer rating gets absorbed by firm × month fixed effects.
Source: TRACE.




                                                                                                              37
                 150100
           spread (bps)
           50    0




                                               BB vs BBB




                                                                    B vs BB
                          BBB vs A or better




                                                                                           CCC vs B
                                                           rating



Figure 4B. Incremental implied secured yield spread between adjacent issuer rating categories. This
graph reports results from the following regression:
  ,, =   ,, +   ,,  __, + ,, + , + ,, ,
where __, is a dummy that equals one if firm j belongs to the worse of two adjacent
rating groups at time t. The figure displays the change in secured spread by moving to the worse of two
adjacent issuer rating categories, i.e., the negative of coefficient on secured dummy interacted with a
dummy for worse issuer S&P rating group (-). Spread is measured as the difference between implied
yield from secondary trade price and a maturity-matched treasury. The regression controls for seniority,
maturity, callability, loan amount, and presence of covenant. We run a separate regression for each pair of
adjacent broad rating groups. For each regression, we restrict the sample to firms that have secondary trade
prices for both secured and unsecured bonds in both rating groups. Note that the direct effect of issuer rating
gets absorbed by firm × month fixed effects. Source: TRACE.




                                                                                                            38
                                               Share of firms with Implied Loss Given Default>100%
                                  1

           Investment Grade       .8

                                  .6

                                  .4

                                  .2

                                  0
                                  2002m1   2004m1   2006m1   2008m1   2010m1   2012m1   2014m1   2016m1   2018m1   2020m1


                                               Share of firms with Implied Loss Given Default>100%
                                  1
           Non-investment Grade




                                  .8

                                  .6

                                  .4

                                  .2

                                  0
                                  2002m1   2004m1   2006m1   2008m1   2010m1   2012m1   2014m1   2016m1   2018m1   2020m1




Figure 5A. Implied Loss Given Default - Merton. This graph plots at the monthly frequency the fraction
of firms for which the implied loss given default (LGD) advantage exceeds 100%, separately for investment
grade and non-investment grade firms. LGD advantage is the difference in loss given default for a secured
and an unsecured bond belonging to the same firm. We calculate the implied LGD advantage for each firm
by dividing that firm's estimated secured spread by the firm's Merton one-year default probability.




                                                                                                                            39
                                               Share of firms with Implied Loss Given Default>100%
                                   1

            Investment Grade       .8

                                   .6

                                   .4

                                   .2

                                   0
                                   2002m1   2004m1   2006m1   2008m1   2010m1   2012m1   2014m1   2016m1   2018m1


                                               Share of firms with Implied Loss Given Default>100%
                                   1
            Non-investment Grade




                                   .8

                                   .6

                                   .4

                                   .2

                                   0
                                   2002m1   2004m1   2006m1   2008m1   2010m1   2012m1   2014m1   2016m1   2018m1




Figure 5B. Implied Loss Given Default ­ S&P. This graph plots at the monthly frequency the fraction of
firms for which the implied loss given default (LGD) advantage exceeds 100%, separately for investment
grade and non-investment grade firms. LGD advantage is the difference in loss given default for a secured
and an unsecured bond belonging to the same firm. We calculate the implied LGD advantage for each firm
by dividing that firm's estimated secured spread by the one-year ahead realized probability of default for
firms belonging to a particular rating category.




                                                                                                                    40
    rating category BB                Share of firms with Implied Loss Given Default>100%
                          1




                          0
                          2002m1   2004m1   2006m1   2008m1   2010m1   2012m1   2014m1   2016m1   2018m1


                                      Share of firms with Implied Loss Given Default>100%
    rating category B




                          1




                          0
                          2002m1   2004m1   2006m1   2008m1   2010m1   2012m1   2014m1   2016m1   2018m1


                                      Share of firms with Implied Loss Given Default>100%
    rating category CCC




                          1




                          0
                          2002m1   2004m1   2006m1   2008m1   2010m1   2012m1   2014m1   2016m1   2018m1




Figure 5C. Implied Loss Given Default for Non-Investment Grade Firms ­ S&P. This graph plots at
the monthly frequency the fraction of firms for which the implied loss given default (LGD) advantage
exceeds 100%, separately for BB, B, and CCC rating categories. LGD advantage is the difference in loss
given default for a secured and an unsecured bond belonging to the same firm. We calculate the implied
LGD advantage for each firm by dividing that firm's estimated secured spread by the one-year ahead
realized probability of default for firms belonging to a particular rating category.




                                                                                                           41
                                                      Secured Spread
                                                 IG                          Non-IG

                         150
                         100
          spread (bps)
                         50
                         0




                          2020m1           2020m3     2020m5     2020m1   2020m3      2020m5
                                                               month
                         Graphs by Investment Grade




Figure 6. Secured Spread Estimates. This figure displays monthly estimates of secured spread obtained
from the following regression run at the monthly frequency:
                                                      , =   , + , +  + , ,
where , is the spread for bond i of firm j. The variable , is a dummy that equals one if
bond i is secured, and zero otherwise. The variable , controls for bond characteristics, while  represents
firm fixed effects.




                                                                                                       42
Figure 7. Bond Issuance (2019m1-2020m6). This figure displays the aggregate dollar amount of corporate
bonds issued every month from Jan 2019 to June 2020 using data from Mergent FISD database. The panel
on the left displays issuance by investment grade issuers while the panel on the right displays issuance by
ono-investment grade firms.




                                                                                                        43
                                                  Table I
                                           Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for variables used in our analysis. Panel A uses data from DealScan,
panel B uses data from Mergent, and panel C uses data from TRACE. Panels A and B tabulate statistics at
the debt issuance level, whereas panel C tabulates statistics at the bond trade level. Spread is measured as
spread over LIBOR at issuance in panel A, as yield spread at issuance over maturity-matched treasury in
panel B, and as the difference between the implied yield from secondary trade prices and the yield on
maturity-matched treasury in panel C. Secured is a dummy that takes the value of one if the debt is secured,
and zero otherwise. Senior is a dummy that takes the value of one if the debt is senior, and zero otherwise.
Maturity is the maturity at issuance in panels A and B and the remaining maturity at the time of trade in
panel C. Callable is a dummy that takes the value of one if the bond is callable, and zero otherwise. Amount
is the logarithm of the dollar principal amount outstanding at issuance. Covenant is a dummy that takes the
value of one if the debt has a covenant, and zero otherwise. Baa­Aaa spread is the monthly credit spread
between Baa and Aaa corporate bonds, while GDP growth is calculated as the quarterly growth rate in real
GDP. Non-IG is a dummy that equals one if the borrowing firm's S&P rating is BB+ or worse, and zero
otherwise. Size is measured as the logarithm of total value of assets in millions of dollars, Age is number
of years since the firm's first entry in Compustat, ROA is calculated as operating income scaled by total
assets, Leverage is total debt scaled by total assets, and Tangibility is net plant, property and equipment
scaled by total assets.
Panel A. DealScan Data
                                             Standard      25th                   75th
                                   Mean      Deviation   Percentile   Median    Percentile   Observations
    Spread (bps)                  284.80      160.35        175.00    255.00     355.00        50,614
    Secured                        0.85        0.36          1.00      1.00       1.00         50,614
    Senior                         1.00        0.03          1.00      1.00       1.00         50,614
    Maturity (years)               3.91        0.53          3.61      4.09       4.28         50,614
    Amount (log dollar value)      18.42       1.65         17.27     18.52       19.58        50,614
    Covenant                       0.53        0.50          0.00      1.00       1.00         50,614
    Secured × Baa­Aaa spread       1.93        1.01          1.59      2.01       2.64         50,614
    Secured × GDP growth           0.56        0.55          0.13      0.58       0.89         50,614
    Baa­Aaa spread (%)             2.29        0.65          1.71      2.20       2.75         50,614
    GDP growth (%)                 0.66        0.54          0.43      0.71       0.93         50,614




                                                                                                            44
Panel B. Mergent Data
                               Mean     Standard      25th       Median     75th       Observations
                                        Deviation   Percentile            Percentile


   Spread (bps)                208.32    207.11       66.26      124.47    287.95        30,041
   Secured                      0.15      0.36        0.00        0.00      0.00         30,041
   Senior                       0.91      0.29        1.00        1.00      1.00         30,041
   Maturity (years)            11.01      7.96        6.00       10.00      10.00        30,041
   Callable                     0.67      0.47        0.00        1.00      1.00         30,041
   Amount (log dollar value)   11.34      2.34        10.13      12.10      12.90        30,041
   Covenant                     0.40      0.49        0.00        0.00      1.00         30,041
   Secured × Baa­Aaa spread     0.34      0.86        0.00        0.00      0.00         30,041
   Secured × GDP growth         0.11      0.33        0.00        0.00      0.00         30,041
   Senior × Baa­Aaa spread      2.12      0.95        1.67        2.12      2.72         30,041
   Senior × GDP growth          0.61      0.55        0.27        0.63      0.95         30,041
   Baa­Aaa spread (%)           2.30      0.70        1.73        2.18      2.77         30,041
   GDP growth (%)               0.69      0.54        0.45        0.74      0.99         30,041
   Non-IG                       0.24      0.43        0.00        0.00      1.00         22,541
   Secured × Non-IG             0.04      0.20        0.00        0.00      0.00         22,541



Panel C: TRACE Data
                                Mean    Standard      25th       Median     75th       Observations
                                        Deviation   Percentile            Percentile


   Spread (bps)                211.99    206.05       84.04      141.81    257.72       3,675,393
   Secured                      0.08      0.28         0.00       0.00      0.00        3,675,393
   Senior                       0.99      0.11         1.00       1.00      1.00        3,675,393
   Maturity (years)             8.92      8.27         3.00       6.00      10.00       3,675,393
   Callable                     0.93      0.26         1.00       1.00      1.00        3,675,393
   Amount (log dollar value)    13.35     0.73        12.90      13.30      13.82       3,675,393
   Covenant                     0.90      0.30         1.00       1.00      1.00        3,675,393
   Non-IG                       0.21      0.41         0.00       0.00      0.00        2,777,603
   Secured × Non-IG             0.04      0.19         0.00       0.00      0.00        2,777,603
   Size (log $ mil.)            10.34     1.22         9.55      10.40      11.16       2,466,484
   Age (years)                  40.27     19.24       23.50      41.50      58.50       2,466,484
   Leverage                     0.34      0.15         0.23       0.31      0.43        2,466,484
   ROA (%)                      14.15     6.54         9.76      13.45      17.56       2,384,090
   Tangibility (%)              34.88     25.25       12.04      29.35      56.05       2,463,537




                                                                                                      45
                                                    Table II
                            Secured Spread Using DealScan Loan Sample
This table reports the results of OLS regressions relating loan spreads to the presence of secured interest in
the loan over the 1994 to 2018 time period. The dependent variable is the spread over LIBOR paid at
issuance of a loan facility. Secured is a dummy that takes the value of one if a loan facility is secured, and
zero otherwise. The regressions also control for seniority, maturity, issuance amount, and the presence of a
covenant. Column (4) uses package fixed effects and hence absorbs all variations across packages. All
regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors that are clustered by firm, and t-
statistics are reported below the coefficients in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                            (1)                (2)          (3)             (4)

           Secured                      100.764***        57.892***      -40.556***      -72.239***
                                          (41.44)           (18.14)         (-4.31)         (-4.44)
           Senior                      -201.672***      -194.091***     -198.106***     -150.266***
                                           (-7.21)          (-6.74)         (-7.22)         (-3.19)
           Maturity                      -4.748**            -3.232      25.662***        36.182***
                                           (-2.40)          (-1.55)        (11.34)           (8.74)
           Amount                       -26.231***       -15.121***      -10.206***      -10.441***
                                          (-35.34)         (-19.28)        (-12.48)        (-11.99)
           Covenant                     -38.103***       -24.894***      -15.544***
                                          (-18.80)         (-10.83)         (-2.87)

           Fixed Effects                   year ×          year ×          year ×         Package,
                                          month,        month, firm,    month, firm     facility type
                                        facility type   facility type     × year,
                                                                        facility type
           Observations                   50,614          48,187           34,700         30,905
           Adj. R-squared                  0.469           0.628            0.671          0.689




                                                                                                           46
                                                 Table III
                          Secured Spread Using Mergent FISD Bond Sample
This table reports the results of OLS regressions relating bond spreads at issuance to presence of secured
interest in the bond over the 1980 to 2018 time period. The dependent variable is the yield difference at
issuance between a bond and a maturity-matched treasury. Secured is a dummy that takes the value of one
if a bond is secured, and zero otherwise. The regressions also control for seniority status, maturity,
callability, issuance amount, and the presence of a covenant in the bond contract. All regressions are
estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors that are clustered by firm, and t-statistics are
reported below the coefficients in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                         (1)                 (2)                  (3)

               Secured                59.969***          55.885***           -35.194***
                                         (7.24)             (8.21)             (-3.81)
               Senior                -104.477***         -37.680***          -43.965***
                                        (-7.52)            (-4.38)             (-4.31)
               Maturity               -4.278***           1.005***            1.993***
                                       (-16.16)            (10.14)             (22.66)
               Callable               79.413***          12.083***             11.184
                                       (10.21)              (2.76)              (1.31)
               Amount                    1.535            2.373***            2.262***
                                         (0.78)             (3.48)              (3.40)
               Covenant              -133.949***         -23.252***             -3.412
                                       (-24.63)            (-6.75)             (-0.70)

               Fixed Effects         year × month       year × month,      year × month,
                                                             firm           firm × year
               Observations             30,041             27,229              19,187
               Adj. R-squared            0.400              0.828               0.940




                                                                                                       47
                                                 Table IV
                           Secured Spread Using TRACE Trading Data
This table reports the results of OLS regressions relating bond yields to the presence of secured interest in
the bond over the 1980 to 2018 time period. The dependent variable is the difference between the implied
yield from secondary trade prices and maturity-matched treasury. Secured is a dummy that takes the value
of one if a bond is secured, and zero otherwise. The regressions also control for seniority status, maturity,
callability, issuance amount, and the presence of a covenant in the bond contract. All regressions are
estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors that are clustered by firm, and t-statistics are
reported below the coefficients in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)

              Secured                           91.415***        -45.156*         -62.583***
                                                  (4.64)          (-1.76)            (-2.66)
              Senior                          -182.815***       -55.520***        -60.505***
                                                  (-9.40)         (-3.50)            (-3.68)
              Maturity                          -2.151***        2.386***           2.990***
                                                  (-5.68)         (20.78)            (33.45)
              Callable                           -21.607           -8.606          11.590***
                                                  (-1.24)         (-1.60)             (2.89)
              Amount                           -33.802***          -2.596             0.907
                                                  (-6.14)         (-0.86)             (0.58)
              Covenant                             9.904           4.229              2.525
                                                  (0.93)           (0.93)             (0.88)

              FE                              year × month      firm, year ×    firm × year ×
                                                                   month            month
              Observations                      3,675,393        3,675,328        3,658,889
              Adj. R-squared                      0.173            0.727            0.952




                                                                                                          48
                                                        Table V
                                   Secured Spread and Firm Characteristics
 This table reports the results of OLS regressions relating the spread gap between unsecured and secured
 bonds to firm characteristics. The dependent variable is a measure of spread over maturity-matched
 treasury. Secured is a dummy that takes the value of one if a bond is secured, and zero otherwise. Senior is
 a dummy that takes the value of one if a bond is senior, and zero otherwise. Size is logarithm of total value
 of assets in millions of dollars, Age is number of years since the firm's first entry in Compustat, ROA is
 calculated as operating income scaled by total assets, Leverage is total debt scaled by total assets, and
 Tangibility is net plant, property, and equipment scaled by total assets. Firm characteristics are measured
 at the end of the quarter before bond trades. The regressions also control for maturity, callability, issuance
 amount, and the presence of a covenant in the bond contract. All regressions are estimated with
 heteroscedasticity robust standard errors that are clustered by firm, and t-statistics are reported below the
 coefficients in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.



                             (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)

Secured                  -554.108*        -115.967        -236.088**     115.898***      -260.517***     -378.569***
                           (-1.77)         (-1.21)          (-2.29)        (3.35)           (-2.98)          (-2.60)
Secured × Size             41.810                                                                          40.882***
                            (1.28)                                                                            (2.61)
Secured × Age                              -0.851                                                          -7.188***
                                           (-0.35)                                                           (-3.22)
Secured × ROA                                               7.967                                            9.882*
                                                            (1.25)                                            (1.90)
Secured × Leverage                                                       -478.494***                     -288.485***
                                                                            (-8.99)                          (-3.82)
Secured × Tangibility                                                                      3.022*          5.411***
                                                                                            (1.66)            (4.45)
Senior                  -42.429***       -47.700***       -46.930***     -39.743***      -42.051***       -41.980***
                          (-2.89)          (-3.16)          (-2.87)        (-2.74)         (-3.00)           (-2.70)

FE                      firm × year ×   firm × year ×    firm × year ×   firm × year ×   firm × year ×   firm × year ×
                            month           month            month           month           month           month
Controls for bond           Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
characteristics
Observations             2,460,744       2,460,744        2,378,655       2,460,744       2,457,806       2,376,191
Adj. R-squared             0.948           0.948            0.948           0.948           0.948           0.949




                                                                                                                    49
                                                    Table VI
                                   Secured Spread and Firm Quality
This table reports the results of OLS regressions relating spreads on debt securities to the presence of
secured interest in the debt for investment grade and non-investment grade firms separately. Columns (1)
and (2) use Mergent bond issuance data, whereas columns (3) and (4) use TRACE bond trading data. The
dependent variable is a measure of spread over maturity-matched treasury. Secured is a dummy that takes
the value of one if a bond is secured, and zero otherwise. Non-IG firms have an S&P rating of BB+ or
worse. The regressions also control for seniority status, maturity, callability, issuance amount, and the
presence of a covenant in the bond contract. All regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust
standard errors that are clustered by firm, and t-statistics are reported below the coefficients in parentheses.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                                    Mergent                            Trace
                                            IG                Non-IG           IG                Non-IG
                                            (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)

      Secured                             -1.587          -55.280**           -2.618           -128.921***
                                          (-0.33)           (-2.08)          (-0.46)               (-3.73)
      Senior                             -22.353          -46.284**         -12.514*            -63.141**
                                          (-1.49)           (-2.45)          (-1.65)               (-2.22)
      Maturity                          2.023***           2.755***         2.862***             4.621***
                                         (33.78)             (3.41)          (38.73)                (5.36)
      Callable                            -0.012          33.041***        -6.969***               26.889
                                          (-0.01)            (4.44)          (-4.15)                (1.63)
      Amount                            2.021***             4.709            0.570                 0.304
                                           (3.43)            (1.48)           (0.69)                (0.05)
      Covenant                            -5.728             0.998            -1.072              30.120*
                                          (-1.30)            (0.04)          (-0.84)                (1.70)

      FE                              year × month,      year × month,    firm × year ×     firm × year ×
                                       firm × year        firm × year         month             month
      Observations                        13,455              2,408        2,194,123             573,308
      Adj. R-squared                      0.901               0.942          0.924                0.921




                                                                                                             50
                                                 Table VII
                         Cyclicality in Secured Issuance and Secured Spread
This table reports results from the analysis of cyclicality in secured bond issuance (Panel A) and secured
spread (Panel B) using data from Mergent for the 1980 to 2018 time period. The dependent variable in
columns (1) and (2) of Panel A is a dummy that takes the value of one if the bond issued is secured, and
zero otherwise. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the dollar share of secured bond in total
monthly bond issuance. Baa-Aaa spread is the difference between Moody's Seasoned Corporate Bond
Yield on Baa and Aaa rated bonds, while GDP growth is calculated as the quarterly growth rate in real
GDP. Non-IG firms have an S&P rating of BB+ or worse. Regressions in columns (1) and (2) are estimated
with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors that are clustered by year × month and firm. The dependent
variable in Panel B is the yield difference at issuance between a bond and a maturity-matched treasury.
Secured is a dummy that takes the value of one if a bond is secured, and zero otherwise. The regressions
also control for seniority status, maturity, callability, issuance amount, and the presence of a covenant in
the bond contract. The regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors that are
clustered by firm, and t-statistics are reported below the coefficients in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01.

Panel A. Secured Issuance
                                            Secured Bond Dummy          $ Share of Secured Issuance
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)

        Baa-Aaa spread (%)                  -0.018                        -0.007
                                            (-1.12)                       (-0.29)
        Non-IG × BaaAaa spread (%)         0.148***                      0.093***
                                             (5.44)                        (2.84)
        GDP growth                                         -0.043                          0.258
                                                           (-0.36)                         (0.31)
        Non-IG × GDP growth                              -3.678***                      -3.867***
                                                           (-4.13)                        (-3.33)
        Non-IG                                                           0.090***       0.199***
                                                                           (2.66)        (14.04)

        Fixed Effects                     rating, firm   rating, firm        -              -
        Observations                        25,556         25,556          706             706
        Adj. R-squared                       0.759          0.760         0.225           0.231




                                                                                                         51
Panel B. Secured Spread


                                                    (1)             (2)

                    Secured                        8.799        -42.473***
                                                   (0.44)         (-4.14)
                    Secured × Baa­Aaa spread    -18.519**
                                                  (-2.03)
                    Secured × GDP growth                         10.320**
                                                                   (2.21)
                    Senior                       -48.037        -58.928***
                                                  (-1.49)         (-4.59)
                    Senior × Baa­Aaa spread        1.639
                                                   (0.11)
                    Senior × GDP growth                         19.014***
                                                                   (3.01)
                    Maturity                     1.991***        1.990***
                                                  (22.64)         (22.80)
                    Callable                      11.182          11.342
                                                   (1.31)          (1.33)
                    Amount                       2.273***        2.269***
                                                   (3.42)          (3.41)
                    Covenant                       -3.362          -3.632
                                                  (-0.70)         (-0.75)

                    FE                         year × month,   year × month,
                                                firm × year     firm × year
                    Observations                   19,187          19,218
                    Adj. R-squared                  0.940          0.940




                                                                               52
                                               Table VIII
                               Secured Issuance and Secured Spread
This table reports the results of OLS regressions relating the choice of secured vs unsecured bond issuance
to estimated secured spread during the 2003 to 2020 time period. The dependent variable is a dummy that
takes the value of one if the bond issued is secured, and zero otherwise. Secured spread is estimated by
running regression Eq. (1) at the monthly frequency using TRACE bond trading data. Baa-Aaa spread is
the difference between Moody's Seasoned Corporate Bond Yield on Baa and Aaa rated bonds, while GDP
growth is calculated as the quarterly growth rate in real GDP. Lending tightness is a measure of tightening
standards for commercial and industrial loans to large and middle-market firms obtained from the Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey. Panel A presents results for the non-investment grade sample whereas Panel
B presents results for the investment grade sample. All regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity
robust standard errors that are clustered by year × month and firm, and t-statistics are reported below the
coefficients in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Panel A. Non-IG Sample
                                                             Non-IG Sample
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)

    Secured spread (%)          0.043***       0.043***         0.032***       0.035***       0.038***
                                  (3.28)         (3.36)           (2.70)         (2.88)         (2.96)
    Baa-Aaa spread (%)                                          0.095***
                                                                  (4.98)
    Lending tightness                                                          0.201***
                                                                                 (3.74)
    GDP growth                                                                               -2.792***
                                                                                               (-3.33)

    Fixed Effects                 firm        rating, firm     rating, firm   rating, firm   rating, firm
    Observations                  5,640          5,640            5,640          5,640          5,640
    Adj. R-squared                0.598          0.606            0.611          0.612          0.612




                                                                                                            53
Panel B. IG Sample
                                                IG Sample
                         (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)

   Secured spread (%)   0.010      0.012          0.009          0.014          0.016
                        (0.81)     (0.94)         (0.70)         (1.07)         (1.21)
   BaaAaa spread (%)                              0.005
                                                  (1.51)
   Lending tightness                                             0.010
                                                                 (1.41)
   GDP growth                                                                   -0.187
                                                                                (-1.37)

   Fixed Effects         firm    rating, firm   rating, firm   rating, firm   rating, firm
   Observations         10,039     10,039         10,039         10,039         10,039
   Adj. R-squared        0.891      0.891          0.891          0.891          0.891




                                                                                             54
                                                 Appendix A
                                                  Table A.1
         Secured Spread Using Mergent FISD Bond Sample: Robustness (year × qtr)
This table reports the results of OLS regressions relating bond spreads to the presence of secured interest
in the bond over the 1980 to 2018 time period. The dependent variable is the yield difference at issuance
between a bond and maturity-matched treasury. Secured is a dummy that takes the value of one if a bond
is secured, and zero otherwise. The regressions also control for seniority status, maturity, callability,
issuance amount, and the presence of a covenant in the bond contract. All regressions are estimated with
heteroscedasticity robust standard errors that are clustered by firm, and t-statistics are reported below the
coefficients in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)

               Secured                 59.969***           55.885***           -48.664***
                                          (7.24)              (8.21)             (-3.53)
               Senior                 -104.477***          -37.680***          -65.986***
                                         (-7.52)             (-4.38)             (-4.97)
               Maturity                -4.278***            1.005***            2.137***
                                        (-16.16)             (10.14)             (21.86)
               Callable                79.413***           12.083***             13.556
                                        (10.21)               (2.76)              (1.32)
               Amount                     1.535             2.373***            2.123***
                                          (0.78)              (3.48)              (3.57)
               Covenant               -133.949***          -23.252***             -8.210
                                        (-24.63)             (-6.75)             (-1.36)

               Fixed Effects          year × month        year × month,       year × month,
                                                               firm         firm × year × qtr
               Observations              30,041              27,229              16,087
               Adj. R-squared             0.400               0.828               0.953




                                                                                                          55
                                                  Appendix B


  To show Sec=
             ured Spread p ( LGDUn sec ured - LGDS ec ured )
  Let us assume a firm's one year probability of default is constant over time at p and the common
       discount rate for the firm's corporate bonds is r. Let us assume the firm has a secured and an
       unsecured bond outstanding, both with maturity n years from now, and the yield to maturity
       on the bonds are r S and r U respectively. Assuming that default, if it occurs, happens at the
       end of the year, let the loss given default per unit of principal and interest due be LS and LU
       respectively. Then we know that for the unsecured bond
       p (1 + r U )(1 - LU ) (1 - p )  U p (1 + r U )(1 - LU ) (1 - p ) U                      
=1                          +          r +                    +         r + ... for n periods  
             (1 + r )         1+ r             (1 + r )         1+ r                           
  A similar expression can be written for the secured bond. Subtracting it on both sides from the
       expression for the unsecured bond, we get
                                               
      p                                     S 
=0         (1 + r )(1 - L ) - (1 + r )(1 - L )
                 U       U          S

    1 + r   
                            X                  
     1- p  U
                              [ X ]
                           p
   +        (r - r S ) +           
     1+ r                1+ r      
       (1 - p )
                2
                     U
                                       [ X ]
                                   p
     +               (r - r S ) +           
       (1 + r )                   1+ r      
                2


     + ...
       (1 - p )
                n

     +              (r - r ) 
                      U   S
                             
       (1 + r )
                n



  Collecting terms, we have
       p  1- p           (1 - p ) n -1      1- p  1- p         (1 - p ) n -1  U
=0         1 +   + ... +         n -1 
                                        X +      1
                                                   +   + ... +         n -1 
                                                                             (r - r S )
      1+ r  1- r         (1 + r )           1+ r  1- r         (1 + r ) 

  So pX + (1 - p )(r U - r S ) =
                               0 . Substituting for X from above and simplifying, we get

   rU - r=
         S
           p(1 + r ) L - (1 + r ) L 
                  U   U        S   S
                                      where the term on the lhs is the secured spread while the
       term in square brackets on the rhs is simply the difference in the loss given default between
       the two bonds.


                                                                                                     56
