                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            UTILIZATION-ADJUSTED TFP ACROSS COUNTRIES:
    MEASUREMENT AND IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL COMOVEMENT

                                           Zhen Huo
                                      Andrei A. Levchenko
                                      Nitya Pandalai-Nayar

                                      Working Paper 26803
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26803


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2020, Revised November 2020




The time series for the utilization-adjusted TFP estimates by country and sector are available for
download online. We are grateful to the editors (Loukas Karabarbounis and Urban Jermann), an
anonymous referee, David Baqaee, Chris Boehm, Lorenzo Caliendo, Yongsung Chang, Gabe
Chodorow-Reich, Olivier Coibion, Javier Cravino, Emmanuel Farhi, John Fernald, Jesus
Fernandez-Villaverde, Simon Gilchrist, Felipe Saffie, Kang Shi, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Linda
Tesar and seminar participants at various institutions for helpful comments, and to Barthélémy
Bonadio and Jaedo Choi for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zhen Huo, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Utilization-Adjusted TFP Across Countries: Measurement and Implications for International
Comovement
Zhen Huo, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
NBER Working Paper No. 26803
February 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. F41,F44

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper develops estimates of TFP growth adjusted for movements in unobserved factor
utilization for a panel of 29 countries and up to 37 years. When factor utilization changes are
unobserved, the commonly used Solow residual mismeasures actual changes in TFP. We use a
general equilibrium dynamic multi-country multi-sector model to derive a production function
estimating equation that corrects for unobserved factor usage. We compare the properties of
utilization-adjusted TFP series to the standard Solow residual, and quantify the roles of both TFP
and utilization for international business cycle comovement. Utilization-adjusted TFP is virtually
uncorrelated across countries, and does not generate much GDP comovement through its
propagation. Shocks to factor utilization can more successfully account for international co-
movement.

Zhen Huo                                        Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Yale University                                 University of Texas at Austin
New Haven, CT 06520                             3.142 BRB, 2225 Speedway
zhen.huo@yale.edu                               Austin, TX 78713
                                                and NBER
Andrei A. Levchenko                             npnayar@utexas.edu
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and CEPR
and also NBER
alev@umich.edu
1   Introduction

It has long been acknowledged in macroeconomics that the intensity of factor utilization varies over

the business cycle. When some dimensions of variable factor utilization are not directly observed,

conventional ways of inferring TFP changes, such as the Solow residual, can be misleading as measures

of technology shocks.     Thus, estimation of TFP shocks must account for variation in unobserved

factor usage. Following the seminal work of Basu, Fernald, and Kimball (2006, henceforth BFK),

it has become standard to use a utilization-adjusted series as a measure of TFP when studying the

US economy.      Importantly, BFK show that the utilization-adjusted TFP series have substantially

dierent properties than the traditional Solow residual.


However, studies of international business cycles have typically employed the Solow residual as the

measure of technology shocks.     This approach makes it challenging to study the sources of inter-

national business cycle comovement in general, and to isolate the role of technology shocks in par-

ticular.    Variable factor utilization in a country could respond to TFP shocks originating abroad.

Non-technology shocks that produce a utilization response will also appear in the measured Solow

residual.


Our rst contribution is to develop utilization-adjusted TFP series for a sample of 29 countries, 30

sectors, and up to 37 years. To guide the estimation, we present a theoretical framework in which

capital utilization rates, hours per worker, and workers' eort are endogenous and can vary within

a period in response to shocks. The model yields an estimating equation that features a correction

for unobserved factor utilization. The rst main result is that utilization-adjusted TFP is virtually

uncorrelated across countries. This is in contrast to the Solow residual, which is modestly positively

correlated.    Our ndings imply that the cross-country correlation in the Solow residual typically

found in the literature is in fact due to correlated movements in unobserved factor utilization.


Our second contribution is to quantify the roles of TFP and factor utilization in the international

business cycle. A feature of our modeling and estimation approach is that we can explicitly separate

the impacts of TFP and utilization on GDP comovement. We use the model structure to extract a

utilization shock, that rationalizes movements in utilization conditional on the world vectors of TFP

shocks and pre-determined variables, and world general equilibrium. While we do not microfound

the utilization shock, it shock captures the eects of all non-TFP shocks on utilization rates. We

then assess how much GDP comovement can be generated with TFP and utilization shocks. Our

second main nding is that TFP shocks alone cannot generate much GDP correlation when fed into a

multi-country, multi-sector general equilibrium model of production and trade. In the G7 countries,

TFP shocks account for less than 10% of the observed GDP correlation on average.           In the full

29-country sample, they produce zero GDP correlation on average. By contrast, utilization shocks

are correlated, and generate about one-third of observed GDP comovement.



                                                   1
We thus conclude that the common approach in the international business cycle literature of working

with TFP-shock-driven uctuations is not the most promising way to fully understand international

comovement. By contrast, non-technology shocks that move factor utilization conditional on TFP

are considerably more important as a driver of comovement.


We estimate the production function parameters using the theoretically-founded estimating equation

and data on many countries and sectors from the KLEMS database (O'Mahony and Timmer, 2009).

The key intuition behind this approach comes from BFK: agents optimize multiple dimensions of

factor use intensity simultaneously. Thus, an observed dimension of factor utilization  hours per

worker  can serve as a proxy for unobserved dimensions of factor utilization such as worker eort.

To account for the endogeneity of inputs to TFP we build instruments that combine oil shocks

and military expenditures with the input-output network. Our quantication uses a multi-country,

multi-sector model of world production and trade in both intermediate inputs and nal goods. We

calibrate all the country-sector input and nal expenditure shares using the World Input-Output

Database (Timmer et al., 2015).


Our paper contributes to the empirical and quantitative literature on international business cycle

comovement. A number of papers are dedicated to documenting international correlations in produc-

tivity shocks and inputs (e.g. Imbs, 1999; Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman, 2003; Ambler, Cardia, and

Zimmermann, 2004). Also related is the body of work that identies technology and demand shocks

in a VAR setting and examines their international propagation (e.g. Canova, 2005; Corsetti, Dedola,

and Leduc, 2014; Levchenko and Pandalai-Nayar, 2020). Relative to these papers, we use sector-level

data to provide novel estimates of utilization-adjusted TFP shocks, and expand the sample of coun-

tries. A large research agenda builds models in which uctuations are driven by productivity shocks,

and asks under what conditions those models can generate observed international comovement (see,

among many others, Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland, 1992; Heathcote and Perri, 2002). In these anal-

yses, productivity shocks are proxied by the Solow residual, which we show can be misleading. Our

quantitative assessment benets from improved measurement of TFP shocks.


Our estimation belongs to the family of methods that measure factor utilization.       Complement-

ing the more model-based approaches such as BFK and Fernald (2014), other work has considered

survey-based direct measures of plant capacity utilization (e.g. Shapiro, 1989; Gorodnichenko and

Shapiro, 2011; Boehm and Pandalai-Nayar, 2019), or used other observable proxies such as electricity

consumption (e.g. Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 1995). The alternative methods cannot be

straightforwardly applied in our setting, as utilization surveys and electricity usage are not avail-

able for the large sample of countries, sectors, and years in our analysis. Our indirect measures of

utilization are modestly positively correlated with the survey-based measures in the subset of coun-

tries and sectors for which those exist, although caution in such comparisons is important, as the

questions on the surveys vary and do not closely correspond to the theoretical margin in our model.



                                                 2
A literature in closed-economy macroeconomics going back to Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Human

(1988) studies the implications of variable factor utilization for domestic business cycles (see, among

many others, Bils and Cho, 1994; Cooley, Hansen, and Prescott, 1995; Gilchrist and Williams, 2000;

Fair, 2018; Chodorow-Reich, Karabarbounis, and Kekre, 2019). Closely related to the focus of BFK,

Shapiro (1993) nds that variations in capital's workweek explain much of the cyclicality of TFP.

Our paper builds on this literature by assessing the implications of utilization adjustments to TFP

for international GDP comovement.


The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets out a simple accounting framework that

illustrates the potentially confounding role of unobserved factor utilization in studying international

comovement due to TFP shocks.                  Section 3 presents the theory behind our estimation approach.

The results of the estimation are in Section 4. We assess the importance of TFP and utilization for

international comovement in a general-equilibrium framework in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.



2    TFP and the Solow Residual in International Comovement

Factor usage, TFP, and the Solow residual                             Let there be         J    sectors indexed by   j   and   N
countries indexed by      n.    Let gross output      Ynjt   in sector   j   country   n   be given by:


                                                        j            1-j j       1-
                                          Ynjt = Znjt Knjt Lnjt                Xnjt j ,                                   (2.1)



where    Znjt , Knjt , Lnjt ,   and   Xnjt   are TFP, capital, labor, and materials inputs, respectively.                  For

simplicity, input elasticities       j   and   j   are assumed to vary by sector in the baseline, but allowed to

vary by country, sector and time in Appendix A.2.


When it comes to measurement, it is important that                     Knjt    and   Lnjt      are utilization-adjusted inputs

that may not be directly observable to the econometrician. Let the factor inputs be comprised of:



                                Knjt  Unjt Mnjt ,            and       Lnjt  Enjt Hnjt Nnjt .                             (2.2)



The capital input is the product of the quantity of installed capital (machines)                            Mnjt   that can be

measured in the data, and capital utilization            Unjt      that is not directly observable. Similarly, the true

labor input is the product of the number of workers                   Nnjt ,   hours per worker        Hnjt ,   and labor eort

Enjt .   While   Nnjt   and   Hnjt   can be obtained from existing datasets,               Enjt   is unobservable.


The Solow residual       Snjt   nets out observable factor usage from gross output:



 d ln Snjt  d ln Ynjt - j j d ln Mnjt - (1 - j )j d ln Hnjt - (1 - j )j d ln Nnjt - (1 - j ) d ln Xnjt .




                                                                 3
The Solow residual thus contains the following components:



                           d ln Snjt  d ln Znjt + j j d ln Unjt + (1 - j )j d ln Enjt .
                                           True TFP                       Unobserved utilization

This expression makes it transparent that in this setting, the Solow residual can diverge from the

true TFP shock due to unobserved utilization of inputs.



GDP accounting and the aggregates                            Following national accounting conventions, real GDP at

time   t,   evaluated at base prices (prices at            t - 1)     is dened by:


                                                     J
                                                                          X
                                       Ynt =               Pnjt-1 Ynjt - Pnjt -1 Xnjt ,
                                                   j =1


where       Pnjt-1   is the gross output base price, and
                                                                        X
                                                                       Pnjt      is the base price of inputs in that sector-
                                                                            -1
country.


Approximating growth rates with log dierences, the real GDP change between                              t-1   and   t   is then:


                                                 J
                              d ln Ynt =                 Dnjt-1 (d ln Ynjt - (1 - j )d ln Xnjt ) ,                         (2.3)
                                               j =1

                       Pnjt-1 Ynjt-1
where   Dnjt-1            Ynt-1      is sector     j 's   base period Domar weight, that is, the sector's gross sales

as a fraction of aggregate value added.


Combining (2.1) and (2.3) leads to aggregate TFP:


                                                                J
                                              d ln Znt =              Dnjt-1 d ln Znjt .                                   (2.4)
                                                               j =1


The aggregate Solow residual can be written as:


                                               J
                             d ln Snt =              Dnjt-1 d ln Snjt = d ln Znt + d ln Unt ,                              (2.5)
                                              j =1


where in the second equality,        d ln Unt      is the aggregated log change in unobserved utilization:


                                          J
                          d ln Unt             Dnjt-1 {j j d ln Unjt + (1 - j )j d ln Enjt } .                             (2.6)
                                        j =1



Appendix B.1 details the derivations behind all the equations in this section.



                                                                      4
Implications for international comovement                         The covariance in the Solow residual between

countries   n   and   m   is:



                       (Sn , Sm ) =  (Zn , Zm ) +  (Un , Um ) +  (Zn , Um ) +  (Zm , Un ),

where    (x, y )  Cov(d ln xt , d ln yt ).

The observed Solow residual can be correlated across countries both due to correlated TFP shocks,

and due to correlated unobserved input changes.                   This leads to two distinct problems with using

the Solow residual to study international comovement.                   The rst is that   Un   may be responding

endogenously to technology shocks. If input use in country               m   responds to TFP shocks in country   n,
Solow residuals in        n   and   m   will become correlated even if true TFP is not. Using Solow residuals

will then lead the researchers to attribute GDP comovement to correlated productivity shocks rather

than shock transmission.


The second problem is shocks to input usage              Un   itself. If the economy is subject to non-technology

shocks that aect input usage directly, the Solow residual will reect the correlation and transmission

of non-technology, rather than technology shocks.


It is an empirical question to what degree correlations in the Solow residual reect true technology

shock correlation, as opposed to endogenous transmission or non-technology shocks.                    It is clear,

however, that using the Solow residual as a measure of technology shocks can lead to incorrect

assessments both of the relative importance of correlated shocks vs. endogenous transmission, and

of the relative importance of technology vs. non-technology shocks for international comovement.

To make progress, we need to overcome the measurement challenge of estimating true TFP when

utilization-adjusted factor usage is unobserved.



3   Variable Factor Utilization Model

We now set up a multi-country, multi-sector framework with variable factor utilization. The model

has two principal uses. The rst is to derive an estimating equation that can be used to infer TFP in

an environment with unobserved factor utilization. The second is quantication of the roles of TFP

and variable utilization in international comovement, that we undertake in Section 5 after estimating

the TFP series.



Households        Each country          n is populated by a representative household.    The household consumes

the nal good available in country             n   and supplies labor and capital to rms. There is a continuum




                                                              5
of workers in the household who share the same consumption. The problem of the household is

                                                                                                                                    
                                          
                                                                                                                                n
                   max               E0           t  Cnt -                njt Nnjt Gj (Hnjt , Enjt , Unjt ) -             Nnjt               (3.1)
             {Mnjt },{Nnjt },
           {Hnjt },{Enjt },{Unjt }        t=0                        j                                               j


subject to

                                                        

                        Pnt Cnt +                 Injt  =         Wnjt Nnjt Hnjt Enjt +                    Rnjt Unjt Mnjt
                                             j                j                                        j

                                                 Mnjt+1 = (1 -           j )Mnjt   + Injt

where     Cnt   is consumption and               Injt   is investment, both of which are bundles of goods coming from

dierent countries and sectors. The total eciency units of labor supplied in a sector is                                         Enjt Hnjt Nnjt ,
and the total eciency units of capital supplied is                             Unjt Mnjt .       Labor collects a sector-specic wage

Wnjt ,    and capital is rented for the price               Rnjt .       The variable      njt   captures potential preference shocks

that shift factor supplies.


We assume the following functional form for                       Gj (.):

                                                                               h       e           u
                                                  Gj (H, E, U ) = H j + E j + U j .                                                          (3.2)



We highlight three features of the household problem. First, labor and capital are dierentiated by

sector, as the household supplies factors to, and accumulates capital in, each sector separately. In

this formulation, labor and capital are neither xed to each sector nor fully exible.                                                 As
                                                                                                                                            1,
                                                                                                                                          j
 = h, e, u,      factor supply across sectors becomes more sensitive to factor price dierentials. In the

limit, households supply variable factors only to the sector oering the highest factor price. At the

opposite extreme, as
                                 ,
                               j                  the supply of hours, eort, and capital utilization is xed in each

sector by the preference parameters.


Second, we assume that the number of employed workers                                      Nnjt    and machines          Mnjt       in a sector is

predetermined. This is required in order to have a well-dened notion of variable utilization. While

this approach is standard for machines, it is less common for employment, where it is usually assumed

that hours and employment move in parallel. Specically, in our model the number of workers in a

particular sector has to be chosen before observing the current shocks as in Burnside, Eichenbaum,

and Rebelo (1993), reecting the fact that it takes time to adjust the labor force.
                                                                                                                            1       On the other

   1
       Our assumption implies that there are frictions that limit the substitutability of employment and the workweek.
This assumption can be supported by the data. For instance, in our sample the standard deviations of hours per worker
growth and of employment growth are 0.02 and 0.06 respectively , suggesting the two margins should not be treated
symmetrically.




                                                                           6
hand, within a period households can choose the hours             Hnjt    and eort          Enjt   that change the eective

amount of labor supply, and utilization rates        Unjt   that change the eective amount of capital supply.

These margins capture the idea that utilization rates of factor inputs typically vary over the business

cycle. Our framework thus implies that within a period, labor and capital supply to each sector are

upward-sloping (e.g. Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno, 2014).


Third, our formulation of the disutility of the variable factor supply (3.2) is based on the Greenwood,

Hercowitz, and Human (1988, henceforth GHH) preferences for labor and a similar isoelastic for-

mulation of the utilization cost of capital. The GHH preferences mute the interest rate eects and

income eects on the choice of hours, eort, and utilization rates, which helps to study the properties

of the static equilibrium where the number of machines and employees are treated as exogenous.



Firms       To make the estimation more reliable, we follow BFK and allow for potentially non-constant

returns to scale in production. Ex post, our estimates show that returns to scale are close to constant,

and thus it is not a large force empirically or quantitatively.                A representative rm in sector            j   in

country   n   operates a CRS production function


                                                     j            1-j j        1-
                                   Ynjt = Znjt njt Knjt Lnjt                Xnjt j ,                                   (3.3)



where   Knjt and Lnjt are the true capital and labor inputs as in (2.2), and the total factor productivity
Znjt njt    is taken as given by the rm. The intermediate input bundle                      Xnjt   is an aggregate of inputs

from potentially all countries and sectors.


The total factor productivity consists of two parts: the exogenous shocks                          Znjt   and the endogenous

component:
                                                  j     1-j j       1-j j -1
                                   njt =        Knjt Lnjt          Xnjt             ,                                  (3.4)


where   j   controls possible congestion or agglomeration eects. As a result, the sectoral aggregate

production function is:
                                                     j          1-j j     1-j j
                                   Ynjt = Znjt     Knjt Lnjt            Xnjt            .                              (3.5)



Optimality conditions          The households' intra-temporal optimization problem leads to



                          Hnjt Gjh (Hnjt , Enjt , Unjt ) = Enjt Gje (Hnjt , Enjt , Unjt ).

Under the functional form adopted for         Gj (·),   this condition implies that the choice of eort has a

log-linear relationship with the choice of hours:


                                                            h
                                                            j
                                           d ln Enjt =      e d ln Hnjt .                                              (3.6)
                                                            j


                                                            7
A similar expression can be derived for the relationship between the optimal choice of capital uti-

lization and the optimal choice of hours:


                               Hnjt Gj,h (Hnjt , Enjt , Unjt )   Wnjt Lnjt
                                                               =           .
                               Unjt Gj,u (Hnjt , Enjt , Unjt )   Rnjt Knjt

We know from the rms' problem that the right-hand side of the equation above is equal to the ratio

of output elasticities   j /(1 - j ),   which is a constant. As a result, the utilization rate also has a

log-linear relationship with hours worked:


                                                         h
                                                         j
                                           d ln Unjt =   u d ln Hnjt                                (3.7)
                                                         j

up to a normalization constant.


The properties (3.6)-(3.7) capture the idea that exible inputs tend to move jointly in the same di-

rection. The household intra-temporal rst-order conditions therefore allow us to express unobserved

eort and capital utilization as a log-linear function of observed hours:



                               j d ln Unjt + (1 - j )d ln Enjt = j d ln Hnjt ,                      (3.8)



               h               h
                               j
where   j = j j
              u + (1 - j )     e.
                               j
                j


Estimating equation          Log-dierencing (3.5), and separating the observed and the unobserved

components of input usage yields:



           d ln Ynjt = j (j j d ln Mnjt + (1 - j )j d ln (Hnjt Nnjt ) + (1 - j )d ln Xnjt )         (3.9)

                                                             Observed Inputs
                           +j (j j d ln Unjt + (1 - j )j d ln Enjt ) + d ln Znjt .
                                                 Unobserved Inputs

This equation makes it plain that measuring TFP innovations is dicult because the intensity with

which factors are used in production varies over the business cycle, and cannot be directly observed by

the econometrician. As unobserved factor utilization will respond to TFP innovations, it is especially

important to account for it in estimation, otherwise factor usage will appear in estimated TFP.


Plugging (3.8) into (3.9) yields the following estimating equation:


                       1
           d ln Ynjt = j (j j d ln Mnjt + (1 - j )j d ln (Hnjt Nnjt ) + (1 - j )d ln Xnjt )        (3.10)

                            2
                           +j d ln Hnjt + nj + d ln Znjt .



                                                         8
The country×sector xed eects         nj   allow for country-sector specic trend output growth rates, that

can be driven by either trend TFP or trend factor accumulation. We take out these trend dierences,

since we are interested in comovement of business cycles.


The coecient
                   1
                   j   is clearly an estimate of returns to scale   j .   Equation (3.8) provides a structural
                                2
interpretation for the coecient j         =  j  j j .   Conditional on the coecient estimates and the log

changes in the observed inputs, we obtain the TFP shocks            d ln Znjt   as residuals.


Our estimating equation and the factor use optimality condition (3.8) coincide with BFK. The key

insight of BFK is that agents' static optimization imposes a relationship between the intensities of

observed and unobserved input uses. This insight is more general than the model above. Indeed, BFK

derive the same estimating equation in a partial-equilibrium setting without specifying the details

of household choices or dynamics. In BFK, the choice between eort, utilization rates, and hours is

made by rms facing upward-sloping supply curves of these dimensions of factor inputs. In contrast,

we model the trade-o between these margins as being faced by households.                    Fully articulating a

model as we do here has the benet of showing that the BFK structural equation applies in a fairly

general open economy setting that can easily be nested in standard general-equilibrium IRBC models.

Our approach thus has the advantage of being simultaneously consistent with the econometric TFP

estimation and with model-based quantication in world general equilibrium, allowing us to move

seamlessly between the two. Though our framework is less general than BFK in some dimensions, an

additional advantage is that we do not have to assume ad hoc convex cost functions for rm choices.



4    Estimation

4.1 Identication

The estimation proceeds to regress real output growth on the growth of the composite observed

input bundle and the change in hours per worker. Because input usage will move with TFP shocks

d ln Znjt ,   the regressors in (3.10) are correlated with the residual.         To overcome this endogeneity

problem, we combine country-level sources of exogenous variation with the input-output network

to build a set of instruments that are plausibly orthogonal to true TFP shocks but have predictive

power for changes in production.


The rst source of country-level variation is oil shocks, constructed using the approach in Hamilton

(1996).   An oil shock is dened as the dierence between the log oil price and the maximum log

oil price in the preceding four quarters. This oil price shock is either zero, or is positive when this

dierence is positive, reecting the notion that oil prices have an asymmetric eect on output. The

annualized oil shock is the sum over the four quarters of the preceding year. The second source of

exogenous variation is the growth rate in real government defense spending, lagged by one year.




                                                          9
Our instruments are rst- and second-order indices of exposure to these aggregate shocks through

the input network, following Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2016). Specically, a sector's rst-order

exposure to the oil shock is computed as the aggregate oil shock                                OILt      times the share of the sector's

                                             Onjt = OILt ×                     x
expenditure on oil as an input:                                        m,i=oil mi,nj . A sector's rst-order exposure to the
                                                                 Gnj                                                    Gnj
defense spending shock is          Dnjt = DEFnt ×                Ynj , where DEFnt is national defense spending and Ynj
is the fraction of sales to the government in total sectoral sales. The resulting instruments vary at

the country-sector-year level.


We next construct second-order network propagation shocks. Sectors purchase inputs from and sell

output to potentially all other countries and sectors in the world. Therefore, output in a sector might

also respond to the eect of the oil and defense shocks on its suppliers and customers. We can thus

build four additional instruments, capturing the second-order upstream and downstream exposure

of industries to oil and defense spending shocks. These instruments are constructed by weighting

the country-sector oil or defense spending shocks with the sales shares (cost shares) of downstream

(upstream) industries for each sector.
                                                        2,3

Following BFK, to reduce the number of parameters to be estimated, we restrict
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                j    to take only

three values, according to a broad grouping of sectors: durable manufacturing, non-durable manu-

facturing, and all others. We similarly estimate a single returns-to-scale coecient
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                          j     for each group.

Appendix Table A6 shows that allowing for sector-specic returns-to-scale yields estimates that are

insignicantly dierent from the pooled estimate in most cases. Finally, we restrict the production

function estimation sample to the G7 countries, for which we have the longest time series. This tends

to lead to the strongest instruments and most precisely estimated coecients.



4.2 Data

The data requirements for estimating equation (3.10) are growth of real output and real inputs for a

panel of countries, sectors, and years. The dataset with the broadest coverage of this information is

KLEMS 2009 (O'Mahony and Timmer, 2009).
                                                                        4   This database contains gross output, value added,

   2                                                                                   x                         x
       The upstream instruments for sector         j,   country    n    are      m,i   mi,nj Omit   and    m,i   mi,nj Dmit .   The downstream
                                                         f    f                                                                 f      f
                                                         mnj Pmj Fmj                        Pnj,mi Xnj,mi                     mnj Pmj Fmi
instruments for sector    j,   country   n   are    m         Pnj Ynj
                                                                            Omt +        mi    Pnj Ynj
                                                                                                          Omit and        m         Pnj Ynj
                                                                                                                                              Dmt +
      Pnj,mi Xnj,mi
  m,i    Pnj Ynj
                    Dmit , where   Omt       is the oil shock times the share of oil in nal expenditure, and                  Dmt     is the defense
                                                                   x       f                              f
shock times the share of government in nal expenditure. The shares mi,nj and
                                                                          mnj   and nal expenditures Pmj Fmj
are dened in Appendix B.2. Downstream exposure includes exposure through nal sales to consumers in all countries.
   3
       BFK face a similar identication problem when estimating the utilization-adjusted series for the US. They use an
oil price shock, the growth in real defense spending, and a monetary policy shock identied in a VAR. Our instruments
build on BFK by taking advantage of subsequent advances in the networks literature. A monetary policy instrument
has a poor rst stage for the countries in our sample.
   4
       This is not the latest vintage of KLEMS, as there is a version released in 2016. Unfortunately, however, the 2016
version has a shorter available time series, as the data start in 1995, and also has many fewer countries. A consistent
concordance between the two vintages is not possible without substantial aggregation.




                                                                            10
labor and capital inputs, as well as output and input deators. In a limited number of instances,

we supplemented the information available in KLEMS with data from the WIOD Socioeconomic

Accounts, which contains similar variables. After data quality checking and cleaning, we retain a

sample of 29 countries, listed in Appendix Table A1. The database covers all sectors of the economy

at a level slightly more aggregated than the 2-digit ISIC revision 3, yielding, after harmonization,

30 sectors listed in Appendix Table A2.    In the best cases we have 38 years of data, 1970-2007,

although the panel is not balanced and many emerging countries do not appear in the data until

the mid-1990s. Appendix Table A3 provides a precise mapping between all the variables we use and

their KLEMS counterparts, and lists instances in which WIOD Socioeconomic Accounts were used

to supplement KLEMS. Appendix Table A4 provides detailed denitions and underlying sources of

the KLEMS data, and lists instances in which the national surveys have missing observations and

thus data were imputed in the G7 countries. This is the case for the capital stock in Japan in some

years, and for occasionally missing price growth data. O'Mahony and Timmer (2009) contains an

exhaustive documentation of the KLEMS data.


The oil price series is the West Texas Intermediate, obtained from the St. Louis Fed's FRED database.

Military expenditure comes from the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). The

construction of the upstream and downstream instruments and the quantitative analysis in Section

5 require information on the input linkages at the country-sector-pair level as well as on nal goods

trade. This information comes from the 2013 WIOD database (Timmer et al., 2015), which contains

the global input-output matrix.



4.3 Empirical Results

Production function estimates        Table 1 summarizes the results of estimating equation (3.10).

The returns to scale parameters are around 1.05 in durable manufacturing, 1.17 in non-durable

manufacturing, and 0.94 in the quite heterogeneous non-manufacturing sector. None are signicantly

dierent from constant returns to scale. The coecient on hours per worker (d ln Hnjt ) is signicantly

dierent from zero in two out of three industry groups, indicating that adjusting for unobserved

utilization is important in the manufacturing industries.


We have multiple instruments and multiple endogenous variables in our estimation. The appropriate

test statistic for diagnosing the weak instruments problem is the Sanderson-Windmeijer      F   (SW-F ),

which is designed for such a setting.   Appendix Table A5 reports the rst-stage        F   statistics for

the baseline and alternative combinations of instruments.    The SW-F statistics indicate that the

instruments are not weak. The SW-F statistics are greater than 8 for all coecients except
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                j   in the

non-durable manufacturing group, where it suggests the instruments are possibly weak (SW-F of

5.8). We therefore assess the sensitivity of the non-durable manufacturing
                                                                             1
                                                                             j   to alternative subsets




                                                 11
of the six instruments. Compared to the baseline estimate of 1.17 for this coecient, the median

point estimate across all combinations of instruments is 1.23, and the median SW-F is 9.7, while

the instrument combination with highest SW-F of 12.16 yields a coecient estimate of 1.2. This

suggests that the relatively low SW-F when using all 6 instruments does not have an unduly large

inuence on the estimated coecient, compared to instrument combinations for which the SW-F is

higher.
          5   Appendix Table A6 reports the production function estimates in which returns to scale are

allowed to vary by sector.


                              Table 1:       Production Function Parameter Estimates


                   Industry Group                        Returns to Scale           Utilization Adjustment
                                                              (j 1
                                                                   )                          (j2
                                                                                                  )
                   Durables                                      1.049                       0.435
                                                                 (.046)                      (.172)
                   Non-durable manufacturing                     1.172                        1.48
                                                                 (.119)                      (.627)
                   Non-durable non-manufacturing                 0.938                       1.128
                                                                 (.209)                      (.674)

                     Notes:   This table reports the estimates of
                                                                    1
                                                                    j   and
                                                                              2
                                                                              j   in the three broad groups
                     of sectors, along with the Driskoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.         The
                     instruments used are the rst- and second-order oil and defense spending shocks,
                     described in the text. The regressions include country-sector xed eects. First
                     stage diagnostics are reported in Appendix Table A5.




Utilization-adjusted TFP series                  Figure 1 plots the aggregate utilization-adjusted TFP series

along with the Solow residual for all the countries in our sample. The data displayed in the Figure

are available to download online.
                                         6   As found by BFK, in the US our utilization-adjusted TFP series

is less volatile than the Solow residual. However, it turns out that for the large majority of countries

the adjusted TFP series is more volatile. The mean (median) standard deviation of the TFP series

is 0.037 (0.033), while for the Solow residual it is 0.019 (0.017).
                                                                                   7

   5
       As far as we are aware, there is no established weak instrument test for a setting with multiple instruments and
multiple endogenous variables that also takes into account heteroscedasticity.           Therefore, in addition to the SW-F
statistics appropriate for multiple instruments/endogenous variables we also report the Kleinbergen-Paap        F   statistics,
that account for heteroscedasticity.
   6
       Throughout the paper, we report aggregate TFP and other values under constant Domar weights                  Dnj ,   that
correspond to period averages. This is done for ease of comparison with the quantitative model, which is solved in
deviations from steady state.    None of the results change if we use time-varying Domar weights instead.           The data
available to the public includes sectoral TFP and both constant and time-varying Domar weights, so that the user can
undertake their preferred aggregation.
   7                                                                                2   2   2
       The relationship between the variance of the Solow residual and TFP is       S = Z + U + 2Z,U .    The Solow residual
can be less volatile than TFP if the covariance between TFP and utilization is suciently negative. The key nding of




                                                            12
                                                                                               Figure 1:              Utilization-Adjusted TFP and the Solow Residual




                  .1
                                                                         .1
                                                                                                                                  .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .05




           .05
                                                                  .05
                                                                                                                       .05 .1
                                                                                                                       BEL




                                                               AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CZE




        AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CYP




                                                                                                                                                                                         CAN




                  0
                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.05 0




                                                                                                                                                                                    -.02 0 .02 .04 .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.1




                  -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                         -.05
                                                                                                                                  -.05 0
                                                                                                                                                                                -.04
                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                            year                                                   year                                                      year                                                     year                                                  year                                                   year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                           .1




                                                                         .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                   .05




                                                                  .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIN




        .02 .04 .06
                                                                                                                                                                                EST




                                                                                                                               ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FRA




        DEU
                                                                DNK
                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                         -.05
                                                                                                                       -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.04-.02 0 .02 .04




                  -.02 0
                                                                                                                                                                                           -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.05




                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                            year                                                   year                                                      year                                                     year                                                  year                                                   year


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                  .1




                                                                         .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                        .05
                                                                                                                                                                                 .05 .1 .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ITA




                                                                                                                                                                                IND




                 GBR
                                                                                                                       HUN




                                                                     GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.02 0 .02 .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.04




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                               -.1 -.05 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                           -.05 0




        -.15-.1-.05 0 .05 .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.06




                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                            year                                                   year                                                      year                                                     year                                                  year                                                   year




13
                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .15




                                                                                                                                                                                           .1




         .02 .04 .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .05 .1




        JPN
                                                                                                                                LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL




                                                                       KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                               -.1-.05 0 .05 .1 .15
                                                                                                                                                                                           -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1




                  -.02 0
                                                                                                                       -.15-.1-.05 0 .05 .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.05 0




                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                            year                                                   year                                                      year                                                     year                                                  year                                                   year




           .05    .1
                                                                .05 .1 .15




        PRT
                                                               SVK
                                                                                                                                SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  USA




                                                                                                                                                                                         SWE




                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                    -.02 0 .02 .04 .06




                                                                         -.05 0
                                                                                                                                                                                -.04




                                                                                                                       -.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04




                  -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04




                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                            year                                                   year                                                      year                                                     year                                                  year




                                                                                                                                                         dln Znt                                                               dln Snt


     Notes:                     This gure displays the log changes in the utilization-adjusted TFP series                                                                                                d ln Znt   and in the Solow residual                              d ln Snt    for every country in our sample.
Sensitivity         We construct a TFP series applying the original BFK production function coecient

estimates to all countries, and compare the resulting TFP series with ours. While our point estimates

will naturally not coincide perfectly with those in BFK, they are not signicantly dierent from the

estimates in that paper in many cases.            BFK Table 1 reports
                                                                              2
                                                                              j   coecients (s.e.'s) of 1.34(0.22),

2.13(0.38) and 0.64(0.34) for durables, non-durables and non-manufacturing respectively, not far

from our estimates in Table 1. The correlation between our TFP series and the series constructed

using BFK coecients is 0.88 (Appendix Table A7).


Next, we repeat the TFP estimation procedure, but allowing sector-specic capital and value added

shares    j   and   j   to vary by country, and then by both country and year. The resulting series have

correlations with the baseline of 0.97 and 0.96, as reported in Appendix Table A7.


One concern might be institutional dierences in labor market exibility across countries, such that

hours per worker cannot adjust to the same extent in dierent countries.                        While our estimation

approach does not treat all of the labor input as fully exible, we do require that hours per worker

respond within our annual time frame. To assuage this and other concerns about country hetero-

geneity, we estimate the coecients excluding each of the G7 countries one by one, and construct

TFP series with those alternative coecients. Appendix Table A7 presents the pairwise correlations

between our baseline TFP series, and all TFP series dropping an individual country.                        Excluding

individual G7 countries from production function estimation leads to TFP series with correlations

with our baseline between 0.94 and 1.00, suggesting our estimates are not driven by any country in

particular.
               8

We also estimate the production function using our full sample of 29 countries. The correlation of

the resulting TFP series with the baseline is 0.83. However, the estimated parameters are noisy and

the rst stage is not as strong, so we prefer our baseline estimates. The TFP series we construct

for non-G7 countries thus use the G7 production function estimates. We advise caution when using

those, as these production function parameters might be more appropriate for some non-G7 countries

than others.


Our TFP estimation procedure also provides us with series for utilization rates by sector.                     In the

US, the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) publishes a series of industry-level utilization. These series

are constructed using a number of sources including survey data from the US Census Bureau, by

dividing an index of industrial production by an index of estimated industrial capacity.                     The left


BFK is indeed that high true TFP tends to coincide with low utilization. While BFK emphasized the central role of
this negative covariance for their results, for the US this negative covariance is not large enough to render the Solow
residual less volatile than TFP. It turns out that in most other countries that is in fact the case.
   8
       To assess whether there are clear rst-order dierences in the exibility of hours per worker, we compute standard
deviations of actual sectoral hours per worker growth rates. Reassuringly, the standard deviations of hours per worker
are not systematically dierent between the countries with more exible labor markets (US: 0.010; UK: 0.016; Canada:
0.014), and more inexible ones (Germany: 0.015; France: 0.014; Italy: 0.014).




                                                           14
panel of Appendix Figure A1 compares our industry-level estimates to these public series. The two

are positively correlated, despite the dierent underlying data sources and methodologies used for

constructing them. The right panel of the gure compares our estimates for the country-level average

utilization growth rates against the country-level utilization based on the FRB data for the US, and

Eurostat data for some European countries. Again, we nd a positive and signicant correlation,

albeit somewhat low.
                           9


International correlation decomposition                   To highlight the relative importance of TFP in inter-

national comovement, combine (2.3) and (3.9) to write real GDP growth as a sum of two components

(see Appendix B.1 for the derivation):



                                          d ln Ynt = d ln Znt + d ln Int ,                                           (4.1)



where     d ln Int   is the component of GDP growth accounted for by changes in inputs, and given by

equation (B.4).        Our estimation approach allows us to construct the true (utilization- and scale-

adjusted)     d ln Int .

Table 2 presents the basic summary statistics for the elements of the GDP decomposition (4.1).

These results are useful for highlighting the role of the TFP shocks and comparing them to the Solow

residual. The top panel reports the correlations among the G7 countries. The average correlation

of real GDP growth among these countries is 0.36. The second line summarizes correlations of the

TFP shocks. Those are on average close to zero. By contrast, input growth is positively correlated,

with a mean of 0.25. The left panel of Figure 2 depicts the kernel densities of the correlations of real

GDP, TFP, and inputs. There is a clear hierarchy, with the real GDP the most correlated, and the

   9
       Both the US and the European data are available for the manufacturing sector only (the European survey has
capacity utilization for services, but it starts in 2010, after the end of our sample in 2007). We stress that there is no
strong reason to treat the capacity utilization surveys as closer to the truth than the BFK method. First, as a survey
answer it entails some subjectivity. This is exacerbated by the fact that the question being asked diers somewhat
between European countries, as detailed in Appendix A.2. By contrast, our measure of utilization intensity is just a
transformation of log hours per worker. It has the benet of being transparent and intuitive: workers working longer
hours is a good indication of variable factors being used more intensively. It is concerning for the survey answers when
the managers reporting low capacity utilization coincides with high hours per worker.        Second, the survey question
is about capacity utilization.   Conceptually, the closest analog in our model to what the surveys are presumably
capturing would be actual output divided by output when factors are utilized so intensively that the marginal costs of
increasing utilization rise steeply. This is related, but not the same as our model's notion of variable factor utilization
intensity. Third, the history of the development of capacity utilization series suggests caution in using the relatively
new EU surveys as a benchmark. In the US, in response to concerns about earlier vintages of these data, the collection
methodology was improved to provide managers with a detailed and precise notion of full production capability,
namely that the number of shifts, hours of operation and overtime pay can be sustained under normal conditions
and a realistic work schedule in the long run. The EU surveys are more recent, and the mapping between them and
theory is even less clear. As far as we are aware, the EU surveys do not provide managers with a precise notion of
capacity. So each manager is more free to apply their own denition of full capacity output. Finally, one benet of
our approach is that we can produce measures of utilization-adjusted TFP for many more countries and sectors than
capacity utilization surveys have available.




                                                            15
TFP the least correlated and centered on zero.


Section 2 shows that the Solow residual can be written as a sum of the aggregate TFP growth

and the aggregated variable utilization change              d ln Unt .10     Thus, it is an empirical question to what

degree correlations in the Solow residual reect true technology shock correlation as opposed to

endogenous input adjustments.              Table 2 shows that the Solow residual has an average correlation

of about 0.09 in the G7 countries. If Solow residuals were taken to be a measure of TFP shocks,

we would have concluded that TFP is positively correlated in this set of countries. As we can see,

this conclusion would be misleading.              Indeed, the correlation in the utilization term        Unt ,   which is

the dierence between the true TFP shock                  d ln Znt   and the Solow residual, accounts for all of the

correlation in the Solow residual, on average. This indicates that the correlation in the Solow residual

is in fact driven by unobserved input utilization and scale adjustments. In our framework, sectoral

unobserved utilization is a log-linear transformation of hours per worker. Table 2 shows that indeed

the correlation in aggregated hours per worker              d ln Hnt   accounts for the correlation in   d ln Unt .11

The bottom panel of Table 2 repeats the exercise in the full sample of countries. The basic message is

the same as for the G7. It is still the case that          d ln Znt   has a zero average correlation, whereas inputs

d ln Int     are positively correlated and account on average for about half of the real GDP correlation.

The Solow residuals are also more correlated than               d ln Znt ,   and the dierence is accounted for by the

fact that the unobserved inputs are positively correlated. The right panel of Figure 2 displays the

kernel densities of the correlations in the full sample.


This is of course only an accounting decomposition. The growth in                     Int   is endogenous to both TFP

shocks at home and abroad, and to any non-TFP shocks. Though the TFP shocks themselves are

uncorrelated, the induced endogenous GDP comovements may still be sizable when TFP shocks are

transmitted across borders via production networks and goods trade. We next turn to a quantitative

model of international shock propagation to assess the roles of TFP and variable utilization in

international comovement.



5        General Equilibrium

This section implements the multi-sector IRBC model in Section 3. Appendix B presents a complete

characterization of the equilibrium conditions. We proceed in two steps. First, when the adjustments

of employment and machines are muted, the model can be viewed as an international version of the

    10
         Now that we augmented the model with variable returns to scale, the dierence between TFP and the Solow
residual includes a scale adjustment, as in equation (B.6). In practice, the scale adjustment plays a minor role relative
to unobserved utilization.
    11
         The reasons the two do not coincide perfectly is scale eects and aggregation across sectors.




                                                              16
                               Table 2:     Correlations Summary Statistics


                                       Mean      Median        25th pctile   75th pctile

                                                G7 Countries (N. obs. = 21)

                            d ln Ynt    0.358     0.337           0.242        0.565
                            d ln Znt    0.020     -0.007         -0.087        0.140
                            d ln Int    0.247     0.231           0.100        0.461

                            d ln Snt    0.086     0.120          -0.022        0.300
                            d ln Unt    0.152     0.157          0.082         0.301
                            d ln Hnt    0.175     0.223          0.073         0.314

                                                All countries (N. obs. = 406)

                            d ln Ynt   0.190      0.231          -0.027        0.437
                            d ln Znt   -0.007     0.003          -0.214        0.212
                            d ln Int   0.111      0.132          -0.089        0.327

                            d ln Snt    0.052     0.083          -0.150        0.296
                            d ln Unt    0.047     0.076          -0.172        0.262
                            d ln Hnt    0.054     0.083          -0.132        0.261

                 Notes:   This table presents the summary statistics of the correlations in the
                 sample of G7 countries (top panel) and full sample (bottom panel).        Variable
                 denitions and sources are described in detail in the text.




network propagation model following Acemoglu et al. (2012). This exercise emphasizes the role of the

input-output linkages in amplifying or dampening the underlying contemporaneous sectoral shocks.

The advantage of the network model is that it is transparent on the role of input linkages in shock

propagation, and can be implemented on a large set of countries and a limited time series like we

have in our data. The disadvantage is that it rules out dynamic responses of capital accumulation

and intertemporal labor adjustment to the shocks. In the second step, we consider the G7 countries

where a longer time series are available, and allow for dynamic responses to shocks, similar to our

previous work (Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar, 2020). Both the static and dynamic versions

of the model are solved by linearizing.


As stressed above, utilization can potentially contribute to international comovement for two distinct

reasons:   endogenous responses of utilization to TFP shocks, and shocks to utilization itself.       To

quantify both of these mechanisms, this section introduces a utilization shock that rationalizes the

estimated variation in utilization and eort given the global vectors of TFP and predetermined

employment and machines.        We also subject the model to the standard Solow residual shocks to

contrast them with TFP.



                                                          17
                                       Figure 2:   Correlations: Kernel Densities

            2.5                                                    1.4


                                                                   1.2
             2
                                                                    1

            1.5
                                                                   0.8


                                                                   0.6
             1

                                                                   0.4
            0.5
                                                                   0.2


             0                                                      0
             -0.5             0              0.5             1       -1       -0.5       0         0.5           1

                    G7 Countries (N. obs. = 21)                           All countries (N. obs. = 406)
                     Notes:       This gure displays the kernel densities of real GDP growth, the
                     utilization-adjusted TFP, and input correlations in the sample of G7 countries
                     (left panel) and full sample (right panel).    Variable denitions and sources are
                     described in detail in the text.




5.1 Calibration

Utilization shock           The utilization shock is a shift in the supply of variable factors,          njt , in equation
(3.1). Each period, given the observed true TFP and pre-determined machines and employment, we

can compute the required utilization shock so that the model-implied unobserved inputs coincide

with our estimated unobserved inputs. This shock is essentially the wedge between the estimated

utilization and the one implied by the model with only TFP shocks.
                                                                                        12   Unlike the TFP shocks,

computing the utilization shock requires solving for the global equilibrium of the model, as the

unobserved inputs are jointly determined in the world production network. Appendix B.4 describes

the details of the procedure.



Elasticities        In implementing the network model, we only need to take a stand on the value of a

small number of parameters, and use our data to provide the required quantities. Table 3 summarizes

the parameter assumptions for the network model and data sources. The exact functional forms of

the nal goods and intermediate goods Armington aggregators are given by equations (B.7) and

(B.9) in Appendix B.2. In Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2020) we estimate the substitution

elasticities in nal and intermediate use. Based on these estimation results, the nal goods (consump-

tion and investment) Armington elasticity                  is set to 2.75, and the intermediate input substitution

  12
       This wedge is dierent from the familiar labor wedge. Our model distinguishes hours from employment, and the
utilization shocks help match the observed hours given the predetermined employment and machines. The utilization
shock captures all margins of utilization  hours per worker, unobserved eort, and capital utilization rate.




                                                              18
elasticity      is set to 1. The scale parameters             j   come from our own production function estimates

reported in Table 1. In practice, returns to scale are close to constant.


The remaining three parameters,
                                           h, e,
                                           j             and
                                                                  u,
                                                                  j    are elasticities of the supply of hours, eort,
                                              j
and capital utilization, respectively. We use a combination of empirical and theoretical restrictions

to pin these down. Joint optimization of the dierent margins of utilization implies that to solve

for equilibrium in this economy we do not need to know
                                                                            h, e,
                                                                            j        and
                                                                                           u
                                                                                           j      individually. Rather, we
                                                                               j
only need a single composite utilization supply elasticity. To see this, combine the the optimality

conditions for variable factors (B.10)-(B.11) with the production function to get:



             d ln Ynjt = d ln Znjt + j j j (1 - j )(d ln Wnjt + d ln Lnjt - d ln Pnt - d ln njt )
                               +j (1 - j )d ln Xnjt + j j (j d ln Mnjt + (1 - j )d ln Nnjt ) ,

where
                                                        1    1    j   1
                                            j            h
                                                           + e+        u
                                                        j   j   1 - j j
is the required composite elasticity.


Our production function estimates yield a restriction on these parameters. Equation (3.8) implies
                                                   h                    h
                                                                        j
that the estimated        j   corresponds to    j  j
                                                   u + (1 - j )         e . Thus,
                                                                        j           j   and   j   are related by:
                                                    j


                                                         1               j
                                                j =       h
                                                                  1+            .
                                                         j             1 - j

In the absence of eort and capital utilization margins, only the supply elasticity of hours
                                                                                                                        h
                                                                                                                        j     is
                                                                h
relevant. When variable eort and utilization are present, j and j jointly govern the combined

responsiveness of variable inputs, and our production function estimates put discipline on the value

of   j .

The model structure also provides a bound on the choice of
                                                                               h.
                                                                               j    The steady-state employment level

Nnj    must satisfy
                                                              n -1
                                                    n Nnj
                                            n -1                               = 1 - j .
                                      n Nnj        + Gj (Hnj , Enj , Unj )
The constraint that employment must be positive thus imposes a restriction that the composite factor

supply elasticity     j   is less than one. When eort and capital utilization adjustments are muted, this

simply amounts to the restriction that the Frisch labor supply elasticity
                                                                                            h - 1)-1
                                                                                           (j            is positive. Given

the discussion above, in the baseline parameterization we set the composite elasticity                      j   to be   0.5   in

all sectors, which corresponds to a Frisch elasticity equal to one in the absence of eort and utilization

variation. Given our estimates of         j ,   the sector-specic
                                                                          h
                                                                          j    can be obtained accordingly. Appendix




                                                                  19
                                          Table 3:    Parameter Values


 Param.     Value     Source                                           Related to
             2.75     Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2020)        nal substitution elasticity
              1       Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2020)        intermediate substitution elasticity
 j                    Table 1                                          returns to scale
 j                    Table 1                                          joint restriction on variable input elasticities
 j            0.5     See Section 5.1                                  composite variable input elasticity
 j , j                KLEMS                                            capital shares, intermediate shares
 f
 mnjt                 WIOD                                             nal use trade shares
 x
 mi,njt               WIOD                                             intermediate use trade shares
 nj                   WIOD                                             nal consumption shares

Notes:    This table summarizes the parameters and data targets used in the quantitative model, and their sources.




B.5 assesses sensitivity to alternative elasticities. The main quantitative implications remain valid

under the alternative parameterizations.



Shares      All other parameters in the model have close counterparts in basic data and thus we

compute them directly.         The ratio of value added to gross output corresponds to             j .   The labor

share   (1 - j )    is computed as labor payments as a fraction of value added. In KLEMS, payments

to capital are computed as the dierence between measured sectoral value added and payments to

labor. This implies that prots are mechanically included in the capital share. Both               j   and    (1 - j )
come from KLEMS (see Appendix Table A3), and are averaged in each sector across countries and

years in the baseline calibration to minimize noise. As noted above, allowing these parameters to be

country-sector-time specic leads to very similar TFP series. Steady state input shares (mi,nj ) and
                                                                                                         x
                                 f
nal consumption shares (mnj ) are computed from WIOD as time averages.



5.2 Model GDP Correlations

Table 4 reports GDP correlations in our model with employment and capital being xed.                             The

model is simulated with the utilization-adjusted TFP shocks, the utilization shocks, and the Solow

residuals. As our model can only be implemented on a balanced panel, we report results both for

a longer G7-only version of the model spanning years 1978-2007, as well as an all-countries version

spanning 1995-2007 the longest timespan for which data are available for all 29 countries.                       For

the G7 group, TFP shocks generate mean GDP correlations of 0.03, less than one-tenth of the

level found in the data. For the full sample of countries, TFP shocks produce mean correlations of




                                                         20
essentially zero. When TFP shocks are uncorrelated, the model can still exhibit GDP comovement

through endogenous propagation of shocks. This propagation would manifest itself as comovements

in variable factors of production  hours, eort, and capital utilization. The fact that GDP is at best

only weakly correlated when the model is subjected to the TFP shocks suggests that endogenous

responses of utilization to TFP shocks do very little to synchronize GDP.


The rows labeled Model, utilization shock of Table 4 report GDP correlations under the utilization

shock.     As primary inputs are more correlated than TFP and the utilization shock rationalizes

variable inputs that are tied to hours per worker, it is not surprising that the utilization shock

generates signicantly higher GDP comovement. The utilization shock alone generates between one-

quarter and one-third of the observed GDP correlations in the two samples of countries. The model

with both TFP and utilization shocks generates about half of the observed correlations in the data.


Section 4 highlighted that the Solow residual is more correlated than true TFP, and that its properties

are quite dierent from true TFP. We now explore the implications of feeding in the Solow residual as

a measure of technology shocks into our model where factor utilization can vary. This exercise helps

assess the consequences of mismeasurement: if the true model features unobserved factor utilization,

and the Solow residual is mistakenly used as the measure of technology innovations, what would we

conclude about the contribution of technology shocks for comovement? The rows labeled model,

Solow residual of Table 4 report GDP comovement with the Solow residual as the shock. For both

country samples, comovement is higher with the Solow residual than true TFP. Solow residuals can

generate about 25% of the level of observed GDP correlations.             These results suggest that TFP

mismeasurement does aect our understanding of the role of technology shocks in international

comovement.


Now we turn to the dynamic model where employment and capital are endogenously determined

every period. To solve the dynamic model, it is necessary to estimate the shock processes for agents

to forecast future aggregate outcomes. We impose a parsimonious structure by allowing the sector-

specic TFP and utilization shocks to follow autoregressive processes that depend on their own past

values and past values of other sectors within the same country.
                                                                          13   This estimation can only be

conducted for G7 countries where a relatively long panel is available. Additional parameters that

are only relevant in the dynamic model are specied as follows.              We choose the utility function

(·) = log(·).       The depreciation rates
                                       j are set to match the sector specic depreciation rates
                                                              n
obtained from the BEA in 2001. The less standard parameter is  which controls the employment

adjustment costs. In the baseline, we set        n   to be 4 and we vary it in Appendix B.5. As can be seen

in Table 5, adding dynamics in capital and employment does not signicantly modify the overall

pattern of GDP comovement. This is mainly due to the fact that GDP growth rates are determined

 13
      See Appendix B.4 for more details on the shock processes.




                                                          21
for the most part by the the impact responses, which are already captured in the static model.


                Table 4:     GDP Correlations in the Data and in the Static Model


                                                     Mean     Median     25th pctile    75th pctile
                                                             G-7 countries (N. obs. = 21)

             Data                                    0.358     0.337        0.242            0.565

             Model, TFP shock                        0.030     0.015        -0.100           0.153
             Model, utilization shock                0.126     0.124         0.008           0.1853
             Model, TFP and utilization shocks       0.197     0.244        -0.020            0.401
             Model, Solow residual                   0.086     0.103        -0.084           0.332
                                                             All countries (N. obs. = 406)

             Data                                    0.190     0.231        -0.027           0.437

             Model, TFP shock                        0.005     -0.011       -0.201           0.230
             Model, utilization shock                0.046      0.057       -0.168           0.277
             Model, TFP and utilization shocks       0.096      0.090       -0.151           0.380
             Model, Solow residual                   0.051     0.032        -0.200           0.313

               Notes:   This table presents the summary statistics of the correlations of   d ln Ynt
               in the sample of G7 countries for 1978-2007 (top panel) and full sample for 1995-
               2007 (bottom panel) in the data and the model with various shocks.       Variable
               denitions and sources are described in detail in the text.




               Table 5:    GDP Correlations in the Data and in the Dynamic Model


                                                     Mean     Median     25th pctile    75th pctile
                                                             G-7 countries (N. obs. = 21)

             Data                                    0.358     0.337        0.242            0.565

             Model, TFP shock                        0.002     -0.005       -0.175           0.178
             Model, utilization shock                0.132      0.099       -0.010           0.218
             Model, TFP and utilization shocks       0.264      0.305        0.051           0.484
             Model, Solow residual                   0.065     0.081        -0.128           0.285

               Notes:   This table presents the summary statistics of the correlations of   d ln Ynt
               in the sample of G7 countries for 1978-2007 and the model with various shocks.




                                                      22
Sensitivity    Appendix Tables A9-A10 present the model correlations under a variety of parameter

combinations in the static and dynamic cases, respectively. Lower substitution elasticities           and   ,
or more elastic factor supply (higher   j )   have the expected eect of greater GDP synchronization.

The max transmission model that combines lower              and      with higher   j   generates TFP-driven

average GDP correlations of 0.078 and 0.036 in the G7 countries and the full sample, respectively.

While this is considerably higher than the baseline (0.03 and 0.005), it is still well short of observed

comovement. The bottom panel reports the results of a model that suppresses the input network

and leaves only nal goods trade. The resulting correlations are lower than the baseline, but not

dramatically so.   This is consistent with the notion that international transmission forces, while

present, are not predominant in this framework.



6   Conclusion

When some margins of factor utilization are unobservable, the Solow residual is a misleading measure

of technology innovations. While use of utilization-adjusted TFP is common in the research on the

US economy, international macroeconomics has thus far worked with the Solow residual. This paper

makes two contributions. First, we provide a new dataset containing utilization-adjusted TFP series

for many countries and sectors for use in open-economy macroeconomics. We illustrate that these

series have dierent international correlation properties from the standard Solow residual. Second,

we quantify the roles of TFP and variable factor utilization in international comovement. We nd

that while TFP shocks do not generate substantial correlation in GDP growth rates across countries,

shocks to variable utilization are more correlated and thus carry greater potential to synchronize

GDP. Future research should focus on non-technology shocks as drivers of international business

cycles.




                                                    23
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr. 2016. Networks and the Macroeconomy:

 An Empirical Exploration. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015 30:276335.


Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. 2012.

 The Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5):19772016.


Ambler, Steve, Emanuela Cardia, and Christian Zimmermann. 2004. International business

 cycles: What are the facts? Journal of Monetary Economics 51 (2):257276.


Backus, David K, Patrick J Kehoe, and Finn E Kydland. 1992. International Real Business

 Cycles. Journal of Political Economy 100 (4):74575.


Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball. 2006. Are Technology Improvements

 Contractionary? American Economic Review 96 (5):14181448.


Bils, Mark and Jang-Ok Cho. 1994. Cyclical factor utilization. Journal of Monetary Eco-

 nomics 33 (2):319  354.


Boehm, Christoph and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2019. Convex Supply Curves.      Mimeo, UT

 Austin.


Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 1993.     Labor Hoarding and the

 Business Cycle. Journal of Political Economy 101 (2):245273.


. 1995. Capital Utilization and Returns to Scale. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual,

 vol. 10. MIT Press, 67124.


Canova, Fabio. 2005. The transmission of US shocks to Latin America. Journal of Applied

 Econometrics 20 (2):229251.


Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Rohan Kekre. 2019. The Macroeco-

 nomics of the Greek Depression. Mimeo, Harvard, Minnesota, and Chicago Booth.


Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2014. Risk Shocks. Amer-

 ican Economic Review 104 (1):2765.


Cooley, Thomas F, Gary D Hansen, and Edward C Prescott. 1995.       Equilibrium Business

 Cycles with Idle Resources and Variable Capacity Utilization. Economic Theory 6 (1):35

 49.




                                          24
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. 2014. The International Dimension of

  Productivity and Demand Shocks in the US Economy. Journal of the European Economic

  Association 12 (1):153176.


Fair, Ray. 2018. Macroeconometric modeling: 2018. Mimeo, Yale.


Fernald, John. 2014. A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity.

  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-19.


Gilchrist, Simon and John C. Williams. 2000. Putty-Clay and Investment: A Business Cycle

  Analysis. Journal of Political Economy 108 (5):928960.


Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Matthew Shapiro. 2011.  Using the Survey of Plant Capacity to

  Measure Capital Utilization.   Working Papers 11-19, Center for Economic Studies, U.S.

  Census Bureau.


Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W Human. 1988. Investment, Capacity

  Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle. American Economic Review 78 (3):40217.


Hamilton, James D. 1996.  This is what happened to the oil price-macroeconomy relationship.

  Journal of Monetary Economics 38 (2):215220.


Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri. 2002. Financial autarky and international business

  cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (3):601627.


Huo, Zhen, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2020. International Comove-

  ment in the Global Production Network. NBER Working Paper 25978.


Imbs, Jean. 1999. Technology, growth and the business cycle.     Journal of Monetary Eco-

  nomics 44 (1):65  80.


Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles H. Whiteman. 2003. International Busi-

  ness Cycles: World, Region, and Country-Specic Factors.      American Economic Review

  93 (4):12161239.


Levchenko, Andrei A. and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2020. TFP, News, and Sentiments: The

  International Transmission of Business Cycles. Journal of the European Economic Associ-

  ation 18 (1):302341.


O'Mahony, Mary and Marcel P. Timmer. 2009. Output, Input and Productivity Measures at

  the Industry Level: The EU KLEMS Database. The Economic Journal 119 (538):F374

  F403.



                                            25
Shapiro, Matthew D. 1989.  Assessing the Federal Reserve's Measures of Capacity Utilization.

  Brookings Paper on Economic Activity    (1):181241.


. 1993.         Cyclical Productivity and the Workweek of Capital.     American Economic

  Review 83 (2):229233.


Timmer, Marcel P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries.

  2015. An Illustrated User Guide to the World InputOutput Database: the Case of Global

  Automotive Production. Review of International Economics 23 (3):575605.




                                             26
                    ONLINE APPENDIX

A   Data and Estimation

A.1 Data Sample and Variable Construction Details

                             Table A1:      Country Sample


                 Australia        Germany              Netherlands
                 Austria          Greece               Poland
                 Belgium          Hungary              Portugal
                 Canada           India                Slovak Republic
                 Cyprus           Ireland              Slovenia
                 Czech Republic   Italy                Spain
                 Denmark          Japan                Sweden
                 Estonia          Republic of Korea    UK
                 Finland          Latvia               USA
                 France           Lithuania




                                            27
                                                        Table A2:   Sector Sample


     Sector code                     Durables                        Sector code                Non durable non manufacturing



         20        Wood and of wood and cork                             50         Sale, maintenance and repair of motor vehicles
       27t28       Basic metals and fabricated metal                     51         Wholesale trade and commission trade,
         29        Machinery, nec                                                          except of motor vehicles
       30t33       Electrical and optical equipment                      52         Retail trade, except of motor vehicles
       34t35       Transport equipment                                  60t63       Transport and storage
       36t37       Manufacturing nec; recycling                          64         Post and telecommunications
                                                                         70         Real estate activities
                                                                        71t74       Renting of m&eq and other business activities




28
                           Non durable manufacturing                    AtB         Agriculture, hunting, forestry and shing

                                                                         C          Mining and quarrying
       15t16       Food , beverages and tobacco                          E          Electricity, gas and water supply
       17t19       Textiles, textile , leather and footwear              F          Construction
       21t22       Pulp, paper, paper , printing and publishing          H          Hotels and restaurants
         23        Coke, rened petroleum and nuclear fuel                J          Financial intermediation
         24        Chemicals and chemical products                       L          Public admin and defence; compulsory social security
         25        Rubber and plastics                                   M          Education
         26        Other non-metallic mineral                            N          Health and social work
                                                                         O          Other community, social and personal services
                              Table A3:     Data Construction Details




Object       KLEMS                   Construction                              WIOD SEA
             variables                                               supplementary variables


d ln Ynjt   GO,            d ln Ynjt =            d ln GO -
            GO_P           d ln GO_P

d ln Mnjt   CAP_QI         d ln Mnjt = d ln CAP_QI              K_GFCF for the following coun-
                                                                tries: EST, CYP, GRC, KOR, LTU,
                                                                LVA, POL, PRT, SVK, SVN
                                                                When necessary, the lower aggrega-
                                                                tion of WIOD is aggregated up to
                                                                our sectoral classication by using
                                                                a weighted average of growth rates,
                                                                        CAPt +CAPt-1
                                                                using                    as weights.
                                                                                2

d ln Hnjt   H_EMP,         d ln Hnjt = d ln H_EMP -            H_EMP for IND, and some sec-
            EMP,           d ln EMP                            tors in JPN and LTU. For AUS
            LAB_QI                                             and SVK, when H_EMP is miss-
                                                               ing from both KLEMS and WIOD,
                                                               we   use d ln LAB_QI           instead    of
                                                               d ln H_EMP

d ln Nnjt   EMP            d ln Nnjt = d ln EMP                EMP for IND, and some sectors in
                                                               JPN and LTU


d ln Xnjt   II, II_P       d ln Xnjt = d ln II - d ln II_P

                                     CAP
                                      njt
j           CAP, GO        njt = GOnjt    .      We take the

                           average j over     countries and
                           time
                                           CAP
                                         njt      njtLAB
j           LAB,           njt = 1 - GOnjt   - GOnjt  .
            CAP, GO        We take the average j over
                           countries and time
    Notes: This table presents a mapping between the variables used in our analysis and the exact
    variable names in the KLEMS and WIOD data. The values of    j   and   j   used in the baseline are
    averages across countries and years.




                                                   29
                                                               Table A4:          KLEMS Data Details


      Variables                       KLEMS methodology                                     Our imputations                    Remarks for G7 countries


     Output and      Taken directly from the National Accounts. Dierent             Missing     price    growth       rates
     intermedi-      vintages are combined to construct the full time series.       are   imputed       using       growth
     ate     input                                                                  rates in the same sectors in
     variables                                                                      other countries.
                                                                                    Top     and      bottom     0.1%      of
                                                                                    growth rates observations are
                                                                                    winsorized.


     Labor vari-     Total hours worked, and average wage by industry are           When     data      on   total    hours     FRA: data from Labor Force
     ables           typically taken from the National Accounts. For num-           worked      is    missing      and   we    Surveys
                     ber of worker and hours per worker, data from Labor            can't    construct        hours      per   DEU:      Income    survey,    so-
                     Force Surveys or earning surveys was used.                     worker    directly,       we    impute     cial   security    data,   Socio-
                                                                                    the growth rate in hours per               Economic Panel Study
                                                                                    worker as the growth in labor              GBR:     Labor     Force   Survey
                                                                                    services minus growth in to-               post   1993,   General     House-
                                                                                    tal employment.                            hold Survey pre 1993
                                                                                    Top     and      bottom     0.1%      of   ITA: Bank of Italy surveys




30
                                                                                    growth rates observations are              JPN: Monthly Labor Survey
                                                                                    winsorized.                                and other survey
                                                                                                                               USA:      Current      Population
                                                                                                                               Survey


     Capital         Capital input is measured as capital services, com-           Top    and        bottom     0.1%     of    CAN:     the   asset    categories
     variables       puted as a weighted gross rate of the stock of dierent        growth rates observations are               used are slightly dierent
                     asset categories. The stock data is taken from various        winsorized.                                 FRA: asset weights are taken
                     national statistical agencies.   The weights are com-                                                     directly as investment shares
                     puted as the shares of each category in total capital                                                     in value from the Business
                     service compensation. The price of capital service for                                                    Surveys
                     each asset category is composed of a nominal rate of                                                      JPN: capital stock data is not
                     return, depreciation, and capital gains. These can be                                                     available every year, and is
                     obtained using data on the price of asset capital, de-                                                    interpolated in-between
                     preciation rates, and the total value of capital services.
                     The total value of capital services is derived as total
                     gross value added minus labor compensation.




                      Notes:   This table describes the sources KLEMS use to construct the database.                      Further details are available in
                      O'Mahony and Timmer (2009). See also Table A3 for details on how we map the model objects to the data.
A.2 Robustness of Estimates

Robustness of our production function estimates             Table A5 provides coecient esti-

mates under alternative combinations of instruments. Table A6 allows for sectoral returns-

to-scale coecients.   For this estimation, we interact the direct exposure instruments with

sector indicators. In many cases, the returns-to-scale coecients are not signicantly dierent

from the baseline group-level estimate. However, the estimates are noisy, and the utilization

adjustment coecient is also estimated with more noise.


Robustness of TFP series        Table A7 correlates our baseline TFP series with several al-

ternatives based on BFK coecients, estimation using the full 29-country sample, estimation

excluding one G7 country at a time, estimation using country-sector specic or country-sector-

time varying labor and input shares. The resultant TFP series are highly correlated with our

baseline series.


Comparison to capacity utilization surveys          Figure A1 compares our implied utilization

series to survey data on utilization growth rates and nds a modest positive correlation. We

advise caution in interpreting these results, particularly the right panel that compares our

series to Eurostat survey measures.     The precise question in the survey varies somewhat

from country to country, and does not dene full capacity for the managers lling out the

survey, which might lead to some subjectivity in the responses and reduce their cross-country

comparability. For instance, for the UK, the question we use is What is your current rate

of operation as a percentage of full capacity?     (Question 4a).   For France, the question is

Votre entreprise fonctionne actuellement à ...% de ses capacités disponibles. Il s'agit du ratio

(en %) de votre production actuelle sur la production maximale que vous pourriez obtenir

en embauchant éventuellement du personnel supplémentaire (Question 2c). This translates

to Your rm is currently operating at ... % of its full capacity. It means the ratio (in %)

of your current production over the maximum production you could reach, potentially by

hiring additional sta.   Clearly, the question for France provides a notion of capacity that

includes additional employment, unlike the question in the UK. In contrast, the question for

Germany (Question B) suggests a capital-based capacity denition, Die Ausnutzung unserer

Anlagen zur Herstellung von XY (betriebsübliche Vollausnutzung=100%) beträgt gegenwärtig

bis ...%, which translates to The utilization of our installations for the production of XY

(normal full utilization=100%) is currently up to ...%.




                                              31
                                        Table A5:           Production Function Estimation Robustness Results



                                                      Non-durable                            Durables              Non-durable
                                                     non-manufacturing                                             manufacturing

                                            RTS (j )
                                                       1    Util. Adj. (j )
                                                                            2   RTS (j )
                                                                                         1     Util. Adj. (j )
                                                                                                               2   RTS (j )
                                                                                                                            1    Util. Adj. (j )
                                                                                                                                                   2



     Baseline                   Coefs         0.938                1.128         1.049                0.435         1.172               1.481
                                             (0.209)           (0.674)          (0.046)            (0.173)         (0.119)          (0.627)


                                SWF           9.615                8.917         16.626            16.141           5.846               8.313
                                KP F                       5.759                              14.664                            5.269




     Oil shocks only            Coefs         0.898                1.464         1.172                0.179         0.991               2.241
                                             (0.361)           (0.974)          (0.142)            (0.477)         (0.324)          (1.931)


                                SW-F          8.006                7.380         4.299                4.969         1.394               1.264
                                KP-F                       4.746                              2.833                             0.871




32
     Defense shocks only        Coefs         1.113                -0.534        0.851                -0.798        0.178               -1.732
                                             (0.235)           (0.852)          (0.260)            (1.257)         (1.244)          (3.341)


                                SW-F          8.963                5.962         0.466                0.529         0.513               0.462
                                KP-F                       1.459                              0.227                             0.288




     Median across all          Coefs         0.792                1.684         1.034                0.435         1.235               1.481
     instrument combinations                 (0.334)           (1.047)          (0.117)            (0.392)         (0.278)          (0.998)


     Maximum over all           SW-F          18.363            14.657           30.969            23.429           12.158           18.221
     instrument combinations
                                KP-F                       7.911                              15.480                            9.829




       Notes: This table contains the results from the production function estimation described in Section 3 using dierent combinations of instruments.
       The Baseline row shows the baseline results using rst- and second-order oil and defense spending shocks (direct exposure, downstream, and
       upstream shocks). The next two sets of results use only the oil or defense shocks, and the last set of results present summary statistics of the
       results using all possible combinations of the 6 instruments. SW-F denotes the Sanderson-Windmeijer partial rst stage                     F -statistic   and KP-F
       denotes the Kleibergen-Paap   F -statistic.   Standard errors allow for arbitrary clustering using the Driscoll-Kraay approach.
                   Table A6:          Sector-Specic RTS Production Function Estimation




                             Durables                               Non-durable non-manufacturing



             Sector     RTS (j )
                                  1     Util. Adj. (j )
                                                       2        Sector    RTS (j )
                                                                                    1                2
                                                                                        Util. Adj. (j )



             20           0.946                                 50          1.586
                         (0.094)                                           (0.695)
             27t28        1.257                                 51          1.974
                         (0.136)            0.373                          (0.663)          -0.552
             29           1.403             (0.175)             52          0.436          (0.652)
                          (0.19)                                           (1.097)
             30t33        0.773                                 60t63       1.346
                         (0.277)                                           (0.154)
             34t35        1.198                                 64          0.225
                         (0.101)                                           (0.815)
             36t37        1.008                                 70         -0.078
                          (0.13)                                           (0.451)
                                                                71t74       0.956
                  Non-durable manufacturing                                 (0.28)

                                                                AtB         1.414
             Sector       RTS             Util. Adj.                       (0.284)
                                                                C          -0.049
             15t16        0.803                                            (0.368)
                         (0.457)                                E           2.441
             17t19        0.995                                            (1.102)
                         (0.173)            1.161               F           0.917
             21t22        0.894             (0.596)                        (0.356)
                         (0.207)                                H           1.531
             23           1.183                                            (0.478)
                         (0.144)                                J           0.883
             24           1.276                                            (0.461)
                          (0.08)                                L           1.763
             25           1.313                                            (0.892)
                         (0.085)                                M           0.701
             26           1.226                                            (0.242)
                         (0.207)                                N           2.423
                                                                           (2.137)
                                                                O           1.082
                                                                           (0.227)



Notes: This table contains the results from the production function estimation described in Section 3, but allowing
for sector-specic RTS coecients. The direct exposure instruments are interacted with sector indicators in the rst
stage. Standard errors allow for arbitrary clustering using the Driscoll-Kraay approach.


                                                           33
                                            Table A7:    Correlation between Alternative TFP Estimates


                             Baseline   BFK         Country    Ctry-time    ex-USA    ex-UK    ex-        ex-        ex-       ex-     ex-     29-country
                                        coecients   shares     shares                          Canada     Germany    France    Italy   Japan   estimation
     Baseline                1
     BFK coecients           0.877      1
     Country-spec. shares    0.967      0.873       1
     Country-time shares     0.959      0.870       0.988      1
     ex-USA                  0.940      0.874       0.941      0.939        1
     ex-UK                   0.981      0.813       0.928      0.916        0.868     1
     ex-Canada               0.997      0.873       0.960      0.951        0.920     0.982    1
     ex-Germany              0.960      0.909       0.956      0.954        0.983     0.890    0.946      1




34
     ex-France               0.999      0.867       0.965      0.956        0.935     0.984    0.994      0.953      1
     ex-Italy                0.959      0.904       0.957      0.955        0.984     0.887    0.948      0.995      0.953     1
     ex-Japan                0.939      0.750       0.872      0.857        0.772     0.984    0.950      0.808      0.944     0.807   1
     29-country est.         0.832      0.696       0.805      0.804        0.841     0.794    0.824      0.836      0.833     0.846   0.743   1


        Notes:   This table reports the correlations of the estimated TFP series using a number of dierent approaches.     BFK estimate refers to
        TFP series for all countries using the coecient estimates in Basu, Fernald, and Kimball (2006), Country-spec. shares refers to TFP series
        constructed using country-specic value added and capital shares, Country-time shares refers to TFP series constructed using country-time-
        specic value added and capital shares, and ex-COUNTRY refers to TFP series using the production function coecient estimates from a
        sample that excludes the G7 country in question. 29-country est. refers to the TFP series using the production function estimation based on
        29 countries.
                                       Figure A1:                  Comparison between Estimated Utilization and Survey Data




                                                                                                              .1
                  .05
                                       Coeff = 0.11
                                       Std.Err. = 0.02
                                       Corr= .381                                                                                  Coeff = 0.08
                                                                                                                                   Std.Err. = 0.03
                                                                                                                                   Corr = .183




                                                                                                dln Utilization (estimate)
    dln Utilization (estimate)




                                                                                                                      .05
                 0




                                                                                                    0         -.05
                  -.05




                                 -.2                 -.1                         0    .1                                     -.1           -.05           0              .05    .1   .15
                                                           dln Utilization (survey)                                                                  dln Utilization (survey)


                                                US sectoral data                                                                             Country average

Notes:                           This gure compares our estimated utilization growth rate and the change in survey measures of capacity
utilization. The left panel plots growth rates of the sector-level utilization series for the US based on our procedure
against the FRB utilization survey. The right panel plots the growth rate of the country-level average utilization rate
based on our procedure against utilization growth rates based on surveys by the FRB for the US and Eurostat for
European countries (we use the answer to the question in the UK survey At what capacity is your company currently
operating (as a percentage of full capacity)? from the Industry / Business Climate Indicator, and take the average
percentage per year).                                    The precise wording of the question for other countries varies slightly, some examples are
discussed above. Both plots include the OLS t, and report the coecient point estimate, the standard error, and
the correlation between the two variables.




                                                                                           35
B   Model and Quantitative Results

B.1 Accounting Framework

The change in real GDP between           t   and the base period     t-1    is:

                                              J
                                                                    X
                           Ynt =                     Pnjt-1 Ynjt - Pnjt -1 Xnjt ,
                                             j =1


and the proportional change:

                           J                      X
         Ynt               j =1    Pnjt-1 Ynjt - Pnjt -1 Xnjt
               =
         Ynt-1                            Ynt-1
                       J                                       X
                                  Ynjt Pnjt-1 Ynjt-1   Xnjt Pnjt  -1 Xnjt-1 Pnjt-1 Ynjt-1
                =                                    -
                      j =1
                                  Ynjt-1  Ynt-1        Xnjt-1 Pnjt-1 Ynjt-1    Ynt-1
                       J
                                        Ynjt              Xnjt
                =              Dnjt-1          - (1 - j )               .
                      j =1
                                        Ynjt-1            Xnjt-1

Approximate the growth rate with log dierence, and plug in                  d ln Ynjt   from (3.5):


                           J
         d ln Ynt               Dnjt-1 (d ln Ynjt - (1 - j )d ln Xnjt )                               (B.1)
                        j =1
                           J
                  =             Dnjt-1 d ln Znjt + j j j d ln Knjt + j (1 - j )j d ln Lnjt
                        j =1


                    +j (1 - j ) d ln Xnjt - (1 - j )d ln Xnjt                                         (B.2)
                               
                      J        
                  =      Dnjt-1 d ln Znjt + j j d ln Knjt + (1 - j )j d ln Lnjt
                               
                    j =1
                                 True TFP               Primary inputs
                               
                                                           
                                                           
                                                j          
                                        j 1-j        1-j
                    + (j - 1)d ln Knjt Lnjt        Xnjt                                               (B.3)
                                                           
                                                    Scale eect
                  = d ln Znt + d ln Int ,




                                                            36
which leads to equation (4.1). This derivation underpins the notion of aggregate TFP (2.4)

in Section 2, and the aggregate input-driven component of GDP growth used in Section 4:

                                                                                                                          
               J                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          j               
                                                                                               j    1-j         1-j
d ln Int             Dnjt-1       j j d ln Knjt + (1 - j )j d ln Lnjt + (j - 1)d ln          Knjt Lnjt        Xnjt            .
                                                                                                                          
              j =1
                                             Primary inputs
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                            Scale eect
                                                                                                               (B.4)




The Solow residual has the following relationship to gross output and observed inputs:


d ln Ynjt = d ln Snjt + j j d ln Mnjt + (1 - j )j d ln Hnjt + (1 - j )j d ln Nnjt + (1 - j ) d ln Xnjt .

Plugging this way of writing output growth into the real GDP growth equation (B.1), we get

the following expression:

                     J
  d ln Ynt                Dnjt-1 (d ln Snjt + j j d ln Mnjt + (1 - j )j d ln Hnjt + (1 - j )j d ln Nnjt ) .
                   j =1
                                                                                                               (B.5)

Comparing (B.3) to (B.5) leads to (2.5), where the utilization adjustment is now:


               J
                                                                                                          j
                                                                                              j     1-j        1-j
d ln Unt =           Dnjt-1 (1 - j )j d ln Enjt + j j d ln Unjt + (j - 1)d ln               Knjt Lnjt         Xnjt        .
              j =1
                                                                                                               (B.6)

Setting   j = 1          (the maintained assumption in Section 2) leads to (2.6).


B.2 Complete Model Equations

Here we fully specify the quantitative model, which nests our estimation framework, that

we use to perform counterfactuals. We assume nancial autarky, and that trade is balanced

period by period.


Goods and trade                 Trade is subject to iceberg costs      mnj   to ship good   j   from country    m    to

country   n   (throughout, we adopt the convention that the rst subscript denotes source, and

the second destination).


The nal use in the economy, denoted              Fnt  Cnt +        j   Injt , is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate across



                                                              37
sectors. The functional form and its associated price index are given by

                                                                                                         f      jn
                                                        jn                                              Pnjt
                                      Fnt =            Fnjt ,                   Pnt =                                ,
                                                  j                                             j
                                                                                                        jn

                                                                                                         f
where  Fnjt is the nal               use of sector          j    in country            n,   and         Pnjt   is the nal use price index in

sector j and country n.              Within each sector, aggregation across source countries is Armington,

and the sector price index is dened in a straightforward way:

                                                                                                                                1
                                       1                         -1                                                            1-
                                                        -1
                                                                                                                   1-
                   Fnjt =            mnj Fmnjt                        ,              Pnjt =                   mnj Pmnjt             ,              (B.7)
                                 m                                                                      m

where      Fmnjt   is nal use in        n      of sector     j   goods coming from country                           m,   and       Pmnjt    is the price

of   Fmnjt .   For sector    j   goods, the expenditure share for nal goods imported from country                                                     m
is given by
                                                                                   1-
                                                        f                     mnj Pmnjt
                                                        mnjt      =                      1-         .                                              (B.8)
                                                                               k    knj Pknjt

The intermediate input usage                    Xnjt   is an aggregate of inputs from potentially all countries and

sectors:
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                  -1                                                                1-
                                           1           -1
                                                                                       X                              1-
                    Xnjt               µmi,nj Xmi,njt
                                                       
                                                                          ,           Pnjt =                  µmi,nj Pmi,njt             ,         (B.9)
                                 m,i                                                                    m,i

where  Xmi,njt is the usage of inputs coming from sector i in country m in production of sector
j in country n, µmi,nj is the input coecient, and where Pmi,njt is the price paid in sector n, j
for inputs from m, i. This leads to the following share of intermediates from country m sector

i in total intermediate spending by n, j :
                                                                                  1-
                                                      x
                                                                          µmi,nj Pmi,njt
                                                      mi,njt     =                          1-          .
                                                                              k,l   µkl,nj Pkl,njt


Let     Pnjt   denote the price of output produced by sector                                            j   in country    n.14          No arbitrage in

shipping implies that the prices at the factory gate and the price at the time of nal or

intermediate usage are related by:


                                                      Pmi,njt = Pmnit = mni Pmit ,
  14                                                                f
       Note this is not the same as the ideal price index          Pnjt       of sector     j   nal consumption in        n,   which aggregates imports
from the other countries.




                                                                              38
where   mni    is the iceberg trade cost.


Within a period, the optimal supply of log hours per worker, up to a normalization constant,

is given by:

                                h                                 Wnjt Lnjt
                                j ln Hnjt = - ln njt + ln                         ,                       (B.10)
                                                                    Pnt
where ln denotes a log-deviation from initial equilibrium. The optimal supply of labor eort

and capital utilization are

                                        h                               h
                                        j                               j
                           ln Enjt =    e
                                          ln Hnjt ,        ln Unjt =    u
                                                                          ln Hnjt .                       (B.11)
                                        j                               j

In a competitive market, primary factors and inputs receive compensation proportional to

their share in total input spending. This implies:


                                     Rnjt Knjt = j j Pnjt Ynjt
                                     Wnjt Lnjt = (1 - j ) j Pnjt Ynjt                                     (B.12)
                                                x
                              Pmi,njt Xmi,njt = mi,njt (1 - j ) Pnjt Ynjt .                               (B.13)



Equilibrium        An equilibrium in this economy is a set of goods and factor prices     {Pnjt , Wnjt , Rnjt },
factor allocations {Mnjt , Nnjt , Hnjt , Enjt , Unjt }, and goods allocations {Ynjt }, {Cnt , Injt , Xmi,njt }

for all countries and sectors such that (i) households maximize utility; (ii) rms maximize prof-

its; and (iii) all markets clear.


At sectoral level, the following market clearing condition has to hold for each country                  n sector
j:

                                                f                                        x
                Pnjt Ynjt =          Pmt Fmt mj nmjt +                 (1 - i )Pmit Ymit nj,mit .         (B.14)
                                m                             m    i

Meanwhile, a direct implication of nancial autarky is that each country's expenditure equals

the sum of value added across domestic sectors


                                        Pmt Fmt =          i Pmit Ymit .                                  (B.15)
                                                      i


Combining with equation (B.14), we have


                                                     f                                        x
           Pnjt Ynjt =                i Pmit Ymit mj nmjt +                 (1 - i )Pmit Ymit nj,mit .    (B.16)
                            m    i                                m     i


                                                      39
Note that once we know the share of value added in production j , the expenditure shares
      f         x
mj , nmjt , and nj,mit for all n, m, i, j , we can compute the nominal output Pnjt Ynjt for all

country-sector pairs    (n, j )   after choosing a numeraire good. There is no need to specify all

the details of the model.


After linearization, the set of market clearing conditions (B.14) to (B.16) allows us to write

the changes in sectoral prices as a function of changes in sectoral outputs,             ln Pt = P ln Yt ,
where both   Pt   and   Yt   are vectors of length   N × J.

B.3 Utilization Shock Extraction

The sectoral output is given by the production function


              ln Ynjt = ln Znjt + j j ((1 - j )(ln Hnjt + ln Enjt ) + j ln Unjt )
                             + j (1 - j ) ln Xnjt + j j (j ln Mnjt + (1 - j ) ln Nnjt ) .

When combined with the optimality conditions from households and rms, it leads to


                                         1             j
    ln Ynjt = ln Znjt + j j (1 - j )      h
                                              1+              (- ln njt + ln Pnjt + ln Ynjt - ln Pnt )
                                         j           1 - j
                                                  x
             + j (1 - j )(ln Ynjt + ln Pnjt - ln Pnjt ) + j j (j ln Mnjt + (1 - j ) ln Nnjt ) .

Using the relationship between prices and output          ln Pt = P ln Yt , we can express the output
as a function of the TFP shock, the            utilization shock ln njt , predetermined capital, and

predetermined employment


                         ln Yt = z ln Zt +  ln t + m ln Mt + n ln Nt .

Note that hours per worker and output are related in the following way


                             h
                             j ln Hnjt = - ln njt + ln Ynjt + ln Pnjt - ln Pnt .

It is immediate that hours can also be expressed as


                         ln Ht = z ln Zt +  ln t + m ln Mt + n ln Nt .

Since hours, employment and capital are directly observed and TFP is already estimated, the

utilization shock   t   can be computed as a residual. According to our model, the unobserved

eort and capital utilization rate are proportional to hours per worker, and it follows that the



                                                      40
utilization shock rationalizes the estimated variation in utilization.


B.4 Dynamic Responses

The rst-order condition with respect to capital accumulation is


                                                     Rnjt+1
                            nt =  Et nt+1                   Unjt+1 + 1 -   j   ,                        (B.17)
                                                     Pnt+1

where   nt   stands for the marginal utility of nal goods consumption in country                  n   period   t.
This condition is similar to the standard Euler equation but is sector-specic and adjusted by

the utilization rate.


The optimality condition with respect to           Nnjt+1   is


                                                    -1           n                 Wnjt+1
  Et nt+1 njt Gj (Hnjt+1 , Enjt+1 , Unjt+1 ) +  n Nnjt +1            = Et nt+1            Hnjt+1 Enjt+1 .
                                                                                   Pnt+1

Note that    Nnjt+1   is chosen in period   t   before observing shocks in period     t + 1.   The left hand-

side is the expected marginal disutility of a unit increase in sector          j   employment, while the

right-hand side is the corresponding marginal utility gain due to higher labor income.


The dynamic model has a large number of state variables (shocks to each country-sector as

well as employment and machines in each country-sector), and so cannot be solved exactly.

To examine the dynamic responses of the model and how it aects the output correlation,

we proceed by solving the log-linearized model. In the linearized model, the taste parameters

mnj   and   µmi,nj   and the trade cost   mni    aect the dynamics only via the the nal use and the

intermediate use trade shares.      Once we match the trade shares as in the data, there is no

need to pin down the trade costs and taste parameters separately.


The nal input into the calibration is shock processes for dierent countries and sectors. The

perceived shock processes matter for the intertemporal decisions of households. We estimate

shock processes for the utilization-adjusted TFP shocks. For non-G7 countries, the panel is too

short to obtain reliable estimates of the shock processes. Therefore in the dynamic analysis

we narrow the focus to the G7 countries, for which we have the longest panel of shocks.

We assume that the country-sector technology shocks follow a vector autoregressive process.

However, due to the large number of countries and sectors, it is not feasible to estimate the

fully unrestricted VAR. Thus, we impose a parsimonious structure on the shock process, that

allows for contemporaneous spillovers between country-sectors, but restricts the structure of




                                                      41
lagged spillovers. The TFP and the utilization shocks shocks are assumed to follow:


                        ln Znjt =z              z                               z
                                 nj ln Znjt-1 + n 1 (m = n, k = j ) ln Zmkt-1 + njt ,                          (B.18)

                         ln njt =nj       ln Znjt-1 +   
                                                        n 1 (m   = n, k = j ) ln mkt-1 +     njt
                                                                                             
                                                                                                 .             (B.19)


That is, we permit a country-sector specic lagged autoregressive parameter, so country-

sector shocks can be persistent. We restrict lagged spillovers to be common within a country

(across sectors), and zero otherwise.
                                                 15   We allow for a full variance-covariance matrix of the

error terms, which amounts to assuming completely unrestricted contemporaneous spillovers:

t  N (0, ),          that is, there is a full covariance matrix. The processes (B.18) and (B.19) are

estimated separately for each country-sector.                 Table A8 summarizes the estimation results.

The sample variance-covariance matrix of the residuals from estimating equations (B.18) and

(B.19) for the period 1978-2007 serves as the estimate of the covariance matrix                       of the shock
innovations. We estimate the utilization shock processes in the same way.


The choice of restrictions strikes a balance between relative parsimony, which improves the

precision of the parameters estimates, and sucient exibility to replicate the measured shock

correlations in the data.

                           Table A8:        Shock Processes: Autoregressive Parameters


                                                Mean      Median     25th pctile     75th pctile


                                                           TFP (util adj.):     ln Znjt

                         Own lag (nj )
                                      z         0.845      0.844        0.809             0.864
                         Spillover lag (n )
                                            z   0.000      -0.001       -0.002            0.000


                                                           Utilization shock:    ln njt

                                      
                         Own lag (nj )          0.710      0.746        0.636             0.788
                                        
                         Spillover lag (n )     0.005      0.004        -0.002            0.007



Notes:      This table presents results from estimating the shock stochastic processes (B.18)-(B.19). The measures are
summary statistics of the coecients in the sample of sectors and countries.




  15
       We also experimented with including within-sector spillover terms and dependence on other past variables, but it
turns out that most of these terms are not signicant.



                                                            42
B.5 Quantitative Results: Sensitivity

This subsection evaluates sensitivity to alternative elasticities. We also consider a counter-

factual analysis where the cross-border trade of intermediate goods is not allowed, which can

be thought as muting the role of production network.


Tables A9 and A10 present the results for the static model and dynamic model, respectively.

As the estimation of the shock processes requires a relatively long sample, we only consider the

G7 countries for the dynamic model analysis. Under lower elasticity of substitution, a country

becomes more responsive to production and demand changes in other countries, resulting in

more transmission and a higher level of GDP comovements. With a higher composite factor

elasticityj , the economy has a stronger amplication channel of the underlying shocks, which
                                                                                           n
also leads to higher GDP comovements. In the dynamic model, the employment elasticity 
                                                                    n
plays a similar role as the composite factor elasticity. A lower      maps to more elastic

employment adjustment, and higher GDP comovements.              Though the results vary under

these alternative parameter combinations, utilization-adjusted TFP can only generate limited

comovement overall.


To assess the role of the production network, we modify the the production structure in the

following way: for type      j   inputs, rms can only source it from domestic rms that produce

type   j   inputs.   This can be viewed as setting the transaction costs for intermediate goods

usage cross-borders to innity. As a result, there is no global production network, and the

direct international transmission is only through nal goods trade. The last block of Table A9

displays the results in the absence of the global production network.       The level of GDP

comovement is lower, but the magnitude of the change is relatively small.




                                                  43
          Table A9:       GDP Growth Correlations in the Static Model and Counterfactuals


                                    All Countries (N=406)                              G7 Countries (N=21)



 Baseline:    = 2.75,  = 1, j = 0.5

                           mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile                  mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile
 TFP shock                 0.005     -0.011      -0.201        0.230         0.030     0.015         -0.100       0.153
 Utilization shock         0.046     0.057       -0.168        0.277         0.126     0.124         0.008        0.185
 TFP and util. shocks      0.095     0.089       -0.151        0.380         0.197     0.244         -0.020       0.410
 Solow residual            0.051     0.032       -0.200        0.313         0.086     0.103         -0.084       0.332


 Low substitution:    = 1,  = 0.5, j = 0.5

                           mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile                  mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile
 TFP shock                 0.016     0.016       -0.199        0.244         0.049     0.037         -0.080       0.172
 Utilization shock         0.067     0.089       -0.152        0.313         0.156     0.184         0.032        0.234
 TFP and util. shocks      0.096     0.092       -0.148        0.373         0.198     0.207         0.005        0.412
 Solow residual            0.061     0.038       -0.179        0.317         0.126     0.165         -0.032       0.357


 Elastic factor supply:    = 2.75,  = 1, j = 0.75

                           mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile                  mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile
 TFP shock                 0.012     0.005       -0.202        0.243         0.038     0.018         -0.081       0.165
 Utilization shock         0.049     0.053       -0.173        0.280         0.128     0.113         0.001        0.208
 TFP and util. shocks      0.111     0.096       -0.141        0.434         0.282     0.307         0.039        0.449
 Solow residual            0.058     0.037       -0.194        0.318         0.103     0.119         -0.076       0.329


 Max transmission:      = 1,  = 0.5, j = 0.75

                           mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile                  mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile
 TFP shock                 0.036     0.041       -0.189        0.265         0.078     0.063         -0.065       0.210
 Utilization shock         0.091     0.104       -0.111        0.327         0.190     0.168         0.067        0.308
 TFP and util. shocks      0.115     0.107       -0.135        0.411         0.306     0.376         0.080        0.487
 Solow residual            0.081     0.075       -0.151        0.342         0.185     0.236         0.019        0.380




 No input network (baseline parameters)



                           mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile                  mean median 25 pctile 75 pctile
 TFP shock                 0.001     -0.005      -0.214        0.242         0.028     0.021         -0.124       0.152
 Utilization shock         0.032     0.044       -0.197        0.270         0.120     0.147         -0.014       0.185
 TFP and util. shocks      0.071     0.071       -0.181        0.346         0.122     0.133         -0.090       0.327
 Solow residual            0.046     0.037       -0.192        0.307         0.077     0.097         -0.096       0.312



Notes: This table presents the summary statistics of the correlations of the model   d ln Ynt   in the full sample for
1995-2007 (left panel), and the G7 countries for 1978-2007 (right panel), in the static model for various elasticity
                                                          44
combinations.
       Table A10:        GDP Growth Correlations in the Dynamic Model and Counterfactuals


    Baseline:    = 2.75,  = 1, j = 0.5,  n = 4                        mean    median      25 pctile      75 pctile
    TFP shock                                                         0.002   -0.005            -0.175      0.178

    Utilization shock                                                 0.132    0.099            -0.010      0.218

    TFP and utilization shocks                                        0.264    0.305            0.051       0.484

    Solow residual                                                    0.065    0.081            -0.128      0.285


    Low employment elasticity:     = 2.75,  = 1, j = 0.5,  n = 6      mean    median      25 pctile      75 pctile
    TFP shock                                                         0.007   -0.018            -0.186      0.168

    Utilization shock                                                 0.125    0.091            -0.018      0.195

    TFP and utilization shocks                                        0.248    0.294            0.054       0.470

    Solow residual                                                    0.067    0.079            -0.114      0.294


    High employment elasticity:    = 2.75,  = 1, j = 0.5,  n = 2      mean    median      25 pctile      75 pctile
    TFP shock                                                         0.000    0.023            -0.210      0.149

    Utilization shock                                                 0.166    0.123            0.049       0.280

    TFP and utilization shocks                                        0.304    0.369            0.093       0.513

    Solow residual                                                    0.077    0.122            -0.182      0.273



Notes: This table presents the summary statistics of the correlations of the model   d ln Ynt   for the G7 countries for
1978-2007 in the dynamic model for various elasticity combinations.




                                                        45
