                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHAT DETERMINES CONSUMER FINANCIAL DISTRESS? PLACE- AND PERSON-BASED
                             FACTORS

                                        Benjamin J. Keys
                                         Neale Mahoney
                                          Hanbin Yang

                                      Working Paper 26808
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26808


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




 The results in this paper were calculated (or derived) based on credit data provided by
 TransUnion, a global information solutions company, through a relationship with the Kilts Center
 for Marketing at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. All views expressed and
 any errors contained in this paper are solely those of the authors. We thank Xuyang Xia for
 excellent research assistance and seminar audiences at the Bank of England, the Central Bank of
 Ireland, Dartmouth, Georgetown, Imperial College London, the J.P. Morgan Chase Institute,
 Kellogg, NYU-Stern, Washington University, and the Wharton School for helpful comments.
 Keys thanks the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center for financial
 support. Mahoney acknowledges support from the Initiative on Global Markets at the University
 of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
 not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Benjamin J. Keys, Neale Mahoney, and Hanbin Yang. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
 provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Determines Consumer Financial Distress? Place- and Person-Based Factors
Benjamin J. Keys, Neale Mahoney, and Hanbin Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 26808
February 2020
JEL No. G5,G51,K35

                                         ABSTRACT

We use credit report data for a representative sample of 35 million individuals over 2000-2016 to
examine consumer financial distress in the United States. We show there are large, persistent
geographic disparities in consumer financial distress, with low levels in the Upper Midwest and
high levels in the Deep South. To better understand these patterns, we conduct a "movers"
analysis that examines how financial distress evolves when people move to places with different
levels of financial distress. For collections and default, there is only weak convergence
following a move, suggesting these types of financial distress are not primarily caused by place-
based factors (such as local economic conditions, loan supply, and state laws) but instead reflect
person-based characteristics (such as financial literacy and risk preferences). In contrast, for
personal bankruptcy, we find a sizable place-based effect, which is consistent with anecdotal
evidence on how local legal factors influence the bankruptcy filing decision. Individual
characteristics determine whether you get into financial distress, while place-based factors
determine whether you use bankruptcy to get out.

Benjamin J. Keys                                Hanbin Yang
Department of Real Estate                       Harvard University
The Wharton School                              hanbin.v.yang@gmail.com
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
benkeys@wharton.upenn.edu

Neale Mahoney
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Neale.Mahoney@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
Consumer financial distress in the United States is high in both absolute and relative terms.

In credit report data, one-third of individuals have at least one debt in collections and

nearly 5% have declared bankruptcy in the last 7 years.1 While there is no perfect data for

relative comparisons, the available data indicate that financial distress is much higher in

the U.S. than Europe.2

      In this paper, we aim to advance our understanding of consumer financial distress in

the U.S. by examining patterns in financial distress across geographic areas. We measure

financial distress using a nationally representative panel of TransUnion credit report data

that tracks approximately 35 million individuals on a monthly basis over 2000-2016. To

the best of our knowledge, this dataset is the largest individual-level credit report dataset

made available to researchers.

      We focus our analysis on three common metrics of financial distress ­ debt in collec-

tions, credit card non-payment, and personal bankruptcy. We emphasize these three met-

rics because our aim is to observe financial distress for the broadest possible segment of the

population. Other measures ­ such as home foreclosures or auto repossessions ­ provide

a narrower window on financial distress because these products are held by a smaller and

more affluent sample of the population.

      The first part of our paper documents large and persistent geographic disparities in

financial distress between the Upper Midwest and Deep South regions of the country.3

In the Deep South, 44% of people with a credit report have an unpaid debt in collections

versus 24% in the Upper Midwest. Similarly, measures of credit card non-payment and

bankruptcy are 40% to 50% higher in the Deep South as the Upper Midwest.

      The main part of the paper aims to better understand what determines these ge-
    1 Authors'calculations using credit bureau data from June 2015 described below.
    2 For
        the sake of comparability, it is useful to rely on survey data from similar years. According to the
2007 Survey of Consumer Finances, 20.8% of U.S. households are late on their debt payments (https:
//www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2014/articles/scf/scf.htm). In contrast, the EU-
SILC (Statistics on Income and Living Conditions) 2008 ad hoc module indicates a median rate of arrears
across E.U. countries of 3.2% on mortgage loans and 1.2% on non-mortgage loans (http://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/web/income-and-living-conditions/data/ad-hoc-modules).
   3 We define the Upper Midwest as Iowa, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, and the

Upper Peninsula of Michigan and the Deep South as Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi,
and South Carolina.


                                                    1
ographic disparities. Much of the existing research on financial distress can be sepa-

rated into two categories. One category emphasizes local institutional and economic fac-

tors, such as state-level bankruptcy laws (e.g., Fay, Hurst and White, 2002; Agarwal, Liu

and Mielnicki, 2003; Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt, 2007; Auclert, Dobbie and Goldsmith-

Pinkham, 2019) and shocks to the local economy (e.g., Agarwal and Liu, 2003; Sullivan,

2008; Keys, 2018). A second category emphasizes individual characteristics, such as pref-

erence parameters (e.g., discount rates, risk preference, sigma) and behavioral factors (e.g.,

inattention, financial literacy).4

     We quantify the relative importance of these categories using a "movers" research de-

sign that examines how financial distress evolves when individuals move to places with

differential levels of financial distress. Consider an individual who moves from a high

financial distress area to a low financial distress area. The analysis asks: To what extent

does the mover's outcome transition from the average outcome in their origin to the aver-

age outcome in their destination? If local institutional and economic factors are important,

we would expect outcomes to converge to those in the new location. If financial distress

is determined by individual characteristics, we would not expect any convergence. In

keeping with movers design literature, we will sometimes refer to local institutional and

economic factors as "place effects" and individual characteristics as "person effects" (e.g.,

Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams, 2016).

     We operationalize this movers research design by estimating event-study regressions

of a given outcome on the "size of the move," defined as the average difference in that

outcome between the origin and destination areas, along with individual and time fixed

effects, and other controls. We show robustness to defining the size of the move using

narrower and broader levels of geographic aggregation.

     The identifying assumption for the movers research design is the standard parallel

trends assumption ­ conditional on controls, the size of the move is uncorrelated with

trends in the outcome. A natural concern is that people move to less expensive and poten-

tially more distressed locations in response to persistent negative shocks to their economic
   4 See, for example, Gross and Souleles (2002) on stigma, Agarwal, Chomsisengphet and Liu (2011) on "in-

dividual social capital" (as proxied by mobility, rural residency, homeownership, marital status, and borrower
age), and Gerardi, Goette and Meier (2013) on financial literacy.


                                                      2
circumstances (e.g., job loss) or conversely move to economically vibrant locations in re-

sponse to persistent positive shocks. We provide three pieces of evidence in support of our

identifying assumption.

    First, we show there is no correlation between the size of the move and the pre-move

trend in our outcomes. For instance, in our event study plots, there is no evidence of an

effect prior to the move, and an effect that occurs fairly precisely, though gradually, after

the move takes place.5

    Second, we show that we get similar results when we exclude potentially problematic

variation. To address concerns about bias from origin-specific shocks, we isolate variation

from individuals who move "from the same origin" to destinations with different finan-

cial distress. To address concerns about bias from destination-specific shocks, we isolate

the complementary variation from individuals who move "to the same destination" from

origins with differential financial distress.

    Third, while we believe our research design is valid, the most likely violation of our

identifying assumption would bias upwards our place-based effects. This would occur

if moves to more distressed areas were precipitated by negative shocks, such as job loss,

that directly cause financial distress. The small place-based effects for debt in collections

and credit card non-payment (discussed below) reduce our concerns about bias of this

form. Because the place-based effects have a theoretical lower bound of zero, the small

estimates impose a fairly tight upper bound on the degree of upward bias, at least for

these outcomes.

    We find that debt in collections and our credit card non-payment measures converge

by less than 10% at 6 years post move. In other words, the place-based component accounts

for less than one-tenth of the geographic variation in financial distress, while the person-

based component accounts for the remaining nine-tenths.

    The small convergence for debt in collections masks a substantially larger place-based

component of roughly 20% for medical debt in collections. This is consistent with the

heterogeneous collection practices of local medical providers (e.g., doctors offices and hos-
   5 With monthly updates of zip code based on the mailing address of the individual, the depersonalized

credit report data allows us to closely track household location.



                                                   3
pitals) having a meaningful impact on overall debt in collections. However, taken together,

these results imply that for collections and default, individual characteristics are the dom-

inant force.

     In stark contrast to the results discussed above, we find a sizable place-based compo-

nent for the likelihood of filing for bankruptcy. At 6 years after a move, bankruptcy filing

rates converge by roughly one-quarter of the origin-destination difference for Chapter 7

and one-third of the difference for Chapter 13.

     Heterogeneity analysis suggests that the Chapter 13 results reflect an underlying infor-

mational theory of geographic variation. Under an informational theory, when individuals

move to a place with higher Chapter 13 filing rates, they learn about Chapter 13 and there

is an increase in the rate of filing. When individuals move to locations with lower Chapter

13 filing rates, they do not unlearn what they previously knew, and so there is not a sym-

metric decrease in filing. We find that Chapter 13 effects are more than twice as large for

moves to places with higher Chapter 13 filing rates than moves to places with lower filing

rates. This type of informational theory is supported by previous anecdotal evidence on

the importance of lawyer networks and legal traditions in the Chapter 13 filing decision

(Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook, 1994; Jacoby, 2014) and parallels a finding in Chetty,

Friedman and Saez (2013), who document a similar asymmetry in take-up of the earned

income tax credit.6

     To summarize our findings in one sentence: Individual characteristics determine whether

you get into financial distress, while place-based factors determine whether you use bankruptcy

to get out.

     Taken together, this set of facts helps prioritize competing theories of financial distress,

and is thus useful for guiding future research and policy discussions. A large literature in

economics and finance ­ including work by ourselves ­ has examined the effects of local

institutional factors (e.g., state laws, local lending practices) on credit market outcomes.7

Our finding of statistically significant place-based effects is consistent with the results from
   6 Unlike prior work, we do not find any persistent correlation between our place effects and local or eco-
nomic factors. We discuss these results and their interpretation in Section 5.
  7 See, for instance, Gropp, Scholz and White (1997); Pence (2006); Dick and Lehnert (2010); Mahoney (2015);

Han, Keys and Li (2017).



                                                     4
this literature. However, with the exception of bankruptcy, our finding that place-based

factors only account for a small share of the geographic differences suggests that these

factors are only of limited quantitative importance for understanding the substantial geo-

graphic variation in financial distress we document.

      Conversely, the large person-based components for these outcomes suggest an impor-

tant role for persistent individual characteristics in explaining the observed geographic

variation in financial distress. Such characteristics may include financial literacy and hu-

man capital; household wealth and intergenerational transfers; and risk preferences, de-

fault stigma, or discount rates. These findings are consistent with new evidence on the per-

sistence of financial distress at the individual level (Athreya, Mustre-del Río and Sánchez,

forthcoming) and are germane to the broader discussion on the determinants of consumer

financial distress (Dynan, 2009; Porter, 2012).

      Finally, our research adds a new finance-related dimension to a rapidly growing lit-

erature that seeks to separate geographic and institutional factors from individual char-

acteristics using movers designs. This literature includes research on brand preferences

(Bronnenberg, Dube and Gentzkow, 2012), health care costs and outcomes (Finkelstein,

Gentzkow and Williams, 2016, 2018, 2019), and intergenerational mobility (Chetty and

Hendren, 2018a,b), among other topics.

      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data and

presents summary statistics on our measures of financial distress. Section 3 documents the

geographic variation in financial distress. Section 4 provides the econometric methodology

of our movers approach. Section 5 conducts the analysis that decomposes the variation in

financial distress into person- and place-based components. Section 6 concludes.


2     Data

2.1    Credit Report Data

We measure financial distress using a monthly panel of credit reports over 2000­2016 from

TransUnion, one of the three national credit reporting agencies. The panel is based on a

random 10% sample of individuals with TransUnion credit records in 2000. In each month,



                                              5
a small percentage of individuals leave the panel (e.g., due to death). To maintain the

representativeness of the data, each month a random 10% sample of individuals with new

credit reports is added to the panel.

     In the average month, we observe data for 35.6 million individuals. We drop individ-

uals if they have missing age information. Most of these individuals have very little credit

utilization. We also drop individuals who are older than 80 or younger than 20. In the

average month, the resulting sample has 30.1 million individuals.

     For each individual × month observation, we observe two types of data. First, we ob-

serve individual-level information, including zip code, age, credit score, and aggregated

data on loans (e.g., aggregate credit card balances).8 Second, we observe line-item infor-

mation on trades (e.g., specific credit cards), debts in collection, and public records (e.g,

bankruptcies). We use these data to construct our primary measures of financial distress.

More detail on variable construction is provided in Appendix Section A.


   · Debt in collections: We construct indicators for whether an individual has at least

      one debt currently in collections, at least one medical debt currently in collections,

      and at least one non-medical debt currently in collections. We also construct mea-

      sures of the collection balance overall, and separately by medical and non-medical

      debt.9

   · Credit card not current: We define an indicator for credit card not current as taking

      a value of 1 if the individual has at least one credit card that is 30 days or more past

      due (30+ DPD), charged off, or in collections. We view this variable ­ which includes

      accounts that have been charged off or are in collections ­ as measuring financial

      distress from the perspective of consumers. Chargeoffs and unpaid collections can

      remain on consumer credit reports for up to 7 years if they are not paid or other-
   8 TransUnion   receives updated addresses from data furnishers (e.g., lenders) on a monthly basis. Indi-
viduals typically provide their new address to their lenders, who in turn will supply that information to
TransUnion. The majority of address updates occur through this channel. Individuals sometimes also contact
TransUnion Consumer Relations to update their address information.
   9 Because collections are not automatically removed from credit reports when they are paid, we only include

collection accounts that are not yet paid in full. We also drop collections with original balance smaller than
$100 to avoid small-dollar nuisance accounts. Accounts with original balances smaller than $100 are similarly
ignored by FICO Score 8: https://www.myfico.com/credit-education/credit-scores/fico-
score-versions


                                                      6
        wise removed. We construct this measure for all individuals with a credit report and

        conditional on those with a credit card.

        For some of our analysis, we also consider an alternative credit card delinquency

        measure, which takes a value of 1 if the individual has at least one credit card that

        is 30 days or more past due (30+ DPD) but has not been classified as charged off or

        in collections. We view this variable ­ which excludes chargeoffs and collections ­ as

        measuring financial distress from the perspective of credit card issuers (e.g., banks).

        Issuers typically charge off accounts when they are roughly 180 days past due (180+

        DPD). At this point, the account is no longer a liability to the issuer and therefore

        should not be counted as contributing to an issuer's financial risk.

      · Bankruptcy: We construct an indicator for whether the individual has declared bankruptcy

        in the last 3 years, and separate indicators for whether they have filed under Chapter

        7 or Chapter 13 of the bankruptcy code in the last 3 years. We use a 3-year window

        to smooth over noise in more high-frequency measures.


      As mentioned in the introduction, we focus on these measures because they provide

the broadest possible window into financial behavior. Other financial products ­ such

as home loans and auto loans ­ are held by a smaller and less representative sample of

the general population, and defaults on these products provide a narrower window into

financial distress.

2.2     Summary Statistics

Table 1 shows summary statistics for our key measures of financial distress, and other

measures we use in robustness analysis, as of June 2015.10

      Debt in collections (1+ debt in collections) are held by 34.1% of the sample, with 22.1%

holding some medical debt and 24.2% holding some non-medical debt in collections. Un-

conditional collection balances are $1,434 on average, implying that conditional on being

positive, collection balances average $4,205.
  10 We use the midpoint of 2015, rather than the start or end of the year, to avoid the unrepresentativeness of

the holiday period.




                                                       7
       Our estimate of the percentage of individuals with debt in collections compares well

to other sources. Using data from an unnamed major credit bureau, the Urban Institute

reports that 33% of individuals have at least one debt in collections in 2016 (Urban Institute,

2019). In a nationally-representative survey conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation /

New York Times, 27% percent of 18-to-64 year olds report being contacted by a collection

agency in the prior 12 months (Hamel et al., 2016).

       Credit card not current (30+ DPD, charge offs, or in collections) is 12.5% for the entire

sample, and 17.5% conditional on having a credit card. Delinquency (30+DPD but not

charged off, or in collections) rates are much lower, reflecting the fact that accounts spend

much less time in delinquency than charged off or in collections.11

       Over the last 3 years, our data indicate that 14.8 in 1,000 individuals have filed for

bankruptcy, with 10.5 in 1,000 filing under Chapter 7 and 4.5 in 1,000 filing under Chapter

13. The overall bankruptcy rate is identical to that reported in New York Fed's Consumer

Credit Panel over this time period (NYFed, 2019).12


3      Geographic Variation
In this section, we discuss the sharp geographic disparities in financial distress across re-

gions within the United States. Figure 1 presents maps of our key measures. The maps are

based on June 2015 data aggregated to the commuting zone (CZ) level.13 Table 2 shows

summary statistics for these CZ-level data, also from June 2015. In this table, we weight

the CZ-level data by the number of individual-level observations in each CZ so that the

statistics are representative of the underlying individual-level data.

       Panel A of Figure 1 shows the percent of individuals with debt in collections (1+ debt

in collections). The map shows strikingly high rates of financial distress in the Deep South
    11 For
         instance, an account that is never paid would spend approximately 5 months in delinquency (30 to
180 days past due) and 84 months charged off or in collections (the 7 years from when the account is charged
off until when the flag is removed), a 17 to 1 ratio. We estimate delinquency rates of 2.6% for the entire sample,
and 3.6% conditional on having a credit card, which is higher than what is implied by this ratio. This is almost
identical to the 3.5% rate reported in TransUnion (2019), albeit for a more recent time period.
  12 The rate of Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcies sum to greater than the combined bankruptcy rate be-

cause individuals sometimes file under Chapter 13 and then Chapter 7 in close succession. This is colloquially
known as filing under "Chapter 20."
  13 Commuting zones are clusters of counties characterized by strong within-cluster commuting ties. There

are 741 CZs in the United States. Unlike metropolitan statistical area (MSA) designations, CZs cover the entire
landmass of the United States.


                                                        8
and low rates in the Upper Midwest.14 Specifically, Table 2 indicates that the percentage

of individuals with debt in collections is 83% higher in the Deep South than the Upper

Midwest (43.5% vs. 23.8%).

     The sharp geographic differences are apparent for medical and non-medical debt in

collections (Appendix Figure A1). However, as shown in Table 2, the differences are larger

for medical debt (31.6% vs. 14.4%) than for non-medical debt in collections (29.1% vs.

17.4%). The differences between the Deep South and Upper Midwest are proportionally

similar when we examine average collection balances, overall and separately for medical

and non-medical debt. The maps for these outcomes are somewhat less crisp, partially due

to the increased noisiness of these measures (Appendix Figure A2).

     Panel B of Figure 1 shows the percentage of individuals with at least one credit card

that is not current (30+ DPD, charged off, or in collections). Like debt in collections, there

is a sharp geographic disparity, with credit card not current rates 51% higher in the Deep

South than in the Upper Midwest (13.4% vs. 8.9%). We focus on credit cards because

they are widely held (71% of individuals in our data). However, as shown in Panel A

of Appendix Figure A3, credit card holding rates are lower in the Deep South. Thus, if

we condition on having a card, the difference in credit card not current grows to 84%

(21.4% vs. 11.6%). There are qualitatively similar geographic disparities in credit card

delinquencies (30+ DPD but not charged off or in collections), although the magnitudes

are much smaller.15

     We next turn to bankruptcy filings, which, as discussed in Section 2, are measured as

filings over the last 3 years per 1,000 people. As shown in Table 2, overall bankruptcy

filings are 37% higher in the Deep South than in the Upper Midwest (19.8 vs. 14.5 per

1,000).16 However, as shown in Panels C and D of Figure 1, these overall numbers mask

large differences by chapter. Chapter 13 filing rates are almost 4 times higher in the Deep

South than the Upper Midwest (10.8 vs. 2.8 per 1,000). Chapter 7 filings, on the other hand,

are concentrated in a region that stretches from Michigan in the north through Indiana and
  14 As we mention in Section 1, we define the Deep South as Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Missis-
sippi, and South Carolina, and the Upper Midwest as Iowa, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wiscon-
sin, and the upper peninsula of Michigan.
  15 A map of credit card delinquencies is shown in Panel A of Appendix Figure A4.
  16 A map of overall bankruptcy rates is shown in Panel B of Appendix Figure A4.



                                                    9
Ohio to Kentucky and Tennessee in the south. This alternative pattern means that Chapter

7 rates are 23% lower in the Deep South than in the Upper Midwest (9.2 vs. 11.9 per 1,000).

Alternatively put, while Chapter 13 accounts for 30% of bankruptcies nationwide, Chapter

13 accounts for 55% in the Deep South and only 19% in the Upper Midwest. These differ-

ences in the chapter of filing, which have been documented in prior studies, are thought

to reflect lawyer networks and differences in legal traditions (Foohey et al., 2016).

    The measures we construct are based on credit report data, and thus condition on in-

dividuals with a credit report. According to Brevoort, Grimm and Kambara (2016), 89%

of adults have a credit report, so the averages are roughly representative of the national

population. Notably, the geographic disparities we document would be even greater as

measured relative to the adult population in each region. Panel B of Appendix Figure A3

shows the number of individuals with a credit report in our data as a percentage of indi-

viduals aged 20-80 calculated from the 2015 American Community Survey. As expected,

our 10% sample of credit bureau data covers roughly 10% of the adult population. How-

ever, our coverage rates are higher in the Deep South than in the Upper Midwest (13.6%

vs 12.2%). This implies that if we adjusted for the underlying population, our measures of

financial distress would be relatively higher in the Deep South and relatively lower in the

Upper Midwest, further increasing the disparities.

    A natural question is whether these differences we document using July 2015 data are

persistent features of these geographic areas or reflect more transitory or cyclical factors.

For our key outcomes, Appendix Figure A5 plots the rank of each CZ in 2015 against the

rank in 2001. For debt in collections and credit card not current, the slope coefficients are

0.89 and 0.75 respectively, indicating that a CZ ranked 100 places higher in 2001 is ranked

89 to 75 places higher in 2015. In other words, while there is variation in the absolute level

of financial distress over the business cycle, the relative rank of geographic areas in the

U.S. is remarkably stable over time.

    For Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy, rank stability ranges from 0.55 to 0.74,

which is strong but lower than the persistence of the collections and credit card measures.

The lower persistence of the bankruptcy measures may reflect the 2005 bankruptcy re-

form (BAPCPA), which changed the incentives on both the extensive and chapter-of-filing

                                             10
margins (Mitman, 2016; Gross et al., 2018). The differences may also reflect the fact that

bankruptcy filings, and in particular Chapter 13, are more strongly related to negative

housing market shocks, which have been less persistent over time.


4    Econometric Framework
In the prior section, we documented large differences in financial distress within the U.S.,

most notably between the Deep South and Upper Midwest. In this section, we present the

econometric framework for a "movers" analysis that decomposes this variation in finan-

cial distress to place- and person-based components. The place-based component captures

local institutional and economic factors ­ such as state level bankruptcy laws and shocks

to the local economy ­ that have been emphasized by one branch of the literature. The

person-based component captures individual characteristics ­ such as preference param-

eters (discount rates, risk preference) and behavioral factors (e.g., inattention, financial

literacy) ­ that have been highlighted by other research.

     For this analysis, we restrict our sample to individuals we observe for the entire sam-

ple window and who are between 30 and 80 years of age, inclusive, in the last period.

Motivated by the CZ-level variation documented above, we also focus our analysis on in-

dividuals who move across CZs, rather than considering more local moves. Specifically,

our baseline sample restricts to individuals who had exactly one cross-CZ move, with the

move occurring between 2004 and 2007, inclusive. For these individuals, we can observe at

least 4 years of pre-move data, which is important for examining pre-existing trends, and

we can observe at least 8 years of post-move outcomes, which is enough to estimate con-

vergence after moves.17 The resulting sample consists of 145,805 movers, with a roughly

even number of moves across years.

     Let yit indicate an outcome for individual i in time period t, where time is measured

in quarters. Let r indicate "event time" or quarters relative to the move, with r = -1

indicating the last quarter in the origin and with r = 0 indicating the first quarter in the

destination location. For each outcome and individual i, we construct our measure of the
  17 Restricting the sample to moves that occur in 2007 or earlier also avoids moves that were precipitated by

the financial crisis. We discuss robustness to including these movers below.




                                                     11
size of the move, i , as the average difference in the outcome between non-movers in the

destination and the origin.18 For instance, an individual moving from a very low to a

very high average collections region would have a large, positive i . Since we restrict to

individuals with one move, an individual is associated with a single value of i for each

outcome.

     In our baseline specification, we construct i as the average difference between the

outcome for non-movers in the origin and destination zipcodes. Among the moves, the

median origin or destination has 3,224 non-movers. Appendix Figure A6 shows a his-

togram of our baseline measure of i . We discuss robustness to alternative measures of i

below.

     Our baseline specification is


                         yit = i + y + q + r +                       r · i + xit  +   it                     (1)
                                                            r = -1


where i are individual fixed effects, y are calendar-year fixed effects, q are calendar-

quarter fixed effects, r are event-time fixed effects, and xit are controls for 10-year age

bins.19

     The coefficients of interest are the r and are normalized to zero in the last quarter in

the origin (-1 = 0). With this normalization, r captures the degree to which outcomes

converge to those in the destination. An estimate of r = 1 indicates that outcomes have

fully converged to those in the destination location; an estimate of r = 0 indicates no

convergence. We calculate robust standard errors clustered by origin × destination CZ.

     The identifying assumption is that, conditional on the controls, the size of the move,
^i , is uncorrelated with any trends in the outcome. A natural concern is that people move


to less expensive and potentially more distressed locations in response to persistent neg-

ative shocks to their economic circumstances (e.g., job loss) or conversely move to more

economically vibrant locations in response to persistent positive shocks.
  18 In parallel to movers, we define non-movers as individuals who we observe for the entire sample window,

are between 30 and 80 years of age in the last period, and never move across zipcodes.
  19 We are unable to control for fully interacted calendar-year and calendar-quarter fixed effects because of

the collinearity between time fixed effects and the event-time fixed effects. This is a standard feature of these
type of specifications (see, e.g., discussion in Dobbie et al. (Forthcoming)).



                                                       12
    To provide support for our identifying assumption, Figure 2 shows binned scatter

plots of the pre-move change in outcomes against the size of the move. Specifically, in each

plot, the vertical axis shows average financial distress 1 year pre-move minus average

financial distress 3 years pre-move, and the horizontal axis shows i . The data is split by

ventiles of i and each point shows the average in that bin. The plots also show the line

of best fit, estimated using the underlying data, and its slope and standard error. The

plots indicate that the size and direction of the move is uncorrelated with any trends in

outcomes. In particular, the correlations are not statistically distinguishable from zero and

are small in magnitude relative to the pre-post differences discussed below.

    To provide some initial evidence for the movers effects, Figure 3 shows binned scatter

plots of the pre-post change in outcomes against the size of the move. The plots are con-

structed in the same manner as before, except that the vertical axis now shows average

financial distress 3 years post-move minus average financial distress 3 years pre-move.

Across the measures of financial distress, there is a positive and statistically significant

relationship between the size of the move and the outcome; we defer our discussion of

magnitudes to the next section. The plots indicate that a linear "dose-response" relation-

ship between the size of the move and our outcomes is a reasonable first approximation,

although we will explore sensitivity to this assumption below.

    We examine the robustness of our results to a number of modifications of our base-

line specification. One set of robustness analysis isolates variation stemming from moves

"from the same place" or moves "to the same place." For instance, the concern that ef-

fects are driven by a persistent origin-specific shock (e.g., mass layoff) can by addressed

by conditioning on individuals who moved from the same origin to destinations with dif-

ferential financial distress, thus generating different values of i . Similarly, the concern that

effects are driven by a shock at the destination (e.g., commodity boom) can be addressed

by focusing on individuals who arrived at the same destination from different origins.

    Econometrically, we isolate variation stemming from moves "from the same place"

by adding a full set of origin CZ × event-time fixed effects to Equation 1. We similarly

estimate effects for individuals who move "to the same place" by adding a full set of des-

tination CZ × event time fixed effects.

                                               13
      A second set of robustness analysis examines sensitivity to how we construct the size

of the move, i . The construction of this variable involves a natural tradeoff. If we define

the group of non-movers too broadly, they will not be a good proxy for the mover's ex-

perience. If we define the group of non-movers too narrowly, we will not have enough

sample to reliably estimate i . As discussed above, for our baseline specification we con-

structed i using non-movers who reside in the mover's destination and origin zipcodes.

Appendix Table A1 shows that for this definition, the median origin or destination we

use to construct i is based on 3,224 non-movers. However, the 5th percentile has only

353 non-movers, raising concerns about measurement error, especially for low-frequency

measures, such as Chapter 13 filings.

      Thus, as a robustness check, we construct i using broader geographic areas. Specifi-

cally, we construct versions of i using non-movers in the mover's origin and destination

county and CZ, respectively. For these measures, the 5th percentile of origin or destination

locations has 3,664 and 16,941 non-movers, respectively, virtually eliminating concerns

about measurement error (see Appendix Table A1). We also examine the sensitivity of our

results to defining i more narrowly than the baseline specification, constructing i using

non-movers in both the same zipcode and same 10-year age group as the mover. Age is the

only demographic variable available in our data, which limits our ability to construct even

finer measures. For the zipcode × age group measure, the median origin or destination

has 748 non-movers, and the 5th percentile has 90 non-movers (see Appendix Table A1).20


5     Results
In this section, we present the event-study estimates from the movers analysis. We then

probe the robustness of these estimates to alternative specifications and explore hetero-

geneity to understand the underlying mechanisms.

5.1     Event Study Estimates

Figure 4 presents event-study plots of the coefficient of interest (r ) by event time (r) for

our main outcome variables. Table 3 shows parameter estimates and standard errors for r
    20 Appendix   Figures A6-A9 show histograms of these measures of i .




                                                       14
at 6 years post-move for our baseline and alternative specifications.

     Panels A and B examine effects on debt in collections (1+ debt in collections) and credit

card not current (30+ DPD, charged off, or in collections). Prior to the move, there is

no evidence of an economically significant trend in r , providing further support for our

identifying assumption.21 After the move, the estimates of r gradually increase and then

stabilize at less than 10% at 4 to 8 years.

     The results imply that, for these outcomes, place-based factors account for a small

fraction of the geographic variation in financial distress. With our baseline specification,

shown in column 1 of Table 3, we can reject a place-based component of zero but can also

reject a place-based effect of 10% at 6 years post-move.

     Figure 5 further examines the effect on debt in collections by estimating effects on med-

ical and non-medical debt in collections (1+ medical debt in collections and 1+ non-medical

debt in collections). The results show that medical debt in collections is the primary de-

terminant of the collections effect, with a place effect of approximately 20% versus 4% for

non-medical collections. This is consistent with the heterogeneous collection practices of

local medical providers (e.g., doctors offices and hospitals) and the debt collectors they

contract with having an important impact on overall debt in collections.

     Panels C and D of Figure 4 examine effects on Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy

filings. As before, the results show no evidence of pre-trends, providing support for our

identifying assumption. In contrast to the previously examined outcomes, we find eco-

nomically large place-based effects for bankruptcy, with a place-based component of 27%

for Chapter 7 and 33% for Chapter 13 at 6 years post-move. These results are consistent

with state level bankruptcy laws (e.g., Fay, Hurst and White, 2002; Agarwal, Liu and Miel-

nicki, 2003; Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt, 2007; Auclert, Dobbie and Goldsmith-Pinkham,

2019) and local lawyer networks and legal traditions (Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook,

1994; Jacoby, 2014) playing an important role in bankruptcy filings.

     A threat to the validity of our research design is a shock that causes people to move

from a given location and has a persistent impact on their probability of financial distress.
  21 For the credit card not current variable, there is a marginally significant  at some pre-period time hori-
                                                                                  r
zons, but the effect is economically small. Adjusting for it by controlling for a pre-existing trend would make
the place-based effect marginally smaller, strengthening our interpretation of the results.


                                                      15
The lack of pre-trends provides some evidence against this concern. To more directly rule

out this threat, Column 2 of Table 3 shows estimates from a specification where we add

origin CZ × event-time controls to the baseline specification. With these controls, the esti-

mates are identified off of individuals who move "from the same place" to locations with

differential financial distress, eliminating any bias from persistent origin-specific shocks.

Column 3 addresses the complementary concern about bias from destination-specific shocks

by adding destination CZ × event-time controls to the baseline specification. While the

point estimates are not exactly the same, the patterns are very similar, with small place

effects for the collections and credit card not current measures, and larger effects for the

bankruptcy outcomes.

    Columns 4 to 6 of Table 3 examine sensitivity to constructing the size of the move at dif-

ferent levels of aggregation. Column 4 constructs i more narrowly, using all non-movers

in the same zip code and same 10-year age group as the mover. Columns 5 and 6 construct

i more broadly, using all non-movers in the same county and the same CZ, respectively.

The estimates using the zip-by-age-group i are typically smaller than the baseline esti-

mates, and are substantially smaller for bankruptcy outcomes. This is consistent with the

smaller sample size leading to measurement error in i , which attenuates the estimates to-

ward zero, with greater measurement error and attenuation for the bankruptcy outcomes

due to the low rate of filing. The county and CZ level estimates tend to be modestly larger.

As in the other robustness exercise, the results are qualitatively similar.

    As mentioned earlier, we restrict the sample to moves that occur in 2007 or earlier to

avoid including moves that were precipitated by the financial crisis. Appendix Tables A3

and A4 are based on a larger sample of moves between 2004 and 2012, and show parameter

estimates and standard errors for r at 4 years post-move. With a shorter post-move period,

the convergence effects are slightly weaker, but the general patterns are very similar.

    Taken together, this evidence reinforces the view that the general pattern of small place

effects for collections and credit card not current and larger place effects for bankruptcy is

robust.




                                              16
5.2    Heterogeneity and Correlates

To shed light on underlying mechanisms, we examine heterogeneity and correlates of the

place-based effects.

      The first form of heterogeneity we examine is based on the direction of the move. We

define a move as "positive" if an individual moves to a destination with higher financial

distress (i > 0) and "negative" if an individual moves to a destination with lower financial

distress (i < 0). Informational theories predict larger effects for positive. If, for example,

individuals learn about the benefits of filing for bankruptcy when they move to places

with higher filing rates (e.g., from peers or advertisements) but do not unlearn the benefits

if they move to places with lower filing rates, we would expect larger place-based effects

for positive moves.22

      Columns 2 and 3 of Appendix Table A2 show estimates of the place effect for pos-

itive and negative moves. The starkest difference, in absolute value, is for Chapter 13

filing, with a place-based effect of 45% for positive moves versus 19% for negative moves.

This asymmetry is consistent with the type of informational effects highlighted by previ-

ous anecdotal evidence on the importance of lawyer networks and legal traditions in the

Chapter 13 filing decision (see, e.g., Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook, 1994; Jacoby, 2014).23

There are statistically significant asymmetries for some other variables but they tend to be

economically smaller and are not always robust to alternative specifications, making us

hesitant to strongly interpret them.

      Research using movers designs in other contexts has found larger differences by the

age of the move. For example, Chetty and Hendren (2018a) find that children who moved

neighborhoods at younger ages experienced larger place-based effects, likely because they

were exposed to local schooling environment for longer. In our context, we would expect

larger impacts for younger movers to the extent that younger people are responsive to
  22 Similarly,debt trap models ­ under which it is easier to get into financial distress than get out of it ­
suggest larger effects for moves to places with higher financial distress rates (positive moves). Supply driven
models, on the other hand, predict larger effects for moves to places with lower financial distress. To the
extent the places with lower financial distress have higher credit supply, moves to lower financial distress
places raises mover's access to credit, which can lead to higher rates of default for these individuals.
  23 Note that this pattern is inconsistent with large local stigma effects (Gross and Souleles, 2002), as it is

unlikely that the potentially stigmatizing aspects of filing for bankruptcy would differ by the chapter of filing.



                                                       17
information, more influenced by peers, or more malleable in the preferences that may con-

tribute to financial distress. To examine the effects by age, columns 4 and 5 estimate the

baseline specification separately by whether the mover is less than 40-years-old at the time

of the move. Across most of the outcomes, the estimates are statistically indistinguishable

for older and younger movers, and the point estimates do not suggest any clear pattern.

       A standard practice in movers designs is to examine correlates of place-based effects

(e.g., Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams, 2016; Chetty and Hendren, 2018b). Because a

number of the correlates vary at the state level (e.g., bankruptcy exemptions), we con-

duct analysis at the state level. We recover state-level place-based effects by running two-

way fixed effects regressions of our outcomes on individual and state fixed effects. We

then project the state-level fixed effects on state-level legal factors (e.g., measures of the

generosity of bankruptcy laws, wage garnishment levels) and state-level economic factors

(e.g., median income, house values, employment).

       In Appendix Section B, we provide more details on the regression specification and

the results. To summarize our findings, we do not find any consistent patterns in this

correlational analysis. This might arise from the fact that many of our measures have the-

oretically ambiguous effects on financial distress. For instance, more consumer-friendly

bankruptcy laws could increase bankruptcy filings, because they make bankruptcy more

beneficial to filers, or reduce them, because lenders endogenously respond by reducing the

supply of credit. Similarly, better economic conditions might directly reduce financial dis-

tress but also increase borrowing amounts, offsetting the direct effect. Indeed, in the cross

section, bankruptcy filing rates are weakly inversely U-shaped in zipcode income.24 The

absence of any correlations may alternatively reflect the more standard critique that there

may be unobserved factors that are correlated with these local characteristics, clouding the

interpretation of the estimates.


6      Conclusion
In this paper, we use monthly credit report data for a representative 10% panel of individ-

uals over 2000-2016 to examine financial distress in the United States. We document large,
    24 See   Appendix Figure A17.


                                              18
persistent geographic differences in financial distress across regions, with a particularly

stark disparity between the Upper Midwest and the Deep South.

    To better understand these patterns, we conduct a movers analysis that examines how

financial distress evolves when people move to areas with different levels of financial dis-

tress. For debt in collection and our credit card outcomes, we find only weak convergence

following a move, while for bankruptcy we find fairly large place-based effects.

    These findings are helpful in weighing competing theories of financial distress. The

small place-based component for debt in collections and credit card not current indicates

that supply-side factors (e.g., state laws, local lending practices) are not a primary expla-

nation for the geographic variation in distress, and instead suggests an important role for

persistent individual characteristics in explaining the geographic variation. Such charac-

teristics include financial literacy and human capital, household wealth and intergener-

ational transfers, and variation across individuals in risk preferences, default stigma, or

discount rates.

    In contrast, the larger place-based estimates for bankruptcy, and in particular the large

place-based effects for positive moves for Chapter 13 filings, is consistent with an infor-

mational theory whereby individuals learn about Chapter 13 when they move to places

with high filing rates but do not unlearn when they move to places with low rates. This

evidence supports prior anecdotal evidence on the importance of local lawyer networks

and legal traditions in driving Chapter 13 filing decisions.




                                             19
References
Agarwal, Sumit, and Chunlin Liu. 2003. "Determinants of credit card delinquency and
 bankruptcy: Macroeconomic factors." Journal of Economics and Finance, 27(1): 75­84.

Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Lawrence Mielnicki. 2003. "Exemption laws and con-
 sumer delinquency and bankruptcy behavior: An empirical analysis of credit card data."
 The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 43(2): 273­289.

Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Chunlin Liu. 2011. "Consumer
 bankruptcy and default: The role of individual social capital." Journal of Economic Psy-
 chology, 32(4): 632­650.

Athreya, Kartik, José Mustre-del Río, and Juan M. Sánchez. forthcoming. "The Persis-
  tence of Financial Distress." The Review of Financial Studies.

Auclert, Adrien, Will S Dobbie, and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham. 2019. "Macroeconomic
 Effects of Debt Relief: Consumer Bankruptcy Protections in the Great Recession." Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research.

Brevoort, Kenneth P., Philipp Grimm, and Michelle Kambara. 2016. "Credit Invisibles
  and the Unscored." Cityscape, 18(2): 9­34.

Bronnenberg, Bart, Jean-Pierre Dube, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2012. "The Evolution
  of Brand Preferences: Evidence from Consumer Migration." American Economic Review,
  102(6): 2472­2508.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018a. "The impacts of neighborhoods on inter-
 generational mobility I: Childhood exposure effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 133(3): 1107­1162.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018b. "The impacts of neighborhoods on inter-
 generational mobility II: County-level estimates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 133(3): 1163­1228.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. "Using Differences in Knowl-
 edge across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings." American
 Economic Review, 103(7): 2683­2721.

Dick, Astrid A., and Andreas Lehnert. 2010. "Personal Bankruptcy and Credit Market
 Competition." The Journal of Finance, 65(2): 655­686.

Dobbie, Will, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Neale Mahoney, and Jae Song. Forthcoming.
 "Bad credit, no problem? Credit and labor market consequences of bad credit reports."
 Journal of Finance.

Dynan, Karen E. 2009. "Changing Household Financial Opportunities and Economic Se-
 curity." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4): 49­68.

Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J White. 2002. "The household bankruptcy decision."
  American Economic Review, 92(3): 706­718.




                                           20
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi L. Williams. 2019. "Place-Based
  Drivers of Mortality: Evidence from Migration." National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper No. 25975.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. "Sources of Geo-
  graphic Variation in Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 131(4): 1681­1726.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2018. "What Drives Prescrip-
  tion Opioid Abuse? Evidence from Migration." SIEPR Working Paper 18-028, August
  2018.

Foohey, Pamela, Robert M. Lawless, Katherine Porter, and Deborah Thorne. 2016. ""No
  Money Down" Bankruptcy." Southern California Law Review, 90: 1055.

Gerardi, Kristopher, Lorenz Goette, and Stephan Meier. 2013. "Numerical ability predicts
 mortgage default." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(28): 11267­11271.

Gropp, Reint, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle J. White. 1997. "Personal Bankruptcy and
 Credit Supply and Demand." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 217­251.

Gross, David B, and Nicholas S Souleles. 2002. "An empirical analysis of personal
 bankruptcy and delinquency." The Review of Financial Studies, 15(1): 319­347.

Gross, Tal, Raymond Kluender, Feng Liu, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang.
 2018. "The Economic Consequences of Bankruptcy Reform." MIT Working Paper.

Hamel, Liz, Mira Norton, Karen Pollitz, Larry Levitt, Gary Glaxton, and Mollyann
 Brodle. 2016. "The Burden of Medical Debt: Results from the Kaiser Family Founda-
 tion/New York Times Medical Bills Survey." Kaiser Family Foundation.

Han, Song, Benjamin J. Keys, and Geng Li. 2017. "Unsecured Credit Supply, Credit Cy-
 cles, and Regulation." The Review of Financial Studies, 31(3): 1184­1217.

Jacoby, Melissa B. 2014. "Superdelegation and Gatekeeping in Bankruptcy Courts." Temple
  Law Review, 87: 875.

Keys, Benjamin J. 2018. "The credit market consequences of job displacement." Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 100(3): 405­415.

Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. 2007. "Consumer bankruptcy: A fresh
  start." American Economic Review, 97(1): 402­418.

Lupica, Lois R. 2012. "The Consumer Bankruptcy Fee Study: Final Report." American
  Bankruptcy Institute Law Review, 20(1031): 17.

Mahoney, Neale. 2015. "Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance." American Economic Re-
 view, 105(2): 710­46.

Mitman, Kurt. 2016. "Macroeconomic Effects of Bankruptcy and Foreclosure Policies."
 American Economic Review, 106(8): 2219­55.

NYFed. 2019. "Consumer Credit Panel." New York Federal Reserve Bank.


                                           21
Pence, Karen M. 2006. "Foreclosing on Opportunity: State Laws and Mortgage Credit."
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(1): 177­182.

Porter, Katherine (Ed.). 2012. Broke: How Debt Bankrupts the Middle Class. Stanford Univer-
  sity Press.

Sullivan, James X. 2008. "Borrowing during unemployment unsecured debt as a safety
  net." Journal of human resources, 43(2): 383­412.

Sullivan, Teresa A., Elizabeth Warren, and Jay Lawrence Westbrook. 1994. "Persistence
  of Local Legal Culture: Twenty Years of Evidence from the Federal Bankruptcy Courts."
  Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy, 17: 801.

TransUnion. 2019. "Q2 2019 TransUnion Industry Insights Report." TransUnion.

Urban Institute. 2019. "Debt in America: An Interactive Map." Urban Institute.




                                            22
                                                 Figure 1: Geographic Variation in Financial Distress

                                 (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                               (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)
23




                      (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                           (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)




     Note: Figure shows CZ-level maps of financial distress. CZ means are constructed using a 10% random sample of TransUnion credit records from June
     2015. Debt in collections is an indicator for 1+ debt in collections. Credit card not current is an indictor for 1+ credit card that is 30+ DPD, charged off, or
     in collections. Bankruptcy filings are the number of individuals out of 1,000 who file for chapter 7 and 13, respectively, in the last 3 years. See Section 2 for
     more details on variable construction.
                                                   Figure 2: Pre-Move Change in Financial Distress by Size of Move

                                                          (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                                                                                      (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)
                        3                     slope = -0.008 (0.006)                                                                                                                  slope = 0.008 (0.011)




                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                        Pre-Move Change in Credit Card Not Current
    Pre-Move Change in Debt in Collections




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                 2




                                                                                                                                                           -2      -1
                     1




                                                                                                                                                   -3
         0




                                                                                                                                            -4
                        -1




                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                             -30   -25    -20     -15     -10    -5     0    5     10        15        20    25   30                                                 -15        -10           -5              0            5        10        15
                                                                                  Size of Move                                                                                                                          Size of Move



    (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                                                                                   (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)
                        10




                                              slope = -0.057 (0.042)                                                                                                                  slope = 0.039 (0.028)




                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                        Pre-Move Change in Chapter 13 Filings
    Pre-Move Change in Chapter 7 Filings
                                   5




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                         0




                                                                                                                                                        -5
               -5




                                                                                                                                             -10
      -10               -15




                                                                                                                                                              -15




                                             -25    -20     -15         -10     -5      0      5        10        15        20    25                                                 -20     -15      -10          -5         0        5       10        15   20
                                                                                  Size of Move                                                                                                                          Size of Move



Note: Figure shows binned scatter plots of the pre-move change in the outcome against the size of the move
 ^i . The vertical axis shows average financial distress 1 year pre-move minus average financial distress 3
years pre-move. The horizontal axis shows i , the average financial distress between destination and origin
zip code. The data is split by ventiles of i and each point shows the average in that bin. The plots also show
the line of best fit, estimated using the underlying data, and its slope and standard error.




                                                                                                                                   24
                                                   Figure 3: Pre-Post Change in Financial Distress by Size of Move

                                                          (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                                                                                      (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)
                        7                     slope = 0.052 (0.008)                                                                                                                   slope = 0.074 (0.017)




                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                        Pre-Post Change in Credit Card Not Current
    Pre-Post Change in Debt in Collections
                              5




                                                                                                                                                                  -2
              3




                                                                                                                                                -4
                        1




                                             -30   -25    -20     -15     -10    -5     0    5     10        15        20    25   30                                                 -15        -10           -5              0            5        10        15
                                                                                  Size of Move                                                                                                                          Size of Move



    (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                                                                                   (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)
                                              slope = 0.149 (0.045)                                                                                                                   slope = 0.328 (0.035)
                        0




                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                          Pre-Post Change in Chapter 13 Filings
    Pre-Post Change in Chapter 7 Filings




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                            -5




                                                                                                                                                      -5
            -10




                                                                                                                                        -10
                        -15




                                             -25    -20     -15         -10     -5      0      5        10        15        20    25                                                 -20     -15      -10          -5         0        5       10        15   20
                                                                                  Size of Move                                                                                                                          Size of Move



Note: Figure shows binned scatter plots of the pre-post change in the outcome against the size of the move
 ^i . The vertical axis shows average financial distress 3 years post-move minus average financial distress 3
years pre-move. The horizontal axis shows i , the average financial distress between destination and origin
zip code. The data is split by ventiles of i and each point shows the average in that bin. The plots also show
the line of best fit, estimated using the underlying data, and its slope and standard error.




                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                     Figure 4: Event-Study Plots

                                                      (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                                                               (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)




                                                                                                                                      .5
                       .5




                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                     .4




                                                                                                                  Credit Card Not Current Coefficients
    Debt in Collections Coefficients




                                                                                                                                            .3
                            .3




                                                                                                                                    .2
                     .2




                                                                                                                             .1
            .1




                                                                                                                     0
     0




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                       -.1




                                          -16   -12   -8   -4   0    4     8      12    16   20   24   28   32                                            -16   -12   -8   -4   0    4     8      12    16   20   24   28   32
                                                                Quarters Relative to Move                                                                                       Quarters Relative to Move



    (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                                                             (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)
                       .5




                                                                                                                                       .5
                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                   Chapter 13 Filings Coefficients
    Chapter 7 Filings Coefficients
                            .3




                                                                                                                                          .3
                    .2




                                                                                                                                   .2
          .1




                                                                                                                          .1
    0




                                                                                                                   0
                       -.1




                                                                                                                                       -.1




                                          -16   -12   -8   -4   0    4     8      12    16   20   24   28   32                                            -16   -12   -8   -4   0    4     8      12    16   20   24   28   32
                                                                Quarters Relative to Move                                                                                       Quarters Relative to Move



Note: Figure shows place-based effects r from event study regressions of financial distress on the size of
the move    ^i , individual and time fixed effects, and other controls. The dash lines show 95% confidence
intervals, based on standard errors clustered by origin × destination CZ.




                                                                                                             26
                                            Figure 5: Event-Study Plots: Medical and Non-Medical Collections

                                                       (A) Medical Collections                                                                                       (B) Non-Medical Collections
                       .5




                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                                                  Non-Medical Collections Coefficients
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                    .4
    Medical Collections Coefficients
                           .3




                                                                                                                                           .3
                     .2




                                                                                                                                    .2
            .1




                                                                                                                           .1
     0




                                                                                                                     0
                       -.1




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                                          -16   -12   -8   -4   0    4     8      12    16   20   24   28   32                                           -16   -12    -8   -4   0    4     8      12    16   20   24   28   32
                                                                Quarters Relative to Move                                                                                       Quarters Relative to Move



Note: Figures shows place-based effects r from event study regressions of financial distress on the size
of the move   ^i , individual and time fixed effects, and other controls. The dash lines show 95% confidence
intervals, based on standard errors clustered by origin × destination CZ.




                                                                                                             27
                                 Table 1: Financial Distress Measures
                                                     Mean         Std. Dev.   Median   Pct 75   Pct 90   Pct 95   Pct 99

      Collections

  Debt in collections (%)                             34.1          47.4        0       100      100      100      100

  Medical collections (%)                             22.1          41.5        0        0       100      100      100

  Non-medical collections (%)                         24.2          42.8        0        0       100      100      100

  Collections balance ($)                            1,434        126,675       0       606     3,401    6,748    21,234

  Medical collections balance ($)                     750          6,090        0        0      1,245    3,178    13,770

  Non-medical collections balance ($)                 684         126,521       0        0      1,445    3,218    10,993


      Credit Card

  Credit card not current (%)                         12.5          33.1        0        0       100      100      100

  Credit card not current (%, cond'l)                 17.5          38.0        0        0       100      100      100

  Credit card delinquent (%)                          2.6           15.9        0        0        0        0       100

  Credit card delinquent (%, cond'l)                  3.6           18.7        0        0        0        0       100


      Bankruptcy

  Bankruptcy filings in past 3 years (per 1,000)      14.8         120.9        0        0        0        0      1,000

  Chapter 7 filings in past 3 years (per 1,000)       10.5         101.8        0        0        0        0      1,000

  Chapter 13 filings in past 3 years (per 1,000)      4.5           67.2        0        0        0        0        0

  N                                                29,398,845

Note: Table presents summary statistics for measures of financial distress constructed using a 10% random
sample of TransUnion credit records from June 2015. Debt in collections measures are indicators for 1+ debt in
collections. Credit card not current is indictor for 1+ credit card that is 30+ DPD, charged off, or in collections.
Credit card delinquency is an indicator for 1+ credit card 30+DPD (but not charged off or in collections).
Bankruptcy filings are the number of individuals out of 1,000 who file for any bankruptcy, chapter 7, and
chapter 13, respectively, in the last 3 years. See Section 2 for more details on variable construction.




                                                             28
                        Table 2: Geographic Variation in Financial Distress
                                                   (1)      (2)        (3)     (4)    (5)      (6)          (7)
                                                                     75% -   90% -   Deep     Upper     Deep South -
                                                  Mean    Std.Dev.    25%     10%    South   Midwest   Upper Midwest

    Collections

 Debt in collections (%)                          34.1      7.9      11.5    20.8    43.5     23.8         19.8

 Medical collections (%)                          22.1      8.1      11.5    22.5    31.6     14.4         17.2

 Non-medical collections (%)                      24.2      5.2       7.1    14.1    29.1     17.4         11.7

 Collections balance ($)                          1,434     570      648     1,233   1,792    1,033         759

 Medical collections balance ($)                  750       411      523     1,037   1,140     590          549

 Non-medical collections balance ($)              684       352      338     539      652      443          209


    Credit Card

 Credit card not current (%)                      12.5      2.0       2.4     4.8    13.4      8.9          4.5

 Credit card not current (%, cond'l)              17.8      3.5       5.3     8.6    21.4     11.6          9.8

 Credit card delinquent (%)                        2.6      0.3       0.5     0.8     2.7      2.1          0.6

 Credit card delinquent (%, cond'l)                3.6      0.5       0.6     1.3     4.3      2.7          1.6


    Bankruptcy

 Bankruptcy filings in past 3 years (per 1,000)   14.8      6.4       8.7    17.8    19.8     14.5          5.3

 Chapter 7 filings in past 3 years (per 1,000)    10.5      4.6       7.5    12.1     9.2     11.9          -2.6

 Chapter 13 filings in past 3 years (per 1,000)    4.5      4.1       2.9     7.7    10.8      2.8          8.1


Note: Table presents statistics on CZ-level measures of financial distress. CZ means are constructed using a
10% random sample of TransUnion credit records from June 2015. Summary statistics are calculated using
the CZ level data, with CZs weighted by the number of individual-level observations in each CZ so means
are representative of the underlying individual-level data. The Deep South is defined as Alabama, Arkansas,
Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina and Upper Midwest as Iowa, Minnesota, North Dakota,
South Dakota, Wisconsin, and the upper peninsula of Michigan. See 1 note for more details on the financial
distress measures.




                                                             29
                                        Table 3: Event-Study Estimates
                                                              Fraction converged to outcome
                                                             at destination 6 years post move

                                     (1)        (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)        (6)
 Financial distress measures    All movers   Same origin   Same destination   Zip × age level   County level   CZ level

 Debt in collections               0.0788      0.0536           0.0611             0.0659           0.1539      0.2231
                                  (0.0095)    (0.0095)         (0.0097)           (0.0081)         (0.0141)    (0.0174)

 Medical collections               0.2042      0.1291           0.1908             0.1575           0.3036      0.3361
                                  (0.0130)    (0.0131)         (0.0133)           (0.0110)         (0.0164)    (0.0187)

 Non-medical collections           0.0409      0.0213           0.0337             0.0490           0.0956      0.1708
                                  (0.0120)    (0.0122)         (0.0123)           (0.0103)         (0.0187)    (0.0249)

 Credit card not current           0.0633      0.0611           0.0482             0.0487           0.1583      0.2244
                                  (0.0180)    (0.0182)         (0.0183)           (0.0136)         (0.0308)    (0.0409)

 Chapter 7 filings (3 years)       0.2665      0.2088           0.2212             0.0863           0.5068      0.6254
                                  (0.0500)    (0.0501)         (0.0509)           (0.0325)         (0.0897)    (0.1139)

 Chapter 13 filings (3 years)      0.3298      0.3578           0.2095             0.1097           0.4940      0.5115
                                  (0.0503)    (0.0522)         (0.0535)           (0.0422)         (0.0625)    (0.0707)


Note: Table shows place-based effects at 6 years (24 quarters) after post move. Specifically, we report 24 from
event study regressions of financial distress on the size of the move   ^i , individual and time fixed effects, and
other controls. Standard errors, clustered by origin × destination CZ, are shown in parentheses. Column (1)
shows the baseline specification. In column (2), we isolate variation from moves "from the same place" by
including fully interacted origin CZ × event time fixed effects. In column (3), we isolate variation from moves
"to the same place" by including fully interacted destination CZ × event time fixed effects. In columns (4)
to (6), we show alternative specifications where we construct    ^i using non-movers in the movers' origin and
destination zip code × 10 year age-bin, county and CZ.




                                                            30
      What Determines Consumer Financial Distress?
            Place- and Person-Based Factors
                                   Online Appendix
                  Benjamin J. Keys       Neale Mahoney       Hanbin Yang


A    Variable Definitions
Debt in collections: We use the line-item information from the collection segment to con-
struct the indicator of whether an individual has at least one debt in collections. We rely on
the Legislative Prohibited Code to construct measures for whether an individual has medi-
cal and non-medical debts in collections. Because collection accounts are not automatically
removed from credit reports when they are paid, we drop accounts that have been charged
off or paid in full. We rely on the Manner of Payment (MOP) code to separate accounts
that are in collection (9B), charged off (9) or paid in full (9P). Our collection measure only
includes 9B. We also drop accounts with original balance smaller than $100 to avoid small-
dollar nuisance accounts. Accounts with original balances smaller than $100 are similarly
ignored by FICO Score 8.25 Across unpaid collection accounts, around 2% are disputed by
customers with code (AID). Dropping these accounts have negligible impact on the frac-
tion of individuals with debt in collections, and so we do not make this adjustment.


    Collections balances: To measure the amount of debt in collections, we compute the
total collection balance amount of all collections, medical collections, and non-medical col-
lections owned by each individual. Again, we only include collection accounts not yet
paid in full with original balance greater than $100.


    Credit card not current: We use the line-item information from the trade segment to
construct this indicator of whether an individual has at least one credit card that is not
current. The "not current" status includes accounts that are 30 days or more past due (30+
PDP), charged off, or in collections. We identify the status of credit card accounts using
their MOP codes. MOP codes of 2, 3, 4, and 5 indicate that the credit card account is 30
DPD, 60 DPD, 90 DPD, and 120+ DPD, respectively. MOP code 7 is for wage earner or
similar plan. MOP codes starting with number 8 indicate that the account is currently a
repossession or was a repossession but paid in full, although this code is very rare. MOP
codes starting with number 9 indicates that the account is currently in collection, charged
off, or was a collection but paid in full.
    This variable measures financial distress from the perspective of consumers, since
chargeoffs and collections can remain on consumer credit reports for up to 7 years. We
 25 See   https://www.myfico.com/credit-education/credit-scores/fico-score-versions.


                                             31
construct this measure for all individuals with a credit report and conditional on those
with a credit card.


    Credit card delinquent: For some of our analysis, we also consider an alternative
credit card delinquency measure, which indicates whether the individual has at least one
credit card that is 30 days or more past due (30+ DPD) but has not been classified as charged
off or in collections. Similar to credit card not current, we use MOP code 2, 3, 4, and 5 to
select credit cards that are past due but not in collection or charged off.
    This variable measures financial distress from the perspective of credit card issuers
(e.g., banks). Issuers typically charge off accounts when they are roughly 180 days past
due (180+ DPD). At this point, the account is no longer a liability to the issuer and there-
fore should not be counted as contributing to an issuer's financial risk.


    Bankruptcy: We use the line-item information from the public record segments. We
use public record type code to identify bankruptcy filings and the chosen chapter (i.e. 7 vs
13). The public record segment also includes the date of filing, so we can restrict to filings
in the past 3 years to focus on relatively recent distress conditions. Since bankruptcy filings
are not nearly as common as other measures of distress above, we use the 3-year window
to smooth over noise in more high-frequency measures.

B       Correlates of Place-Based Effects
We examine correlates of our place-based effects following the methodology in Finkelstein,
Gentzkow and Williams (2016). As in our baseline movers analysis, we restrict the sample
to individuals who we observe for the entire sample window and who are between 30 and
80 years of age, inclusive, in the last period. We further restrict the samples to individu-
als who did not move at all (non-movers) or moved only once across commuting zones
(movers) between 2000 and 2016. The resulting sample contains 571,380 movers.
    As before, let i indicate individuals, t indicate time measured in quarters, and r indi-
cate event time. For a given outcome yit , we recover state-level place-based effects with
regressions of the form

                           yit = i + y + q + r + s + xit  +        it ,


where i are individual fixed effects, y are calendar-year fixed effects, q are calendar-
quarter fixed effects, r are event-time fixed effects, and xit are controls for 10-year age
bins.
    The coefficients of interest are the state fixed effects, s , and can be interpreted as the
causal effect of residing in state s on the given measure of financial distress. The state fixed
effects are identified off individuals who move across states in our sample. The identifying
assumption is that moves across states are uncorrelated with trends in the outcome.

                                              32
    We focus our analysis on the state fixed effects based on the medical debt in collections
and bankruptcy outcome variables. These are the outcomes where we find economically
significant place effects, and where there is the potential to detect meaningful correlations.
For these outcomes, we project the state-level place-based effects, s , on state-level legal
and economic factors.
    For legal factors, we consider median seizable assets, wage garnishment levels, Chap-
ter 7 fees, and Chapter 13 fees. Median seizable assets are a state-level measure of the assets
above the Chapter 7 bankruptcy exemptions in that state for the median household from
a nationally representative distribution, and are taken from Mahoney (2015). Wage gar-
nishment is the percentage of a borrower's disposable income that can be withheld to pay
back creditors, which we obtain from nolo.com.            26   Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy
fees are taken from Lupica (2012). To construct state-level measures, we aggregate the
judicial district level fees to the state level, weighting by number of observations in our
sample, and then we average fees before and after the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and
Consumer Production Act (BAPCPA), weighting by number of years that our sample falls
into the pre- and post-BAPCPA periods.
    For economic factors, we use state-level measures of median income, the percentage
who own a house, median house value, percent who own a vehicle, the percentage with
a bachelors degree or more, the percentage employed, and the percentage with health in-
surance. All of these variables are constructed from the 2011-2015 5-year sample of the
American Community Survey (ACS). We also use a state-level measure of for-profit hos-
pitals, defined as the share of for-profit hospitals weighted by bed count, from the 2014
Provider of Services (POS) file provided by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS).
    To conduct the analysis, we standardize all variables to have a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of one. Then, following Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams (2016),
we examine the correlation between the normalized place-effects and covariates using two
approaches. First, for a given outcome, we estimate separate bivariate regressions of the
place-effects on each covariate. The coefficient from these regressions is the Pearson cor-
relation coefficient. It takes on values between -1 and +1 and its square is the r2 of the
regression. Second, we report coefficients from a post-Lasso multivariate regression. For a
given outcome, we run a Lasso regression of the place effects on the full set of covariates,
with the penalty level chosen by a 4-fold cross-validation to minimize the mean squared
error. Then, for that outcome, we run an OLS regression on the set of covariates chosen by
the Lasso regression.
    Figures A10 to A12 examine correlates with the medical debt, Chapter 7 bankruptcy
and Chapter 13 bankruptcy place effects. In each figure, the left panel shows the coeffi-
  26 The federal limit for wage garnishment is 25%, with some states imposing a lower limit. These limits

usually apply for debts other than child support, taxes, and student loans.



                                                   33
cients from the separate bivariate regressions and the right panel shows the coefficients
from the multivariate regression with the covariates chosen by a Lasso regression. The
results are hard to interpret. While there are correlations that are consistent with existing
theories, there are also patterns that suggest important omitted variables. For instance, the
strong correlation between wage garnishment and Chapter 7 bankruptcy place effects is
consistent with theories that wage garnishment "pushes" people into bankruptcy. On the
other hand, the fact that there is a correlation between for-profit hospitals and the Chapter
13 filing place effects, but not the Chapter 7 filings place effects, strikes us as spurious. In
our view, the results are due to the fact that places with more for-profit hospitals, which
are typically in the Deep South, also have distinctive legal cultures which drive the corre-
lations.
    To potentially improve interpretation, we conduct additional analysis of the bankruptcy
place effects that allows us to separately examine the extensive margin and the chapter of
filing margin. Figure A13 shows results for a combined bankruptcy outcome, which cap-
tures the extensive margin decision. In the bivariate regressions, wage garnishment is
associated with high bankruptcy place effects, while Chapter 7 filing fees are associated
with lower bankruptcy place effects. The local economic factors have mixed effects. This
is consistent with the fairly weak, inverse-U-shaped cross sectional relationship between
bankruptcy rates and zip code income.27 Figure A14 and A15 show results for the Chapter
7 and Chapter 13 place effects, including the combined bankruptcy place effect as an ad-
ditional covariate, so that the resulting partial correlations can be interpreted as the effects
on the chapter of filing. As in the prior analysis, the results are hard to interpret.

C    Flag Removal Event Study
Our credit card not current variable includes chargeoffs and unpaid debt in collections that
are up to 7 years old. To assess whether a 7-year-old flag still matters for consumer access
to credit, we conduct event study analysis where we examine the effect of the legislatively
required removal of these flags at a 7-year time horizon on credit scores.
    We use the 10% sample from TransUnion at quarterly frequency from Q3 2000 to Q3
2016. We restrict the sample to individuals with valid credit scores in all quarters. We also
require individuals to be between 30- and 80-years-old at the end of the panel.
    We study the removal of flags for whether the account is charged off, in collections, or
other related category.28 For these categories, we define flag removal as occurring when the
number of flagged credit card accounts decreases from a positive number in the previous
quarter to zero in the current quarter.
    We include six quarters before and after the flag removal to capture any pre-trends
and to measure the persistence of the flag removal effect. To avoid potential confounds,
 27 See   Appendix Figure A17.
 28 Specifically,
                we include MOP code 8, 8A, 8D, 8P, 8R, 9, 9B, 9P.



                                                     34
we only consider events when there is no other change in the number of flagged credit
card accounts during the six quarters before and after the removal.
    To facilitate the analysis, we aggregate together individuals who have their flags re-
moved in the same calendar quarter. Let i denote these flag-removal cohorts, t calendar
time measured in quarters, and s event time measured in quarters, which we normalize to
0 in the quarter of flag removal. Letting yit denote credit scores, we estimate event study
regressions of the form


                             yit = i + t +  · s +     s     +   it                           (2)
                                                     s 0


where i are cohort fixed effects, t are calendar time fixed effects, and  is a linear trend
in event-time s. The coefficients of interest s capture the incremental effect of flag removal
on credit scores, net of the linear trend. Standard errors are clustered at individual level.
    Figure A16 shows the results of this analysis. The dashed line corresponds to the event
time trend  . The solid line is constructed by adding the coefficients s to this trend. The
dashed blue lines represent 95% confidence intervals. In the top left corner, we display the
immediate removal effect on credit score (0 ).
    The plot shows a sharp, highly significant 5-point increase in credit scores. Relative
to the linear counterfactual, the increase is fairly persistent over the 6 quarters after flag
removal. This analysis indicates that the chargeoffs and unpaid debt in collections in-
cluded in our credit card not current measure of financial distress are important for access
to credit, as the removal of these flags increases credit scores and thus access to loans.




                                              35
Figure A1: Geographic Variation in Medical and Non-Medical Debt in Collections

                                        (A) Medical Collections (%)




                                      (B) Non-Medical Collections (%)




Note: Figure shows maps based on data aggregated to the commuting zone (CZ) level. CZ means are
constructed using a 10% random sample of TransUnion credit records from June 2015. Medical collections
is an indicator for 1+ medical debt in collections. Non-medical collections is an indicator for 1+ non-medical
debt in collections. See Section 2 for more details on variable construction.




                                                     36
                Figure A2: Geographic Variation in Collections Balances

                                         (A) Collection Balance ($)




                                     (B) Medical Collection Balance ($)




                                  (C) Non-Medical Collection Balance ($)




Note: Figure shows maps based on data aggregated to the commuting zone (CZ) level. CZ means are con-
structed using a 10% random sample of TransUnion credit records from June 2015. Collections balance is
the average balance of debt in collections. Medical and non-medical collections balances are the average
balances of medical and non-medical debt in collections. See Section 2 for more details on variable construc-
tion.

                                                     37
Figure A3: Geographic Variation in Percent with Credit Cards and Credit Reports

                                       (A) Percent with Credit Card




                               (B) Percent of Population with Credit Report




Note: Figure shows maps based on data aggregated to the commuting zone (CZ) level. Panel A shows the
percent of individuals with a credit card in our credit report data. Panel B shows the ratio of observations
in our credit report data to the the total population between 20 and 80 reported in the 2015 American Com-
munity Survey. The credit report data are constructed using a 10% random sample of TransUnion credit
records from June 2015, aggregated to the Commuting Zone level.




                                                    38
     Figure A4: Geographic Variation in Delinquency and Bankruptcy Filings

                                   (A) Credit Card Delinquency (%)




                            (B) Bankruptcy Filings in Past 3 Years (per 1,000)




Note: Figure shows maps based on data aggregated to the commuting zone (CZ) level. CZ means are con-
structed using a 10% random sample of TransUnion credit records from June 2015. Credit card delinquency
is an indicator for 1+ credit card (30+DPD but not charged off or in collections).




                                                   39
                        Figure A5: Rank Stability in Financial Distress

                  (A) Debt in Collections                                (B) Credit Card Not Current




      (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)        (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)




Note: Figures show scatter plots of the ordinal ranking of commuting zones in 2015 versus 2001 for our
financial distress measures. The 45 degree line is shown in red.




                                                          40
                          Figure A6: Histogram of Size of Move i at Zip Code Level

                          (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                                             (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)




                                                                                                       10
                                                                           mean = 0.3                                                                              mean = -0.1
              10

                                                                            sd = 13.1                                                                                 sd = 6.6




                                                                                                       8
              8




                                                                                                       6
          6
    Percent




                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                       4
              4




                                                                                                       2
              2
              0




                                                                                                       0
                    -50                         0                                50                         -40         -20                 0                 20            40
                                Size of Move in Debt in Collections                                                      Size of Move in Credit Card Not Current



    (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                                        (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)
              10




                                                                           mean = 0.1                                                                              mean = 0.2
                                                                             sd = 9.5                                                                                sd = 8.1



                                                                                                       15
              8




                                                                                                       10
              6




                                                                                             Percent
    Percent
              4




                                                                                                       5
              2
              0




                                                                                                       0




                   -40        -20                   0                 20           40                       -40         -20                0                  20            40
                                    Size of Move in Chapter 7 Filings                                                      Size of Move in Chapter 13 Filings



Note: Figure shows histogram of size of move i computed at zip code level. We keep i that are within ± 4
standard deviations from the mean.




                                                                                        41
 Figure A7: Histogram of Size of Move i at Zip Code × 10 Year Age Bin Level

                         (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                                       (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)
              15
                                                                    mean = 0.2                                                                              mean = -0.1
                                                                     sd = 15.9                                                                                 sd = 9.0




                                                                                                10
                                                                                                8
              10




                                                                                            6
                                                                                      Percent
    Percent




                                                                                                4
              5




                                                                                                2
              0




                                                                                                0
                   -50                        0                      50                              -40         -20                 0                 20            40
                              Size of Move in Debt in Collections                                                 Size of Move in Credit Card Not Current



    (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                                 (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)
              15




                                                                                                30
                                                                    mean = 0.1                                                                              mean = 0.2
                                                                     sd = 15.7                                                                               sd = 12.1
              10




                                                                                                20
    Percent




                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                                10
              5
              0




                                                                                                0




                   -50                         0                     50                              -50                            0                                50
                               Size of Move in Chapter 7 Filings                                                    Size of Move in Chapter 13 Filings



Note: Figure shows histogram of size of move i computed at zip code × 10 year age bin level. We keep i
that are within ± 4 standard deviations from the mean.




                                                                                 42
                                Figure A8: Histogram of Size of Move i at County Level

                               (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                                              (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)
              10




                                                                                                           10
                                                                               mean = 1.3                                                                                mean = 0.3
                                                                                 sd = 9.1                                                                                  sd = 4.2
              8




                                                                                                           8
              6




                                                                                                           6
    Percent




                                                                                                 Percent
              4




                                                                                                           4
              2




                                                                                                           2
              0




                                                                                                           0
                   -40             -20                0                   20             40                     -20           -10                 0                 10            20
                                      Size of Move in Debt in Collections                                                      Size of Move in Credit Card Not Current



    (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                                            (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)
                                                                               mean = 0.3                                                                                mean = 0.3




                                                                                                           15
                                                                                 sd = 5.5                                                                                  sd = 5.7
              8
              6




                                                                                                           10
    Percent




                                                                                                 Percent
     4




                                                                                                           5
              2
              0




                                                                                                           0




                         -20        -10               0               10            20                                -20       -10              0               10          20
                                      Size of Move in Chapter 7 Filings                                                          Size of Move in Chapter 13 Filings



Note: Figure shows histogram of size of move i computed at county level. We keep i that are within ± 4
standard deviations from the mean.




                                                                                            43
               Figure A9: Histogram of Size of Move i at Commuting Zone Level

                    (A) Debt in Collections (%)                                                             (B) Credit Card Not Current (%)




                                                                                                 10
                                                                     mean = 1.5                                                                             mean = 0.3
                                                                       sd = 7.6                                                                               sd = 3.2
       10




                                                                                                 8
       8




                                                                                                 6
    Percent




                                                                                       Percent
         6




                                                                                                 4
       4




                                                                                                 2
       2
       0




                                                                                                 0
              -40       -20                0                   20            40                             -10                      0                       10
                           Size of Move in Debt in Collections                                                    Size of Move in Credit Card Not Current



    (C) Chapter 7 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)                                  (D) Chapter 13 Filings in Past 3 Years (Per 1,000)



                                                                                                 15
                                                                     mean = 0.3                                                                             mean = 0.5
       10




                                                                       sd = 4.5                                                                               sd = 5.2
       8




                                                                                                 10
          6
    Percent




                                                                                       Percent
       4




                                                                                                 5
       2
       0




                                                                                                 0




              -20       -10                   0                 10           20                       -20         -10                0                 10          20
                              Size of Move in Chapter 7 Filings                                                      Size of Move in Chapter 13 Filings



Note: Figure shows histogram of size of move i computed at commuting zone level. We keep i that are
within ± 4 standard deviations from the mean.




                                                                                  44
         Figure A10: Correlates of Place Effects: Medical Debt in Collections




Note: Figure shows bivariate OLS regression coefficients (left panel) and post-Lasso multivariate regression
coefficients (right panel) of the place effect of medical debt in collections. The dependent variable and all
covariates have been standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. To obtain the post- Lasso
estimates, we first run a Lasso regression on the full set of covariates, with the penalty level chosen by a 4-
fold cross-validation to minimize mean squared error. We then run an OLS regression on the set of covariates
chosen by the Lasso regression.




                                                      45
                 Figure A11: Correlates of Place Effects: Chapter 7 Filings




Note: Figure shows bivariate OLS regression coefficients (left panel) and post-Lasso multivariate regression
coefficients (right panel) of the place effect of chapter 7 bankruptcy filings in the past three years. The depen-
dent variable and all covariates have been standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. To
obtain the post- Lasso estimates, we first run a Lasso regression on the full set of covariates, with the penalty
level chosen by a 4-fold cross-validation to minimize mean squared error. We then run an OLS regression on
the set of covariates chosen by the Lasso regression.




                                                       46
                Figure A12: Correlates of Place Effects: Chapter 13 Filings




Note: Figure shows bivariate OLS regression coefficients (left panel) and post-Lasso multivariate regression
coefficients (right panel) of the place effect of chapter 13 bankruptcy filings in the past three years. The depen-
dent variable and all covariates have been standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. To
obtain the post- Lasso estimates, we first run a Lasso regression on the full set of covariates, with the penalty
level chosen by a 4-fold cross-validation to minimize mean squared error. We then run an OLS regression on
the set of covariates chosen by the Lasso regression.




                                                        47
        Figure A13: Correlates of Place Effects: Combined Bankruptcy Filings




Note: Figure shows bivariate OLS regression coefficients (left panel) and post-Lasso multivariate regression
coefficients (right panel) of the place effect of any bankruptcy filings in the past three years. The dependent
variable and all covariates have been standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. To obtain
the post- Lasso estimates, we first run a Lasso regression on the full set of covariates, with the penalty level
chosen by a 4-fold cross-validation to minimize mean squared error. We then run an OLS regression on the set
of covariates chosen by the Lasso regression.




                                                      48
Figure A14: Correlates of Place Effects: Chapter 7 Filings Controlling for Com-
bined Filings




Note: Figure shows bivariate OLS regression coefficients after partialling out combined bankruptcy filings
(left panel) and post-Lasso multivariate regression coefficients (right panel) of the place effect of chapter 7
bankruptcy filings in the past three years. The dependent variable and all covariates have been standardized
to have mean zero and standard deviation one. To obtain the post- Lasso estimates, we first run a Lasso
regression on the full set of covariates including combined bankruptcy filings, with the penalty level chosen
by a 4-fold cross-validation to minimize mean squared error. We then run an OLS regression on the set of
covariates chosen by the Lasso regression.




                                                      49
Figure A15: Correlates of Place Effects: Chapter 13 Filings Controlling for Com-
bined Filings




Note: Figure shows bivariate OLS regression coefficients after partialling out combined bankruptcy filings
(left panel) and post-Lasso multivariate regression coefficients (right panel) of the place effect of chapter 13
bankruptcy filings in the past three years. The dependent variable and all covariates have been standardized
to have mean zero and standard deviation one. To obtain the post- Lasso estimates, we first run a Lasso
regression on the full set of covariates including combined bankruptcy filings, with the penalty level chosen
by a 4-fold cross-validation to minimize mean squared error. We then run an OLS regression on the set of
covariates chosen by the Lasso regression.




                                                      50
                                              Figure A16: Flag Removal Event Study




                                   20
                                         Removal effect = 5.23(0.05)




                                   15
                                   10
                    Credit score
                                   5
                                   0
                                   -5
                                   -10




                                         -6    -5   -4   -3    -2      -1        0   1   2      3   4   5   6
                                                              Time (quarters) to flag removal
Note: The dashed line corresponds to the event time trend  . The solid line is constructed by adding the
coefficients s to this trend. The dashed blue lines represent 95% confidence intervals. In the top left corner,
we display the immediate removal effect on credit score (0 ).




                                                                            51
                       Figure A17: Bankruptcy Filings across Income

                  (A) Chapter 7 FIlings                              (B) Chapter 13 Filings




                                           (C) Combined Filings




Note: Binned scatter plots show the relationship between bankruptcy filing and average income at zip code
level. The y-axis corresponds to the fraction of individuals who filed for chapter 7, 13, or any bankruptcy in
the past 12 months, constructed using pooled 10% random samples of TransUnion credit records from June
2013, 2015 and 2016. The x-axis corresponds to average income at zip code level from 2013-2017 5-year ACS.




                                                     52
                 Table A1: Number of Non-Movers Used to Construct ^i

  No. Non-Movers     Mean     Pct 1    Pct 5   Pct 10   Pct 25    Pct 50    Pct 75    Pct 90     Pct 95      Pct 99
  Zip                3,795     100      353     671      1,631    3,224     5,320     7,528      9,185       12,989
  Zip × age bin       956      34       90      156       357      748      1,308     1,969      2,501       3,842
  County            71,162    1,601   3,664    5,799    12,762   37,224    91,388    172,316    238,733     549,968
  CZ                264,449   6,154   16,941   26,771   55,679   145,633   366,119   650,512   1,068,960   1,144,226

Note: Table shows summary statistics on the number of non-movers used to construct different versions of
^i . The statistics pool across origins and destinations and are weighed by the number of movers so that they

are representative for our sample. For example, the mean should be interpreted as the mean, taken across all
movers, of the number of non-movers in an origin or destination.




                                                        53
                                  Table A2: Event-Study Estimates
                                                        Fraction converged to outcome
                                                       at destination 6 years post move

                                     (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)
 Financial distress measures    All movers    Positive moves   Negative moves      Move <40       Move  40

 Debt in collections               0.0788          0.0645           0.0574            0.0759          0.0810
                                  (0.0095)        (0.0191)         (0.0200)          (0.0190)        (0.0109)

 Medical collections               0.2042          0.2099           0.1173            0.2336          0.1955
                                  (0.0130)        (0.0248)         (0.0269)          (0.0260)        (0.0140)

 Non-medical collections           0.0409          -0.0846          0.1405            0.0173          0.0485
                                  (0.0120)        (0.0260)         (0.0240)          (0.0250)        (0.0136)

 Credit card not current           0.0633          0.0296           0.1239            0.0697          0.0674
                                  (0.0180)        (0.0386)         (0.0405)          (0.0372)        (0.0204)

 Chapter 7 filings (3 years)       0.2665          0.2276           0.2423            0.2383          0.2777
                                  (0.0500)        (0.0934)         (0.1004)          (0.0982)        (0.0577)

 Chapter 13 filings (3 years)      0.3298          0.4518           0.1944            0.3924          0.3050
                                  (0.0503)        (0.0756)         (0.1198)          (0.0903)        (0.0624)


Note: Table shows place-based effects r at 6 years (24 quarters) after the move from event study regressions
of financial distress on the size of the move ^i , individual and time fixed effects, and other controls. Standard
errors, clustered by origin × destination CZ, are shown in parentheses. Column (1) shows the baseline speci-
fication. In columns (2) and (3), we report estimates from regressions estimated separately on positive moves
to places with higher financial distress ( ^i > 0) and negative moves to places with lower financial distress
( ^i < 0). In columns (4) and (5), we report estimates from regressions separately on individuals who moved
when they are less than 40-year-olds and individuals who moved at age greater or equal to 40-year-old.




                                                       54
                       Table A3: Event-Study Estimates with Larger Sample
                                                             Fraction converged to outcome
                                                            at destination 4 years post move

                                    (1)        (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)        (6)
 Financial distress measures   All movers   Same origin   Same destination   Zip × age level   County level   CZ level

 Debt in collections              0.0605      0.0458           0.0491             0.0517           0.1059      0.1500
                                 (0.0068)    (0.0069)         (0.0070)           (0.0059)         (0.0091)    (0.0116)

 Medical collections              0.1510      0.1114           0.1426             0.1144           0.1993      0.2179
                                 (0.0090)    (0.0092)         (0.0091)           (0.0076)         (0.0113)    (0.0131)

 Non-medical collections          0.0467      0.0372           0.0414             0.0432           0.0730      0.1191
                                 (0.0086)    (0.0087)         (0.0089)           (0.0074)         (0.0120)    (0.0159)

 Credit card not current          0.0325      0.0271           0.0243             0.0331           0.0897      0.1562
                                 (0.0127)    (0.0126)         (0.0128)           (0.0097)         (0.0210)    (0.0265)

 Chapter 7 filings                0.1735      0.1137           0.1745             0.0441           0.3845      0.4305
                                 (0.0352)    (0.0360)         (0.0363)           (0.0234)         (0.0602)    (0.0727)

 Chapter 13 filings               0.2611      0.3171           0.1581             0.1433           0.3382      0.3656
                                 (0.0361)    (0.0372)         (0.0391)           (0.0261)         (0.0489)    (0.0522)


Note: Table shows place-based effects r at 4 years (16 quarters) after the move from event study regressions
of financial distress on the size of the move ^i , individual and time fixed effects, and other controls. We include
a larger sample of individuals who moved across CZs between 2004 and 2012. Standard errors, clustered by
origin × destination CZ, are shown in parentheses. Column (1) shows the baseline specification. In columns
(2) and (3), we report estimates from regressions estimated separately on positive moves to places with higher
financial distress ( ^i > 0) and negative moves to places with lower financial distress (    ^i < 0). In columns (4)
and (5), we report estimates from regressions separately on individuals who moved when they are less than
40-year-olds and individuals who moved at age greater or equal to 40-year-old.




                                                           55
                       Table A4: Event-Study Estimates with Larger Sample
                                                         Fraction converged to outcome
                                                        at destination 4 years post move

                                    (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
 Financial distress measures   All movers      Positive moves   Negative moves      Move <40        Move  40

 Debt in collections               0.0605           0.0884            0.0194           0.0758           0.0568
                                  (0.0068)         (0.0132)          (0.0140)         (0.0153)         (0.0074)

 Medical collections               0.1510           0.1783            0.1029           0.2215           0.1323
                                  (0.0090)         (0.0173)          (0.0186)         (0.0209)         (0.0094)

 Non-medical collections           0.0467           0.0270            0.0683           0.0641           0.0411
                                  (0.0086)         (0.0178)          (0.0169)         (0.0203)         (0.0093)

 Credit card not current           0.0325           0.0412            0.0443           0.0407           0.0365
                                  (0.0127)         (0.0256)          (0.0280)         (0.0310)         (0.0135)

 Chapter 7 filings                 0.1735           0.0755            0.2369           0.0936           0.1955
                                  (0.0352)         (0.0673)          (0.0734)         (0.0831)         (0.0387)

 Chapter 13 filings                0.2611           0.4272            0.0878           0.3509           0.2331
                                  (0.0361)         (0.0555)          (0.0810)         (0.0764)         (0.0408)


Note: Table shows place-based effects r at 4 years (16 quarters) after the move from event study regressions
of financial distress on the size of the move ^i , individual and time fixed effects, and other controls. We include
a larger sample of individuals who moved across CZs between 2004 and 2012. Standard errors, clustered by
origin × destination CZ, are shown in parentheses. Column (1) shows the baseline specification. In columns
(2) and (3), we report estimates from regressions estimated separately on positive moves to places with higher
financial distress ( ^i > 0) and negative moves to places with lower financial distress (    ^i < 0). In columns (4)
and (5), we report estimates from regressions separately on individuals who moved when they are less than
40-year-olds and individuals who moved at age greater or equal to 40-year-old.




                                                        56
