                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              NETWORK-BASED HIRING:
                           LOCAL BENEFITS; GLOBAL COSTS

                                   Arun G. Chandrasekhar
                                      Melanie Morten
                                      Alessandra Peter

                                     Working Paper 26806
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26806


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




We thank Ran Abramitzky, Abhijit Banerjee, Nick Bloom, Emily Breza, Gabriel Carroll, Ben
Golub, Rachel Heath, Nate Hilger, Matt Jackson, Victor Lavy, Kaivan Munshi, Ben Olken, Isaac
Sorkin, Meredith Startz, Adam Szeidl, and Xiao Yu Wang for helpful discussions. Financial
support from the NSF under grant SES-1530791 is gratefully acknowledged. Chandrasekhar and
Morten thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Melanie Morten, and Alessandra Peter. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Network-Based Hiring: Local Benefits; Global Costs
Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Melanie Morten, and Alessandra Peter
NBER Working Paper No. 26806
February 2020
JEL No. D83,D86,J46,L14,O1

                                         ABSTRACT

Entrepreneurs, particularly in the developing world, often hire from their networks: friends,
family, and resulting referrals. Network hiring has two benefits, documented extensively in the
empirical literature: entrepreneurs know more about the ability of their network (and indeed they
are often positively selected), and network members may be less likely to engage in moral hazard.
We study theoretically how network hiring affects the size and composition (i.e., whether to hire
friends or strangers) of the firm. Our primary result is that network hiring, while locally
beneficial, can be globally inefficient. Because of the existence of a network, entrepreneurs set
inefficiently low wages, firms are weakly too small, rely too much on networks for hiring, and
resulting welfare losses increase in the quality of the network. Further, if entrepreneurs are
uncertain about the true quality of the external labor market, the economy may become stuck in
an information poverty trap where forward-looking entrepreneurs or even entrepreneurs in a
market with social learning never learn the correct distribution of stranger ability, exacerbating
welfare losses. We show that the poverty trap can worsen when network referrals are of higher
quality.

Arun G. Chandrasekhar                           Alessandra Peter
Department of Economics                         Economics Department
Stanford University                             Julis Romo Rabinowitz Bldg
579 Serra Mall                                  Princeton, NJ 08544
Stanford, CA 94305                              ap14@princeton.edu
and NBER
arungc@stanford.edu

Melanie Morten
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
memorten@stanford.edu
                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                   1

                                              1. Introduction


        "The best way to find out if you can trust somebody is to trust them."
                                                                                         --Ernest Hemingway

   Entrepreneurs often leverage networks in order to hire workers, particularly so in the devel-
oping world. The literature has identified two primary benefits of network hiring. First, there
is referral value. Entrepreneurs know the ability of network members, and, further, screening
in referrals may mean these individuals are better than average. Second, as entrepreneurs are
often in a setting where effort is not observable, there is a relational value to network-based
hiring. While there may not be strong external incentives for strangers to exert effort, with
network members they can leverage repeated interactions, supported links, implicit enforcement
by within-firm referral provision, or even altruism to provide incentives. These ideas have been
studied at length in a large empirical and theoretical literature (e.g., Munshi (2003); Karlan,
Mobius, Rosenblat, and Szeidl (2009); Beaman and Magruder (2012); Pallais and Sands (2016);
Beaman (2016); Heath (2018)).1 However, network-based hiring is not without its limits. A
key practical constraint is that networks tend to be sparse and clustered: an entrepreneur who
relies exclusively on hiring from their own network will not have many potential employees.2
This leads to two natural questions: first, whether the reliance on network hiring distorts an
entrepreneur's organizational choices of firm size and composition, and second, whether each
entrepreneur's decision has broader implications for other firms in the market through experi-
mentation, learning from other firms, or general equilibrium effects.
   The empirical literature points out three positive local benefits of hiring from networks owed
to the referral and relational value. The entrepreneur knows the quality of the worker, does
not doubt worker effort, and understands that these workers are positively selected.3 But we
show that exactly these local features can be globally detrimental. Referral and relational value
can result in inefficient firm organization, where entrepreneurs run firms that are too small
and too network reliant, generating welfare losses. Further, in dynamic settings where firms
1
 Other key references (although incomplete), include Montgomery (1991); Calv´       o-Armengol (2006); Bandiera,
Barankay, and Rasul (2009); Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012); Fainmesser (2013); Fafchamps and Moradi
(2015); Burks, Cowgill, Hoffman, and Housman (2015).
2
  For a literature on sparse networks see, e.g., Ioannides and Datcher Loury (2004); Cross and Borgatti (2004);
Jackson (2008); Leskovec et al. (2009); Ugander et al. (2011); Schweinberger and Handcock (2015); Chan-
drasekhar (2016); Graham (2015). In the context of this paper, by an entrepreneur's network we mean the
collection of her friends, kin, or referrals thereof for whom information frictions are alleviated, rather than the
broader network or graph of links between all individuals. In other contexts, one might call this an (extended)
"network neighborhood".
3
  Another natural consideration with network hiring could be if entrepreneurs derive utility (nepotism) or expect
reciprocity for hiring friends. We briefly describe in Section 2 how our model could be adapted to accommodate
this. We show the extent to which such an extension does not change our results and therefore omit it for
parsimony.
                                        NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                2

are uncertain about the quality of the general labor market and learn through experimenting
with organizational structure or observing others, these pathologies can be amplified and lead
to an information poverty trap whereby the market fails to learn that firm expansion is indeed
profitable.
   Specifically, in this paper, we provide a theoretical characterization of an entrepreneur's
organizational decision and the tension they face between exclusively relying on network-based
hiring, and therefore running a smaller firm, or additionally hiring strangers from a general
labor market pool and building a larger firm. Throughout the paper we use the term friend
synonymously with the entrepreneur's network members. The general pool can consist of
workers from other entrepreneurs' networks and workers, such as recent migrants, that are
not connected to any entrepreneurs. Friends differ from strangers in two ways. First, the
entrepreneur knows the friend quality (modeled as the cost of providing high effort), and so can
set a wage exactly sufficient to induce the friend to work. In contrast, the entrepreneur knows
only the distribution of worker quality in the pool, so the wage offered by the entrepreneur
implies a threshold such that a stranger with effort below than this threshold will accept the
wage and one with effort above it will not. The former is costly as the stranger extracts an
information rent from the entrepreneur; the latter is costly as the entrepreneur forfeits their
fixed capital cost if they do not successfully hire. Our baseline analysis considers wages that
are linked (tethered ) between friends and strangers. As we discuss in Section 2, this assumption
is the empirically-relevant one to consider for wage setting in firms in low-income countries,
motivated by the empirical literature.4 An entrepreneur with a high-quality friend will need
to offer a stranger a higher wage than they would pay their friend; because of tethering, they
will need to pay their friend this wage as well. This change in incentives when a stranger is
employed discourages the entrepreneur from expanding and makes it more likely they will run
a small networked firm.5
   The second difference between a friend and a stranger is that the friend may not be morally
hazardous, while a stranger will be. As a result, the stranger wage contract needs to incentivize
high effort, but the friend contract can be flat. Again, in the base case of tethered wages,
the entrepreneur trades off expanding and employing a stranger at the cost of needing to now
pay the friend the incentivized wage. This factor also leads the employer, for the same quality
friend, to be more likely to run a small networked firm than to expand to a large firm.


4
  Studying tethered wages allows us to nest the case of concerns of fairness and equal treatment or even­quite
distinctly­imperfect capacity to execute side payments which all have empirical support. See, among others,
Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani (2017) and references therein. Nonetheless, we provide all results for the case of
independent wages for completeness.
5
  We have written the problem such that better-quality friends (those with a lower cost of effort) will earn a
lower wage. Our setup is isomorphic to one where the entrepreneur pays a piece-rate wage per unit of output,
and a worker with a lower cost of effort will produce more units per hour and so will indeed earn more income.
We present it this way for simplicity.
                                       NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                              3

   The firm choice is therefore between running a small, networked firm (i.e., employing only
the friend); running a large, networked firm (i.e., employing a friend and a stranger); running a
large, non-networked firm (employing two strangers); or choosing not to operate.6 In the case
of tethered wages, the entrepreneur chooses to run a small, networked firm when the cost of
capital is high and the friend is of sufficiently high quality; chooses to run a large, networked
firm when the cost of capital is low and the friend is of sufficiently high quality; chooses to run
a large, non-networked firm when the cost of capital is low and the friend is not high quality;
and chooses to shut down when the cost of capital is high and the friend is not high quality.
The referral and relational value of the network affects the entrepreneur's organizational choice.
The effect of the referral value on hiring decisions is non-monotonic. The stronger the referral
value, the more likely the entrepreneur will start a business. However, since the referral value
is only present when hiring network members, it discourages firm expansion. The relational
value tends to strengthen this effect. When hiring only a friend, the wage contract includes
insuring the worker, since effort is observable, which generates an additional disincentive to firm
expansion. In the case of independent wages the intuition is similar, but the nonmonotonicity
between friend quality and organizational choice is not present. Instead, the decision to run a
small or large firm depends on whether capital is above a threshold value; the choice of whether
or not to hire a friend depends on the threshold value of the friend.
   We then study whether network hiring leads to welfare losses for the economy. We define
welfare as the sum of profits and workers' surplus; welfare is thus broader than simply firm's
profits (which is what the entrepreneur maximizes). Our economy features three sources of
inefficiency: (i) the quality of the stranger is not observed before the wage is set, so the en-
trepreneur is trading off the probability of the worker accepting the wage against the higher
wage payments; (ii) effort is unobservable, so the wage needs to incentivize effort, which inef-
ficiently exposes the workers to risk; (iii) in the baseline case, wages are equal for all workers
in the same firm, which discourages firms from hiring strangers when they have a particularly
good network connection. While it may seem like the network correctly solves the first two
sources of inefficiency, and so hence welfare may be higher, we show that welfare may be lower
in the economy when entrepreneurs are networked than when they are not. This striking result
occurs because a network inefficiently encourages firms to operate at a small scale and hire too
many friends relative to strangers.
   We prove three results. First, being connected to a better friend can reduce welfare. If
the entrepreneur has a very high-quality friend and the capital cost is low enough, there is a
quality threshold where the entrepreneur switches between running a small, friend-only firm
and running a large, networked (friend/stranger) one. Welfare in the economy discontinuously
jumps at this threshold. Second, welfare may be higher if the entrepreneur had no friend at

6
 In our setup, revenues are linear in the number of workers and therefore hiring only one stranger is never
optimal.
                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                 4

all. If the entrepreneur has a low-quality friend and the capital cost is high enough, there is a
threshold where the entrepreneur switches from running a small, friend-only firm to running a
large, stranger-only one. Again, welfare discontinuously jumps at this threshold. Third, having
a friend who solves the moral hazard problem (one with both referral and relational value) may
be worse than having a friend with only referral value. Similar to the previous thresholds, the
negative welfare effect is larger if the network provides more benefits to the entrepreneur as
these extra benefits lead the entrepreneur to continue to hire the network member instead of
expanding.7
   Finally, we consider two model extensions ­ general equilibrium effects and a social learning
problem ­ to characterize how network hiring interacts with the broader economy. In terms of
general equilibrium effects, we first consider whether endogenizing the outside option of workers
changes the equilibrium. Our model assumes that an entrepreneur who has a high-quality friend
can pay this friend a low wage. If the friend had the option to work in the labor market, would
they still accept this low wage? Focusing on only the referral effect, we show that general
equilibrium considerations could actually exacerbate the key tension that entrepreneurs are too
likely to hire from their network. The mechanism for this operates via the outside option. As
more entrepreneurs hire their network members, fewer jobs are available, and thus it becomes
harder for other workers to find a job outside their own network. As a result, workers' outside
options are lower, and entrepreneurs can pay their high-quality friend lower wages and are
therefore disincentivized from hiring an additional stranger.
   Second, in terms of the social learning problem, all the previous results rest on the fact that
entrepreneurs know the distribution of worker quality in the economy, and based on this, they
choose whether to operate large or small firms. We relax this assumption and study the arguably
more realistic case where entrepreneurs have only beliefs over this distribution. Then, if an
entrepreneur hires from the general market pool based on these beliefs, this choice constitutes
an experiment. The outcome of the production process generates a signal about the worker's
type, and since the worker was drawn randomly from the distribution, this is a signal about
the underlying quality distribution itself. We study both a single forward-looking Bayesian
entrepreneur and a social learning problem where, as entrepreneurs learn about the quality of
strangers, they pass this information on to other firms. The main result is that, because of the
incentives to run small networked firms, if non-networked individuals are truly high quality,
the economy can become stuck in an information poverty trap. Entrepreneurs then stop hiring
strangers and so, therefore, maintain their beliefs that strangers are low quality, leading them to


7
 In the case of independent results we still find scope for network hiring to cause welfare losses. In this case,
the result is not that firms are too small, but that firms inefficiently hire friends over strangers, i.e., there
is a welfare discontinuity at the friend quality such that the entrepreneur switches between running a large,
networked (friend/stranger) firm and a large, non-networked (two stranger) one. The information rent effect
drives this discontinuity.
                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                  5

run a small, networked firm with the highest possible welfare losses.8 Further, the information
poverty trap can increase with the strength of both the referral and relational values and lead
to even more firms organizing suboptimally as small and networked. We show that there is an
important asymmetry: if strangers are truly low quality, then entrepreneurs will always learn
that it is optimal to rely on network-based hiring only.
   Our paper makes three core contributions. First, we contribute to an understanding of
the organizational structure of a firm. We take the applied literature on referral networks,
particularly in development, as a starting point. Experiments have shown that entrepreneurs
(a) tend to know the quality of their network members (Beaman and Magruder, 2012; Pallais
and Sands, 2016; Chandrasekhar et al., 2018), and (b) face fewer moral hazard concerns when
employing their referred members (Heath, 2018; Pallais and Sands, 2016). Our model takes
these results at face value, assuming that the friend quality is known to the entrepreneur (and
we focus on the case where they are typically of high quality) and also that friends intrinsically
have no moral hazard concerns.9 We simply add these assumptions to the usual moral hazard
contracting setup (see, e.g., (Salanie, 2005)). Despite these unambiguously positive, local effects
of networks that serve as informal substitutes for poor formal contracting environments with
limited information, there is a potential for significant adverse consequences globally because
the presence of such networks discourages entrepreneurs from hiring non-networked members.
These unintended consequences already arise when considering an entrepreneur in isolation and
are exacerbated at the market level.
   Second, we study market-level firm organization considering two cases: dynamic experi-
mentation and social learning. In the dynamic experimentation case, we consider a single,
forward-looking Bayesian entrepreneur over time. In the social learning case, we consider the
classical environment of an individual sequence of Bayesian entrepreneurs, each living a single
period (e.g., Banerjee (1992); Smith and Sørensen (2000); Eyster and Rabin (2010)). We de-
part somewhat from this literature in that each entrepreneur observes the entire information
set generated by all prior agents. In both cases, we show that there may be an information
poverty trap at the market level. When entrepreneurs are uncertain about the quality of a
general stranger market pool, network quality discourages hiring from the pool, which would
be necessary for self or social learning to occur. As a result, even if entrepreneurs have incen-
tives to experiment and, in the social learning case, even if they have full information set about
all other firms' previous organizational decisions and outcomes, there is a positive probability
that they will hire only their friends and thus a share of firms will remain small. This is so
8
  In our setup draws from the referral distribution are not informative about the general stranger distribution,
which seems a natural representation given that strangers -- for example, a recent migrant in the city -- are
often strangers precisely as they are different from the network and so plausibly have a different distribution of
abilities. Thus, knowledge of a friend's idiosyncratic type, therefore, does not help to learn the aggregate state
-- the distribution of types in the population -- but instead inhibits learning by discouraging experimentation
with the pool.
9
  We deliberately abstract from nepotism or other ex ante detrimental effects of network-based hiring.
                                           NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                    6

even when a social planner (that maximizes total welfare in the economy) would want them to
hire strangers as well and create large firms. Again, better-performing referral networks may
exacerbate this effect.10
   Lastly, our paper highlights how the quality of institutions can affect patterns of firm struc-
ture, organization, and growth and thereby generate systemic welfare losses. In countries where
there is either more scope for moral hazard or less information about workers, we would expect
entrepreneurs to rely more on their networks. Given that networks are sparse, this reliance
not only affects static choices of organizational structure but also impedes learning about the
general market and hence entrepreneurs' willingness to expand their firms. Our paper proposes
a novel way of thinking about the slow growth of firms in developing countries (Hsieh and
Klenow, 2014; Bento and Restuccia, 2017; Hsieh and Olken, 2014), and the seeming presence of
"subsistence entrepreneurs," typically interpreted as lacking the will or ability to expand their
firm (Schoar, 2010; Akcigit, Alp, and Peters, 2016; McKenzie and Woodruff, 2016).11

Organization. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our
main environment. We also characterize the optimal contracts and expected profits for each
organizational structure as a function of fundamental parameters (e.g., capital costs, worker
quality distribution, and friend quality). In Section 3, we study the optimal firm size and com-
position between networked and pool workers as well as the associated welfare losses. Section
6 turns to learning dynamics. We study the case where firms' organizational decisions serve as
experiments and look at the limiting distribution of firm organization in the market. Section 7
is a conclusion.


         2. Model of Entrepreneurs and Workers in and out of Network

2.1. Overview. We study an environment in which an entrepreneur (she) hires a worker (he)
or a set of workers either from her network (also called friends) or from a pool of strangers.
The entrepreneur chooses the scale of the firm (here the number of workers), the composition
of workers (share of friends and strangers), and the wage structure. For simplicity we study the
case where the firm could have either one or two workers, capturing small or large firms.12 And
because networks are sparse, so an individual has only few links, in the context of our model we
will say that the entrepreneur has a single friend. To expand, the entrepreneur must therefore
be willing to hire from the general stranger pool.
10
   This may be hard to overcome; indeed, the few labor drop experiments find that short-term subsidies do not
shift entrepreneurs to hire strangers post-experiment, suggesting strong priors (see, e.g., Groh et al. (2016)). This
finding is also consistent with our own piloting in the field where entrepreneurs exhibit considerable skepticism
over stranger quality.
11
   Our paper may also offer another perspective on some of the patterns documented in the family firm literature,
which primarily focus on different mechanisms (see Bertrand and Schoar (2006) and references therein).
12
   The hiring and expansion incentives we study in this simple setup would be equally at play in a more general
setting where firm size depends on demand and productivity.
                                           NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                     7

   Motivated by the applied literature we focus on two information frictions ­ asymmetric infor-
mation and nonobservable effort ­ that occur with general labor market hiring but that might
be overcome by network hiring. First, asymmetric information exists in that the entrepreneur
does not know the worker's cost of exerting effort. Second, she might not be able to observe
whether the worker exerts effort, generating the potential for moral hazard.13 There are, of
course, other reasons for why entrepreneurs hire their friends and family, chief among them
altruism. We deliberately focus on asymmetric information and moral hazard, since these have
been documented to be locally beneficial.14
   The first friction, asymmetric information, exists only with strangers. We assume that the
entrepreneur knows her friend, and therefore she knows the private cost for this friend to exert
effort. We call this the referral value of the network. This positive value of hiring network
members is consistent with the empirical literature, which documents that individuals know
more about their network members' abilities (Beaman et al., 2014; Pallais and Sands, 2016).
However, the entrepreneur does not know the stranger and therefore has only beliefs about the
stranger's cost of effort.
   We study the second friction--no observable effort-- both where is equally present with
friends and strangers and where it is absent with friends. In the latter case, we say there
is relational value to network-based hiring. The relational value captures a reduced form for
any force, such as a repeated game between the entrepreneur and friend or altruism between
the entrepreneur and friend. Again, this positive value of network hires is documented by the
empirical literature (Heath, 2018) and, more generally, by a literature showing that interactions
with network members overcomes contracting frictions (Pallais and Sands, 2016; Heath, 2018;
Chandrasekhar et al., 2018). The asymmetric incentive constraint makes the optimal wage the
entrepreneur offers to a worker depend on whether the worker is a friend or stranger.
   In our primary analysis, we maintain a tethered wage assumption--that the wages of any two
workers hired by the same firm are tethered. That is, the entrepreneur must offer the same wage
to every worker in her firm, whether friend or stranger. The focus on tethered wages is natural,
in line with empirical and theoretical literatures that document how considerations of fairness
prevent entrepreneurs from paying workers in the same job different wages and how contracting
frictions make it difficult to overcome this by executing side-payments.15 Qualitatively, all of

13
   Our framework nests two additional frictions that could be alleviated by hiring friends: first, strangers might
be able to steal the installed capital, and second, hiring in the general labor market might take more time than
hiring through referrals. We discuss these in more detail below.
14
   If entrepreneurs derive utility, or also expect reciprocity, for hiring their friends, this would act as a shift in
profits in our analysis. While shifting the relevant parameter space, this extension would not affect our analysis
of who gets hired at the margin.
15
   In fact, in our own survey of 85 small firms (such as small convenience stores, restaurants, medical shops,
clothing stores, and stationery shops) in six neighborhoods in Bangalore, Delhi, and Patna, we found that 76%
of entrepreneurs tether wages and pay workers identical piece rates. Qualitative evidence behind this survey is
provided in Appendix D. Though beyond the scope of our paper, prior research has delved into the motivations
behind this tethering, perhaps chief among them coming from morale effects of pay inequality. See Breza, Kaur,
                                      NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                            8

our results for the tethered wage case go through as long as there is some -- even minimal --
cost of paying workers differently. For completeness, all propositions also include results for the
knife-edge case where wages can be entirely independent between workers.
   Let us briefly discuss the role of each of the three key components -- referral value, rela-
tional value, and tethered wages -- in our theory. First, the referral value on its own gives
entrepreneurs a strong incentive to hire out of their network and hence affects the composition
of firms. Friends are sure to accept the wage contract and are not paid the usual information
rent that arises with private information. Since part of the benefit of network-based hiring
to the entrepreneur is that she avoids paying rents to workers, this force tends toward hiring
fewer strangers relative to a social planner, as we will discuss in detail in Section 4. Second,
the relational value gives entrepreneurs an even greater incentive to hire out of their network,
since workers need not be exposed to income risk in order to incentivize high effort. In contrast
to the referral value, the relational value on its own is always welfare improving. However,
when the other two frictions are present, it can amplify welfare losses from network-based hir-
ing. Third, the tethered wage generates an interaction between different workers in the firm,
one that increases with worker heterogeneity. This assumption is what generates most of the
effects on firm size. When an entrepreneur hires an additional worker, the larger the difference
between the two workers, the lower the profits. In our setup, the difference between workers
arises naturally as a consequence of information frictions being solved for a subset of workers ­
the network connections.
   Taken together, all three core elements of our model allow us to study an environment where
network-based hiring is useful to overcome contracting frictions, as has been emphasized by an
applied literature. As such, welfare is increasing locally in the extent to which networks solve
information frictions. However, due to the sparseness of networks, firm expansion requires
hiring from the general labor market. The decision whether or not to expand is intuitively
interlinked with the firm's network-based hires. As such, globally, i.e., when taking firm size
and composition into account, the welfare effects of network-based hiring are ambiguous.

2.2. Baseline Model.

2.2.1. Environment. A single entrepreneur hires from two potential sources of workers: the
network (friends) and strangers. The entrepreneur picks the number of friends nf and the
number of strangers ns and therefore selects a firm size of n = nf + ns  2. As networks are
sparse, we model this by letting the entrepreneur only have one friend, so to run a large firm
they must hire a stranger as well. Hiring each worker involves a fixed cost of K . This can be
thought of as a required capital investment made by the entrepreneur before extending an offer
to a potential worker.

and Shamdasani (2017) for both an experiment on this theme and an extensive discussion of the empirical
literature.
                                           NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                   9

   Output by a given worker is determined by worker effort, e  {0, 1}. If e = 0 then output
is 0, whereas if e = 1 then output is y with probability p, and 0 otherwise. Without loss of
generality and for simplicity, all workers have outside option zero.16
   Workers from the pool have common strictly increasing, concave, differentiable utility func-
tions u(·) with u(0) = 0. Workers are heterogeneous in their cost of effort c drawn from an
absolutely continuous CDF Fc (·) on R. Entrepreneurs cannot observe an individual worker's
cost of effort c. They offer a wage contract to a randomly chosen worker from the pool. If the
worker does not accept, the firm cannot make another offer. This is a reduced form for the
idea that search can be slow in practice. We assume here and in Section 3 that the population
distribution Fc is known to entrepreneurs. In Section 6 we make the natural assumption that
nascent businesses may not know the distribution itself and may need to learn it.
   In what follows, we assume that the entrepreneur faces the problem of potentially morally
hazardous behavior by her employees. Moral hazard is the natural situation in our analysis.
For instance, effort on typical jobs held by the poor in the developing world is not observable.
In Appendix C, for completeness, we characterize the case with no moral hazard as well.
   The entrepreneur's friend has a cost of providing effort cf , which is known to the entrepreneur.
The fact of this knowledge simply encodes the findings from the empirical literature (e.g.,
Beaman et al. (2014); Pallais and Sands (2016)). In the economy as a whole, cf is distributed
according to some distribution, Ff (·) not necessarily equivalent to Fc (·).17 While we study
both cases, we will often focus on the case motivated by the findings of the empirical literature
where network referrals are of "good types" corresponding to known low cf (e.g., Beaman et al.
(2014); Pallais and Sands (2016)).
   The entrepreneur's friend has a cost of lying to them, parametrized by  . This is a reduced
form for repeated game dynamics, trust, altruism, or any such force that would make a friend
easier to incentivize than a stranger. If  = 0, there is no trust advantage of hiring a friend,
whereas  =  maps into the case where there is no moral hazard when hiring a friend. While
we study both cases, the predominantly empirically relevant case, motivated by the findings of
the empirical literature, is that  is very high and so friends cooperate with entrepreneurs even


16Here  we assume that the outside option of workers is fixed and, in particular, does not depend on the other
parameters of the market environment. This will be true, for instance, in a newly developing industry, where the
outside option can be thought of as the payoff from working in more established industries. Section 5 analyzes
the case where the outside is endogenous to hiring decisions of entrepreneurs.
17There are a number of reasons these distributions do not need to coincide. First, we think that network
referrals in part have screening value as noted by the empirical literature. So friends will be positively selected.
Second, a general worker pool need not simply consist of friends of other entrepreneurs, but furthermore can
also include other sources of potential workers such as recent migrants. Third, by the friendship paradox, those
who are linked to entrepreneurs must have more links than a random person and therefore do not constitute a
random draw. For further information on the friendship paradox see Feld (1991) and Jackson (2019). Fourth,
there is homophily. If entrepreneurs are of a "higher type," then their connections will tend to be of higher type
as well (Montgomery (1991)). We do not formally explore these interpretations and view our assumptions on
cf as a reduced form.
                                                   NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                       10

without formal contracts (e.g., Pallais and Sands (2016); Heath (2018); Chandrasekhar et al.
(2018)).
   Our setup is chosen to nest the primary justifications in the literature for referrals and usage
of network hiring. By allowing a friend's effort cost to be observable and drawn from a different
distribution, Fc , we capture the referral value, which directs higher-quality individuals to the
entrepreneurs.  , the friend's cost of lying, captures the relational value, which generates better
behavior workers who are friends. The difference between Ff and Fc could also capture, in
a reduced-form way, the fact that labor search is slow in practice. We would expect that it
takes longer to hire from the general labor market than through a network, reflected here as a
difference between the "effective" effort cost distributions Fc and Ff . Our setup also nests the
notion that strangers might not be trustworthy in the sense that they could steal, for instance,
the installed capital from the entrepreneur. Any mass of Fc above the threshold where a worker
is employable can be interpreted as the worker stealing K . If no production happens, K is
wasted and from the point of view of the entrepreneur this is analogous to the worker running
away with her capital.
   The timing is as follows:




   (1) The entrepreneur decides ns , nf , and a wage contract siy for each worker i as a function
       of output y  {0, 1}, paying K · n to start a firm of size n.
   (2) Each of the n workers decides, independently, whether to accept or decline the contract.
   (3) A set of n ^=n ^f + n
                           ^ s workers remain with the firm and each selects an effort level ei for
       i = 1, ..., n
                   ^.
   (4) Outputs yi are realized.
   (5) Payoffs are received.




   The entrepreneur decides the firm size (nf + ns ), the composition of workers in terms of
                                                                                   i n
friends (nf ) and strangers from a general market pool (ns ), and the wages {si
                                                                              0 , s1 }i=1 for each
worker i to maximize expected profits:
                     max              nf rf (si    i                        i i
                                              0 , s1 ; cf ,  ) + ns Ec rs (s0 , s1 ; c) - (nf + ns ) · K
               {si   i n
                 0 ,s1 }i=1 ,nf ,ns




          s.t. nf + ns  2                                                               (a) size constraint
                                                            
                                 j 2                      j 2
                          (si
                            0 - s0 ) +             (si
                                                     1 - s1 )              (b) tethered wages constraint
                    i,j                      i,j
                                               NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                               11
                           
                                  i                  i      if pu(si               i
                           p(y - s1 ) + (1 - p)(0 - s0 )           1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - cf  0
                           
                           
                                                            and pu(si               i            i
                           
                                                                    1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - cf  u(s0 ) - 
                           
rf (si    i
     0 , s1 ; cf ,  ) :=    (0 - si )
                                 0                          if u(si
                                                                  0)  0                                     (c) IC: friend
                           
                                                            and pu(si               i             i
                           
                                                                    1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - cf < u(s0 ) - 
                           
                           0
                           
                                                            o/w
                           
                           p(y - si
                           
                                                      i
                                   1 ) + (1 - p)(0 - s0 )   if pu(si               i
                                                                   1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - c  0
                           
                                                            and pu(si               i           i
                           
                                                                    1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - c  u(s0 )
                           
 rs (si    i
      0 , s1 , c,  ) :=     (0 - si
                                  0)                        if u(si
                                                                  0)  0                                (d) IC: stranger
                           
                                                            and pu(si               i            i
                           
                                                                    1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - c < u(s0 )
                           
                           0
                           
                                                            o/w.

   That is, entrepreneurs consider the fact that friends want to participate and apply effort
(incorporating the cost of lying,  ); strangers who participate find it incentive-compatible to
apply effort; both friends and strangers receive at least their outside option; and firms need
to choose a feasible scale. The constraint (b) nests both the case we focus on, tethered wages
( = ), and the knife-edge case with fully independent wages ( = 0) which we include for
completeness.18

2.2.2. Optimal contracts. In this section, we describe the trade-offs entrepreneurs face when
choosing wages for each of the four possible organizational forms: friend only, stranger only,
friend and stranger, and two strangers. Appendix C contains a full characterization.
   When hiring only a friend, the entrepreneur chooses a wage contract that exactly satisfies
the friend's participation and incentive constraints. The optimal wage depends on the cost of
lying,  . If  = , the incentive constraint is always satisfied, and the entrepreneur pays her
friend a flat wage. If  = 0 on the other hand, the wage profile is chosen to be as steep as
possible by setting the wage in case of failure equal to zero to ensure that friends exert high
effort.
   When hiring a stranger, the optimal wage also features maximal incentives, so zero payments
in the case of low output. The wage offered in case of high output (s1 ) solves the following
first-order condition:

(2.1)                                        F (¯       c) u (s1 ) p(y - s1 )
                                                c) = f (¯

where c¯ = pu(s1 ) is the effort cost corresponding to the worker who is just indifferent between
accepting the contract or not. The optimal wage trades off the benefits of a marginal increase in
the probability of the worker accepting -- the right-hand side of equation (2.1) -- against extra
payments that have to be made to all workers who accept the contract ­ the left-hand side. The
18Qualitatively,    all results we show for  =  hold for any  > 0. For exposition, we focus on the two polar
cases only.
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                        12

equation also illustrates how asymmetric information affects who gets hired. If the entrepreneur
were able to observe c, she would hire any worker for whom c  pu(y ). That worker would
be paid the entire surplus s1 = y . This cannot be the optimal contract with unobserved type
and c
    ¯ is lower than pu(y ). Because the model has linear payoffs, an entrepreneur who hires two
strangers offers the same wage, and payoffs simply scale linearly.
   As long as firm wages are tethered (i.e.  > 0), interesting interactions occur between friends
and strangers in a large, mixed firm. Consider first the case where  = 0, which corresponds to
a world in which both friends and strangers are offered steep incentives. The wage offered in
case of high output solves the following first-order condition

(2.2)                  1 + F (¯       c) u (s1 ) p(y - s1 ) + pu (s1 ) ( + µ)
                              c) = f (¯

where  and µ are the Lagrange multipliers on the friend's participation and incentive con-
straints. If the friend is of low quality, so cf is sufficiently high, then these constraints are
binding, and the wage is simply set to satisfy the friend's constraints. If the friend is of high
enough quality,  = µ = 0, and the optimal wage is the solution to (2.2). Compared to the
case where only a stranger is hired, an additional cost of offering a higher wage occurs. This
higher wage must be paid not only to all strangers who accept the contract, but also has to
be paid to the friend. The optimal wage is, therefore, lower than in a stranger-only firm, and
fewer workers from the pool are hired. In other words, the presence of a high-quality friend
who must be paid the same wage offered to the pool makes the entrepreneur more selective in
terms of hiring strangers.
   Next consider the case where  = . Now there is not only a potential level difference between
the optimal friend and stranger wages but also a difference in the slopes. For sufficiently good
friends, the optimal wage contract is the same as in the  = 0 case, as it is dictated by the
incentives of workers from the pool. For high enough values of friend cost, the optimal wage
might now feature a positive compensation in the case of firm failure. The trade-off here is
between cheaply satisfying the friend's participation constraint (by providing insurance through
the wage contract) against discouraging effort by pool workers.
   If instead, wages are fully independent within the firm, the contracts offered to a friend and
stranger in a large, mixed firm are simply identical to the ones offered by small firms.
   Figure 1 illustrates how the firm's profits (gross of the capital cost K ) depends on both the
friend's effort cost and the presence of the relational value. When the firm hires only strangers,
profits are, of course, independent of friend type. When only a friend is hired, profits decrease
in cf and are higher when the friend has a cost of lying. The grey lines in Figure 1 correspond
to the additional profit from hiring a stranger if the entrepreneur already employs her friend.
This illustrates three important properties of the model in the baseline case of tethered wages.
   The first two properties hold independently of the value of  , that is, both where the friend
solves moral hazard concerns and where he does not. First, hiring from the general labor market
                                           NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                    13

                                                                    Friend, referral only
                                 1.2                                Friend, referral + relational
                                                                    Add stranger, referral only
                                                                    Add stranger, referral + relational
                                                                    Stranger only
                                  1


                                 0.8

                        Profit   0.6


                                 0.4


                                 0.2


                                  0
                                       0   0.2         0.4        0.6                0.8                  1
                                                  Friend cost of effort, cf

       Figure 1.       This figure shows firm profit, gross of capital cost, as a function of the known friend's
       cost of effort. The figure shows the profit from hiring a friend only as well as the marginal profit
       from expanding the firm and hiring a stranger. The profit from hiring a stranger only (which does not
       depend on the friend cost of effort) is given by the horizontal line.



is always less profitable when the entrepreneur also hires her friend. Since all workers must be
paid the same wage, except in the knife-edge case where optimal payments to the friend and
the pool worker happen to coincide, payments to one of the types of agents are distorted, and
profits from expanding the firm are lower.
   Second, the additional profit from hiring from the pool is non-monotonic in friend quality.
For very high-quality friends, the optimal wage is lower if they are the only employee. When
a friend is added to the firm, the entrepreneur must pay her friend a higher wage in order to
have a reasonable chance of attracting a pool worker. The higher is the friend's effort cost,
the smaller is the difference in optimal wages, and hence the higher the additional profit from
hiring a stranger. At some point, the optimal wage paid to the pool worker is lower than what
the entrepreneur must pay her friend. When running a mixed firm, therefore, she overpays
workers from the general labor market, and in this region, additional profits are declining in
the friend's effort cost.
   Third, when the friend has a high cost of lying to the entrepreneur, profits from hiring the
friend only increase, but additional profits from hiring a stranger decrease. In this case, there is
not only a difference in the optimal level of wages between the friend and the stranger but also
in the optimal slope of the wage contract. This additional difference in optimal compensation
reduces the profitability of a large, mixed firm relative to a small, networked one.
   In the knife-edge case where wages are fully independent within the firm, the additional profit
from hiring a stranger is independent of who else is hired and always equal to the horizontal
                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                  14

solid line in Figure 1. This is true irrespective of whether or not friends solve the moral hazard
problem.



                     3. Optimal Firm Size and Workforce Composition

   We now analyze the optimal firm organizational structure--size and composition--as a func-
tion of cf , the quality of the entrepreneur's network connection, and K , the cost of capital.19 We
denote the choice by x(cf , , K ) : R0       0     0
                                       + × R+ × R+  {shutdown, F, S, F S, SS }, where shutdown
means the firm does not operate; F (or S) means the entrepreneur operates a small, friend-only
(stranger-only) firm; FS means the entrepreneur operates a large, networked (friend/stranger)
firm; and SS means the entrepreneur operates a large firm consisting of two strangers. We use
 (i, cf ,  )), i  {shutdown, F, S, SS, F S } to denote expected profits gross of capital cost.
   We present the referral value effect separately first and then add the relational effect. This
allows us to see the role that each force plays.

3.1. Referral Value Effect. Let us begin with the referral effect. To think about this, we
imagine a case with moral hazard for both friends and strangers, so being a network member
has no value other than the fact that their quality is known. Friends--or individuals who are
referred--tend to be better than average, as discussed in the empirical and theoretical literature
(owing to either to screening or the friendship paradox). So let us begin with the idea of a
"good friend," formally defined below.
   The wage to incentivize a good friend to join the firm does not have to be particularly
high. After all, their intrinsic cost of effort is rather low when compared to the distribution
of strangers from the general labor market. So expanding the firm and hiring a second worker
who is a stranger necessitates incentivizing this unknown. A higher wage is required, but since
firms offer tethered wages, the network friend will also receive the higher wage as a premium,
which is costly for the entrepreneur. All told, for high enough capital cost to hire the second
worker, it may not be worth it. The better the quality of the friend, the lower the tolerance
in terms of capital cost there is to expand to a large, mixed firm. That is, entrepreneurs with
better friends tend to be more conservative in that, as the capital cost increases, they rather
quickly choose to keep only their friend as a worker and remain small.
   It is worth also commenting on the case of a so-called "good enough" friend (one with a
high cost of effort). We think a priori this case is less empirically relevant, i.e., inconsistent
with the aforementioned empirical literature and counter to the typical intuition. Nonetheless,
we describe it for completeness. In this case, a premium is paid to any stranger who is hired
since the friend needs higher wages. But the friend offers another relevant advantage. The
19The  cost of capital K and the value of output y have similar effects on the main outcomes of interest. We
therefore interpret productivity of the firm as the former, but varying K can be interpreted as (inversely) varying
y.
                                         NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                    15

entrepreneur knows the friend's type and so can guarantee that he does not quit. So there is a
trade-off here between the certainty that the friend will not quit (as opposed to expanding to a
second stranger who may leave) versus the premium cost that must be provided to this "good
enough" friend. When the latter dominates, a large firm comprised of strangers is preferable,
whereas when the former dominates, hiring the good enough friend is preferable.
   The presence of a friend, good or good enough, in fact, always reduces the tolerance in terms
of capital cost for scaling up. When the entrepreneur has a good friend, expanding and hiring
a stranger comes at the cost of overpaying her friend, and she is less likely to expand than a
non-networked individual. That is, the threshold capital cost to run a big firm K  ¯ (cf , 0) which
depends on two arguments--network quality and scope of moral hazard by friends ( = 0)--
actually declines with the quality of the friend. With a good enough friend, expanding and
hiring a stranger comes at the cost of overpaying the stranger, and again the entrepreneur is less
willing to expand. In summary, unless the friend is precisely such that his wage coincides with
the optimal stranger wage, entrepreneurs who can hire through referrals are more reluctant to
run large firms.20
   We also briefly mention the case of fully independent wages. In this case, the threshold
capital cost to run a big firm K ¯ (cf , 0) is independent of the network referral quality. This
comes from the separability in profits in hiring the network referral and hiring the stranger.
   Figure 2 provides a visualization of the four quadrants for type of firm. The case where the
network has both referral and relational value is shown in the hatched portion of each figure; for
comparison, the allocation when the network has only referral value is shown in the background.
Proposition 3.1 formalizes the relationship between an entrepreneur's willingness to scale up
and the quality of her friend. Appendix C extends Proposition 3.1 to the entire range of friend
qualities for completeness.




20The   point where the wages coincide is precisely the cutoff between good and good enough.
                                                                      NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                                                                              16


                         1                                                                                             1
                                                                       Referral value only                                                                        Referral value only




                        0.8                                             Shutdown                                      0.8                                          Shutdown

                                                                                                                                      Small, friend only
   Cost of capital, K




                                                                                                 Cost of capital, K
                        0.6               Small, friend only                                                          0.6



                        0.4                                                                                           0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                 Large, strangers
                                                                      Large, strangers                                                   Large, mixed
                        0.2              Large, mixed                                                                 0.2



                         0                                                                                             0
                              0    0.2         0.4        0.6           0.8                  1                              0   0.2        0.4        0.6          0.8                              1
                                          Friend cost of effort, cf                                                                   Friend cost of effort, cf

                                     (a) Tethered wages                                                                         (b) Independent wages

                          Figure 2.        This figure shows the organizational choice of the firm. Panel (a) considers the case
                          where wages of strangers and friends are tethered to one another. Panel (b) considers the case where
                          wages of strangers and friends are independent. For each panel, the figure shows the organizational
                          choice for the case where the friend has both referral and relational value. The black line shows how
                          the organizational choice changes if the friend only has referral, but not relational, value. The dashed
                          horizontal line shows the maximum cost of capital before the stranger-only firm would shut down.


Proposition 3.1. Suppose  = 0. Let c     ^f be the quality level of friend s.t. the optimal wage
coincides with the one offered to the pool: u(s1 (SS )) = c
                                                          ^ f . Define a "good friend" to be any
friend with cf  c^f . Then
                                                               
                                                               F S
                                                                              ¯ (cf , 0)
                                                                           K  K
        (1) cf  c
                ^ f , x(cf , 0, K ) =
                                                               F
                                                               
                                                                           otherwise
        (2) If  =  (wages are tethered)
                 K¯ (cf ,0)
             (a) cf         > 0.
                 ¯ (c
             (b) K   ^               ¯            1
                      f , 0) = maxcf K (cf , 0) = 2  (SS ).

        (3) If  = 0 (wages are fully independent)
                      ¯ (cf , 0) = 1  (SS ) and therefore independent of cf .
             (a) cf : K            2

Proof. All proofs are in Appendix A.


3.2. Relational Value Effect. With any friend, the relational value effect means that there
is no need to provide a slope for incentive because the friend automatically applies high effort.
Meanwhile, hiring a worker from the pool involves providing incentives. Because wages are
tethered, the friend in a mixed firm also receives this higher wage. Therein lies the issue: a
premium is given to the friend when the stranger must be incentivized to work. Among good
friends, the premium can be high, and the better the friend, the higher the premium. That is,
                                       NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                          17

the relative cost to the firm of merely paying a wage to satisfy the participation constraint of
a good friend versus giving them a pooled wage written up to induce effort by a stranger in a
larger firm is higher the better the friend.
   Owing to this fact, an entrepreneur with a higher-quality friend requires lower levels of capital
cost per worker to simply decide to maintain a small firm with the network member. The worse
the friend, the higher the capital cost the entrepreneur is willing to withstand before deciding
she wants a small networked firm instead of a large mixed firm. So K      ¯ (cf , ), the threshold
capital cost to run a big firm as a function of friend quality and lack of moral hazard for the
friend, declines in the friend quality.
   Compared to the previous case, when there is only a referral effect, the effective premium
that must be paid to a friend in a mixed firm increases. While previously there was a level
of friend quality such that a networked entrepreneur was just as willing as an unnetworked
entrepreneur (shown by the black dashed line) to expand her firm, this is now no longer the
case. As illustrated by Figure 2, for all levels of friend quality, the entrepreneur is willing to
tolerate only a lower cost of expansion before deciding to run a small, networked firm. Notice
that this is not true for non-networked individuals (the right side of both panels of Figure 2),
as the relational value only affects choices in the presence of a potentially qualified friend.
   In the case of fully independent wages, again the threshold capital cost is independent of the
friend quality, and indeed for high enough quality friends, the threshold capital cost is the same
whether or not friends also avoid moral hazard.

Proposition 3.2. Suppose  = . Let c         ~
                                            f be the quality level of friend s.t. the friend's partici-
pation constraint starts to bind at the optimal wage offered to the mixed firm: p u(s1 (F S, )) =
~
c f . Define a `very good friend' to be any friend with cf  c  ~
                                                               f . Then
                                      
                                      F S
                                      
                                           K  K   ¯ (cf , )
   (1) cf  c  ~f , x(cf , , K ) =
                                   F
                                   
                                           otherwise
   (2) If  = 
            K¯ (cf ,)
        (a)    cf
                       > 0.
        (b)  cf  c   ~    ¯           ¯
                      f , K (cf , ) < K (cf , 0)
        (c) maxc K  ¯ (cf , )  1  (SS )
                  f               2
   (3) If  = 0
                 ¯ (cf , ) = 1  (SS ) and therefore independent of cf .
        (a) cf : K               2
        (b)  cf  c ~f , ¯
                        K ( cf ,     ¯ (cf , 0)
                                   )=K

   To further clarify the different trade-offs faced by entrepreneurs with tethered versus inde-
pendent wages, Proposition 3.3 compares firm composition in the two cases. We show that with
fully independent wages, there is a larger effect on firm composition. This contrasts with the
previous two propositions, which highlighted the effect of referral and relational value on size.
This effect was only present with tethered wages. When wages instead are fully independent
                                       NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                      18

within the firm, entrepreneurs choose to hire their friend and a stranger for a larger range of
friends, and hire purely strangers only for very high-cost friends. The reason for this is that
the value of the good enough friend is higher when the entrepreneur does not need to overpay
the pool worker.

Proposition 3.3. Let c     f ( ),   {0, } be the quality level of friend s.t. the entrepreneur is
indifferent between choosing F S and SS when  = 0 (no fairness constraint):  (F S, c    f ( ),  ) =
                       
 (SS, cf ( ),  ). Let cf ( ),   {0, } be the same quality level of friend when  = :
 (F S, c                   
        f ( ),  ) =  (SS, cf ( ),  ).

   (1)  , c           
           f ( ) and cf ( ) are unique;                               
                               F S
                               
                                     c    cf ( )
                                                                      F S   c  cf ( )
       x(cf , ,  = ) =                             ;   x(cf , ,  = 0) =
                               SS
                               
                                     otherwise                        SS
                                                                      
                                                                            otherwise
   (2)  ,   cf ( )   <   cf ( ).


  The fact that with independent wages, avoiding the information rent leads to more network-
based hiring lies at the core of welfare losses resulting from referral and relational value, which
we turn to next.



                              4. Efficiency and Welfare Properties

  We now discuss efficiency and welfare properties of the market allocation described above.
There are three sources of inefficiency in this setup. First, entrepreneurs cannot observe a
worker's cost of effort before setting the wage. They set a wage that optimally trades off a
higher probability of a worker accepting an offer against higher wage payments. The resulting
wage is inefficiently low in that a set of workers exists that would produce in the first-best, but
they are priced out in the market allocation. Second, effort is unobservable. Wages set by the
entrepreneur are steep in order to provide incentives, inefficiently exposing the worker to risk.
Third, in the baseline case of tethered wages, all workers in a firm must be offered the same
wage contract. As discussed in Propositions 3.1 and 3.2, this discourages entrepreneurs from
hiring strangers when their network connection is of sufficiently high (or low) quality. In the
case of fully independent wages, as discussed in Proposition 3.3, entrepreneurs are more likely
to hire their friend to avoid paying an information rent to strangers.
  While it may seem like the network exactly solves the first two sources of inefficiency, and
hence welfare may be higher, we show a striking result that welfare may actually be lower in
the economy when entrepreneurs are networked than when they are not, because a network
inefficiently encourages firms to operate on a small or excessively networked scale.
  We consider a social planner that maximizes total surplus in the economy. To avoid distri-
butional concerns, we evaluate the total surplus as the sum of entrepreneur's profits and the
                                                              NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                                                                   19

maximum monetary transfers workers could pay while still respecting their participation con-
straint. The social planner faces the exact economic environment as the entrepreneur, taking
the wage contract set by entrepreneurs as given and choosing the organizational form. For
instance, if an entrepreneur offers a wage contract {s0 = 0, s1 = w} to the pool and also hires
her friend, welfare is given by
                                                ^ p u(w)
                   W F (FS, cf ) = (F S, cf ) +          p  (c) f (c) dc + p  (cf )
                                                                                            0

 where p u(w -  (c)) = c.
   To be explicit, the only difference between entrepreneurs and the social planner is that the
latter chooses an organizational structure to maximize welfare instead of profits. We refer to this
welfare-maximizing allocation as the second-best. We focus on this approach for pedagogical
reasons: it allows us to concentrate purely on the welfare consequences of organizational choice,
i.e., hiring a friend or a stranger.21
   Figure 3b illustrates how welfare in each organizational form depends on the friend's cost of
effort. Welfare is computed assuming that the entrepreneur chooses the level of wages, so this
represents welfare in the market allocation. For comparison, Figure 3a repeats the picture for
profits from Section 2.


                                                  Friend, referral only                                                                    Friend, referral only
                1.2                               Friend, referral + relational
                                                  Add stranger, referral only
                                                                                                          1.2                              Friend, referral + relational
                                                                                                                                           Add stranger, referral only
                                                  Add stranger, referral + relational                                                      Add stranger, referral + relational
                                                  Stranger only                                                                            Stranger only
                 1                                                                                         1


                0.8                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                Welfare
       Profit




                0.6                                                                                       0.6


                0.4                                                                                       0.4


                0.2                                                                                       0.2


                 0                                                                                         0
                      0    0.2        0.4        0.6               0.8                  1                       0   0.2        0.4        0.6               0.8                  1
                                 Friend cost of effort, cf                                                                Friend cost of effort, cf

                                  (a) Profits                                                                              (b) Welfare

                Figure 3.         Panel (a) shows firm profit as a function of the known friend's cost of effort. The figure
                shows the profit from hiring a friend only as well as the marginal profit from expanding the firm and
                hiring a stranger. The profit from hiring a stranger only (which does not depend on the friend cost
                of effort) is given by the horizontal line. Panel (b) shows welfare as a function of the known friend's
                cost of effort. The figure shows welfare from hiring a friend only as well as the marginal welfare from
                expanding the firm and hiring a stranger. The welfare from hiring a stranger only (which does not
                depend on the friend cost of effort) is given by the horizontal line.

21If the social planner could also choose wages, they would offer a higher wage to the pool compared to the
entrepreneur, which would increase the probability that a match occurs and production happens. They would
also hire strangers at a higher value of K , further increasing production.
                                             NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                    20

   When hiring only a friend, welfare and profits coincide. Since the friend's effort cost is
observable, there are no inefficiencies. When hiring only a stranger, welfare is independent of
the friend's effort cost, but importantly higher than pure profits. The difference between welfare
and profits corresponds exactly to the workers' information rent. Since the entrepreneur must
set a wage before observing the effort cost, workers who accept the wage contract in general
enjoy a surplus.
   In the case of fully independent wages, the gap between profits and welfare when hiring a
stranger is exactly why the social planner and the entrepreneur make different choices. The
entrepreneur does not internalize the surplus to the worker. For a friend with a relatively high
cost of effort, the entrepreneur would keep hiring her friend, while the social planner would
have already switched to hiring from the general labor market.
   With tethered wages, welfare also depends on the quality of the entrepreneur's friend, since
this affects all wages offered. In the absence of the referral effect, the welfare of hiring an
additional stranger is weakly increasing everywhere.22 For low values of the friend's effort cost,
the difference between welfare and profits comes from the fact that hiring an additional stranger
means paying the friend a higher wage. While this reduces profits, it is a pure transfer and as
such has no effect on welfare. As soon as the friend's constraint starts binding, a higher effort
cost has the positive effect that entrepreneurs now offer higher wages to the pool, counteracting
some of the inefficient wage shading that results from observable effort cost. Taken together, the
additional welfare from hiring a stranger is strictly increasing whenever the friend's constraint
is binding.
   In the presence of the referral effect, there is a welfare cost of hiring an additional stranger,
since friends must now be paid inefficiently steep wages. While welfare is still in general higher
than profits, welfare from hiring an additional stranger is lower when friends also solve the
moral hazard concern.
   Figure 4 illustrates the second-best organizational choice, that is, the welfare-maximizing
choice of firm size and composition conditional on the entrepreneur setting wages (subopti-
mally). The left panel corresponds to the case with only the referral effect ( = 0). The dashed
line marks the maximum level of capital the entrepreneur would be willing to pay to run a
large firm in the market allocation. For all levels of referral quality, the second-best features a
weakly larger firm. When both the market allocation and the second-best involve hiring only
strangers (this corresponds to the far right part of panel 4a), the discrepancy between the plan-
ner and market choices comes from the fact that workers' cost of effort is not observable. All
workers who accept a contract get a surplus equal to the difference between their reservation
wage and the market wage. The entrepreneur does not take this into account when deciding
whether to operate. This is precisely the sense in which these frictions lead entrepreneurs to
run inefficiently small firms.

22
     Depending on the assumption about Fc , it could start declining for very large values of cf .
                                                                      NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                                                                       21


                         1                                                                                            1
                                                                      Private equilibrium                                                                              Private equilibrium




                        0.8                                             Shutdown                                     0.8                                                 Shutdown


                                    Small, friend only
   Cost of capital, K




                                                                                                Cost of capital, K
                                                                                                                                         Small, friend only
                        0.6                                                                                          0.6



                        0.4                                                                                          0.4
                                          Large, mixed
                                                                      Large, strangers                                                                                 Large, strangers
                                                                                                                                          Large, mixed
                        0.2                                                                                          0.2



                         0                                                                                            0
                              0    0.2         0.4        0.6           0.8                 1                              0       0.2          0.4        0.6           0.8                 1
                                          Friend cost of effort, cf                                                                        Friend cost of effort, cf

                                   (a) Referral value only                                                                     (b) Referral and relational value

                          Figure 4.       This figure shows the social planner's organization choice, taking the wage contract as
                          given. Panel (A) shows the case where the network has referral value only. Panel (B) shows the case
                          where the network has referral and relational value. In each panel, the private equilibrium is shown as
                          a black line. The dashed horizontal line shows the maximum cost of capital before the stranger-only
                          firm would shut down in the private equilibrium.




   Through the referral effect, friends solve the inefficiency of unobserved effort cost. One might
therefore expect that the presence of a friend removes the difference between the second-best
and the market allocation. In fact this is true whenever the capital cost is high enough that the
second-best organizational form is also a small, networked firm. However, as Proposition 3.1
shows, the presence of a friend--especially a "good one"--reduces the entrepreneur's incentive
to scale up and hire outside of her network. Figure 4a shows that the second-best organizational
choice is (weakly) larger for all values of network referral quality than the private equilibrium
(shown as a solid black line in the figure), and the disagreement in size is larger in the presence of
a good friend. Even though the referral value solves the first inefficiency for network connections,
entrepreneurs still choose too small--and now also too networked--a firm. Proposition 4.1
formalizes this.
   Figure 4b illustrates how the presence of the relational effect changes the second-best allo-
cation. When the network connection also solves the inefficiency of unobservable effort, the
welfare-maximizing choice of organizational form is (weakly) smaller and more networked. In
this case there is a real cost of having to pay all workers the same wage, as friends are given
inefficiently steep wage contracts. However, as Figure 4b illustrates and Proposition 4.1 for-
malizes, the entrepreneur's choice of organizational form is also too small and too networked in
this case.
                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                        22

   In the case of fully independent wages, the market and planner allocation differ mostly in
terms of composition.23 The set of friend effort cost cf for which the planner would like to run
a networked firm (FS versus SS) is strictly smaller. Part of why the entrepreneur chooses to
hire her friend is because this avoids paying an information rent to workers. The planner does
not value this and would therefore switch to hiring only from the general labor market much
earlier. Appendix B plots the equivalent of Figure 4 for the case of fully independent wages.
   Having discussed efficiency properties and the planner's choice, we now turn to analyzing how
welfare in the market allocation depends on the network quality. On the one hand, through
the referral and relational value effects, network connections solve some of the underlying inef-
ficiencies in the market. On the other hand, when entrepreneurs are connected to high-quality
workers, organizational choices are further away from the welfare-maximizing ones. This begs
the question of whether it is possible that the referral and relational value effects reduce welfare
on net. We look at three aspects of this overall question: (1) does being connected to a better
friend reduce welfare, (2) is welfare higher when the entrepreneur has no network connection
at all, and (3) does having a network connection with relational in additional to referral value
reduce welfare. Note that without considering organizational choice, the answer to all three
questions is no.
   When taking into account how the referral and relational values alter the choice of firm
composition, however, the effects on welfare can indeed flip. Consider first the case of a "very
good friend", as defined in Proposition 3.2 and a level of capital cost such that the entrepreneur
chooses to run a mixed firm as long as the friend's quality is sufficiently low. Figure 5a plots
welfare as function of friend quality in this region. The jump in welfare occurs exactly where
the market allocation switches from running a small, network-reliant firm to also employing a
stranger. Both in the presence and in the absence of the relational value effect (dashed and
solid lines), welfare is declining in the friend's effort cost as long as the organizational form does
not change. This is simply a consequence of surplus being lower when workers have a higher
cost of production. At the point where the entrepreneur has such a high-quality friend that she
chooses to hire only the friend, welfare drops discontinuously. The drop in welfare is exactly
equal to the expected surplus of workers hired from the pool, or their information rent from
unobservable cost of effort.




23The   same result of too-low tolerance of K when strangers are hired of course also applies here.
                                                                              NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                                                                                                    23


              1.04
                                                                              Referral value only                                                                                                   Referral value only
                                                                              Referral + relational value                   0.55                                                                    Referral + relational value
              1.02
                                                                                                                             0.5
                1                                                                                                                                    Small, friend only                             Large, strangers
                                                                                                                            0.45

              0.98
                                 Small, friend only                                  Large, mixed                            0.4      Small, friend only                              Large, strangers

                                                                                                                            0.35
              0.96                   Small, friend only                                    Large, mixed
    Welfare




                                                                                                                  Welfare
                                                                                                                             0.3
              0.94
                                                                                                                            0.25

              0.92                                                                                                           0.2

                                                                                                                            0.15
               0.9
                                                                                                                             0.1
              0.88
                                                                                                                            0.05

              0.86                                                                                                            0
                     0   0.05         0.1            0.15               0.2             0.25                0.3                    0.65        0.7         0.75          0.8           0.85        0.9           0.95             1
                                            Friend cost of effort, cf                                                                                               Friend cost of effort, cf


                                (a) Very good friend                                                                                                 (b) Good enough friend

                 Figure 5.        This figure shows the welfare achieved by the private organizational structure. Panel
                 (A) shows the case for a low cost of capital and the case of tethered wages, for the jump where the
                 market allocation switches from running a small networked firm to running a large mixed firm (the
                 very good friend case). Panel (B) shows the case for a higher cost of capital and the case of tethered
                 wages, for the jump where the market allocation switches from running a small networked firm to a
                 large stranger-only firm (the good enough friend case).




   Figure 5b illustrates that the welfare losses from inefficient organizational choice can be
large enough that welfare is higher in the absence of a friend (represented here as a friend with
prohibitively high effort cost). This is most likely to happen when the entrepreneur has a friend
of relatively low quality, a good enough friend. Due to the referral (and possibly relational)
value effect, she values her friend enough to be willing to pay her a relatively high wage. This
wage is too high to justify offering the contract to the pool, however, so she chooses to hire
her friend only. Facing the same cost of installing capital, an entrepreneur with no network
connections would have run a large firm, generating much higher welfare gains.
   Again taking into account the effect on organizational choice, it is possible that the relational
value effect reduces welfare. The dotted orange line in Figure 5a plots welfare with both the
referral and relational value effects, whereas the solid orange line corresponds to the case with
only the referral effect. When only the friend is hired in both cases, welfare is higher in
the presence of the relational value, since contracts can be flat and provide insurance to the
friend. When the organizational choice is a mixed firm in both cases, welfare coincides. For
low enough values of cf , the friend's participation and incentive constraints are not binding.
Wages and hence welfare are identical in this region. However, because hiring the friend only
is more profitable in the presence of the relational value effect, the entrepreneur is even more
discouraged from hiring an additional worker from the pool. It is precisely for this range of
friend quality where the relational value effect deters outside hiring that welfare is reduced by
having a friend for whom effort is effectively contractible.
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                         24

   In the case of fully independent wages, there is a similar possibility for welfare declines with
better-quality networks. Now this effect will only happen in the case of "good enough" friends.
Since the planner and entrepreneur disagree on the highest cost friend that should still be
hired, welfare drops discontinuously at the level of cf such that the entrepreneur starts hiring
her friend. Again, even in the knife-edge case where wages are fully independent within the
firm, since the relational value effect encourages even more network-based hiring, it is entirely
possible that welfare is lower than with the referral value only. Appendix Figure B.2a shows
the welfare discontinuity for the case of independent wages.
   Proposition 4.1 formalizes the above discussion.

Proposition 4.1.
   (1) For all values of referral quality cf :
        (a) If  = , the entrepreneur chooses an organizational form that is smaller than in
            the welfare-maximizing allocation.
        (b) If  = 0, the entrepreneur chooses an organizational form that is more networked
            than in the welfare-maximizing allocation.
   (2) Define welfare as the sum of entrepreneur's profits and workers' surplus. For all values
       of :
        (a)  (cf , cf ) with cf < cf s.t. W F (cf ,  ) > W F (cf ,  )    {0, }
        (b)  cf s.t. W F (cf , ) > W F (cf , 0)
        (c)  cf s.t. W F (,  ) > W F (cf ,  )    {0, }


   To sum up, in our setup (a) entrepreneurs are choosing firms that are too small and too
network-reliant and (b) the referral and relational value effects can lower welfare precisely if
they induce the entrepreneur to run a small and networked firm. These results also motivate an
analysis of overall market organization, where we question whether a market learns to organize
itself in a manner of efficient scale and composition, and how all of this depends on fundamentals
such as network quality in the market.




                                  5. General Equilibrium

  Our paper primarily focuses on the case of small industries, which is appropriate for burgeon-
ing markets. This is a setting where workers' outside options naturally consist of the market
at large in a variety of industries and, therefore, can be thought of as fixed--i.e., a partial
equilibrium setup. However, we also briefly examine a setting where this phenomenon applies
to a large and mature industry--i.e., a general equilibrium setup -- to explore the interaction
between hiring decisions of entrepreneurs in a common labor market. We leave a more general
                                      NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                            25

characterization of the market-wide effects of network-based hiring for future work, as this is
beyond the scope of this paper. For simplicity, we focus on the case where there is only refer-
ral value; we conjecture that the same mechanism carries over to the case where there is also
relational value.
   We find that general equilibrium interactions have the potential to amplify the negative effect
of network quality on firm expansion. As before, being connected to a better friend makes an
entrepreneur less likely to hire from the pool. In equilibrium, this can change workers' outside
option sufficiently to induce other entrepreneurs also to stop hiring from the pool. We also
show that the intuition of high-quality friends deterring outside hiring is still present when
these friends have the option to join the general labor market.


5.1. Setup. Consider a market with a measure N of entrepreneurs, each of whom is connected
to one friend. There are also M > N workers who do not have a connection to an entrepreneur;
these could, for instance, be recent migrants to the city. As before, migrants' cost of providing
effort is unknown to entrepreneurs and drawn from Fc (.).
   We denote by z (x) the share of entrepreneurs who choose the organizational form x 
{0, F, S, F S, SS }. The stranger pool then consists of M migrants in addition to the N ·
(z (0) + z (SS )) workers that were not hired by their friend. The number of jobs offered to
pool workers is N · (z (F S ) + 2z (SS )).
   The timing is as follows. Entrepreneurs decide how many workers to hire and whether these
are friends or strangers. Workers observe the distribution of wage offers in the population; the
                                                   N ·[z (F S )+2z (SS )]
ratio of vacancies to job applicants given by  := M  +N ·[z (0)+z (SS )]
                                                                          ; and in the case of networked
workers, their wage offer from the connected entrepreneur. Connected workers then decide
whether to accept the wage offer from their known entrepreneur, join the general labor market
pool, or exit the labor market altogether. The M unconnected workers decide whether to enter
the labor market. We normalize the value of exiting the labor market to 0 for all workers.
   Workers from the labor market pool are randomly matched to firms; the number of matches
that form is equal to the minimum of vacancies and jobs offered. Given M > N , there are
always more applicants than jobs, and the ex ante job-finding probability for workers, , is less
than 1. Once matched, workers cannot redraw a new wage offer this period. This assumption
captures the fact that a job search takes time in practice. Therefore, workers accept a contract
as long as their expected utility exceeds zero. Workers who are connected to an entrepreneur
compare the wage contract offered to the expected benefits from joining the labor market pool.
Let v  denote the expected wage payments received conditional on being matched in the general
labor market. A worker with effort cost cf has an outside option of  (v  - cf ).


5.2. Equilibrium. An equilibrium is a set of {v  , }, a distribution over organizational forms
z (x; v  , ), and wage contracts {s0 (x, cf , v  , ), s1 (x, cf , v  , )} such that
                                        NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                              26

    (1) Given {v  , }, organizational choice x and wage contracts {s0 (x, cf , v  , ), s1 (x, cf , v  , )}
         solve the entrepreneur's problem as laid out in Section 2, with the friend's participation
         constraint replaced by pu(s1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - cf   (v  - cf )
               N · [z (F S ; v  , ) + 2z (SS ; v  , )]
    (2)  =
              M + N · [z (0; v  , ) + z (SS ; v  , )]
                   2z (SS )
    (3) v  =                        [p u(s1 (SS, v  , ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (SS, v  , )] +
              2z (SS ) + z (F S )
                    z (F S )
                                   Ec [p u(s1 (cf , F S, v  , ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (cf , F S, v  , )]
              2z (SS ) + z (F S ) f
   From the new participation constraint, it is clear that, as long as  < 1, good friends still
require a lower wage than higher-cost friends. Even though both types of friend could join the
general labor market, they might not be matched to any employer. This possibility is more
costly to a higher-quality worker, who has a higher expected surplus from being matched, than
a lower-quality worker. As a result, the main mechanism driving Propositions 3.1 and 3.2
is still present in general equilibrium. Being connected to a very high quality friend reduces
the marginal profits of hiring from the pool and increases the incentives to run a small and
networked firm.

5.3. Quality of Friends and Labor Market Equilibrium. For simplicity, we consider a
distribution of friend types that has two mass points. A fraction  of connected workers are of
type cH                            L     H
       f , and the remainder has cf < cf . We start from a baseline equilibrium with tethered
wages in which entrepreneurs connected to the low-cost friends choose F S , corresponding to the
good friends region defined in Section 3. Entrepreneurs with high-cost friends choose SS . We
then analyze the general equilibrium effects of reducing cH
                                                          f just enough to induce entrepreneurs
to hire their friends.
   This change affects the other entrepreneurs -- those connected to low-cost friends -- through
a change in their friend's outside option.24 When a fraction  of entrepreneurs switch from
hiring two strangers to hiring their friend only, the probability of being matched, , decreases
for all pool workers. In addition, the only entrepreneurs who still hire strangers are those
connected to low-cost friends, who chose F S in the baseline. The wage they offer is lower since
we assumed that they were operating in the good friend region where the friend's constraints
are not binding. Taken together, not only does the job-finding probability decrease, but the
expected wage when finding a job is also lower.
   Since their outside option decreased, low-cost friends are now even more valuable to the
entrepreneur. However, the reduction in the outside option can only be fully capitalized on when
no strangers are hired. For a large enough change in the outside option, these entrepreneurs
could now be induced to stop hiring from the pool altogether. In the new equilibrium, no
entrepreneurs hire from the general labor market, and all friends have an outside option of zero.
24Throughout  the analysis, we abstract from changes in the composition of the labor pool. We conjecture that
for M large enough, the effect through the outside option dominates.
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                         27

This setup shows how an increase in the friend quality in one small part of the distribution can
not only induce directly affected entrepreneurs to stop hiring from the labor market but also,
through general equilibrium interactions, result in other entrepreneurs choosing to run small,
networked firms. Proposition 5.1 formalizes.
                                                                      
Proposition 5.1. Suppose  = , x(cL                               H
                                       f ; v ,  ) = F S , and x(cf ; v ,  ) = SS . Consider a shift
                                                                                       
of cH                     H                                                    H
    f by  such that x(cf - ; v ,  ) = F. Then, in the new equilibrium, x(cf - ; v ,  ) = F ,
        
x(cL
   f ; v ,  )  {F, F S }, and

   (1)  < ; the job-finding probability is lower.
   (2) v  < v  ; expected payments are lower.
                                           L 
   (3) For small enough values of cLf , x(cf ; v ,  ) = F ; entrepreneurs with low cost friends
       also hire their friend only.

   In the case of independent wages, we assume that friend quality is low enough such that
both types of entrepreneurs hire only from the general labor market in the baseline. We then
consider an improvement in the friend quality of the lower cost friend, such that it induces
entrepreneurs to start hiring their friends.
   Since a fraction 1 -  of entrepreneurs now hire only one worker from the pool, the job-finding
probability decreases. In addition, the average wage offered in the labor market decreases. This
is a result of the fact that without the cL
                                          f workers, the pool is now of higher expected quality.
After all, the set of friends now hired directly by connected entrepreneurs is of relatively low
quality. With a higher expected quality, wages offered to unknown workers are lower. Both a
lower job-finding probability and a lower wage reduce the workers' outside option.
   With a lower outside option, workers become cheaper to employ; for a large enough shift,
entrepreneurs connected to the low-cost workers also switch from hiring only strangers to hiring
their friend in the new equilibrium. Similar to the case with tethered wages, general equilibrium
effects imply that an increase in friend quality in some part of the distribution can lead to more
network-based hiring everywhere.
                                                                 
Proposition 5.2. Suppose  = 0 and x(cL                      H
                                            f ; v ,  ) = x(cf ; v ,  ) = SS . Consider a shift of
                                                                                    
cL                    L                                                       L
 f by  such that x(cf - ; v ,  ) = F S . Then, in the new equilibrium, x(cf - ; v ,  ) = F S ,
        
x(cH
   f ; v ,  )  {F S, SS }, and

   (1)  < ; the job finding probability is lower.
   (2) v  < v  ; expected payments are lower.
                                       
   (3) For small enough cH        H
                           f , x(cf ; v ,  ) = F S ; entrepreneurs with high-cost friends also hire
       their friend.

   In Section 4, we discussed that, through the effect on organizational choice, welfare might be
decreasing in friend quality. The general equilibrium interactions described here reinforce this
effect. The overall welfare effects of an increase in cf depend on the relative strength of the
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                        28

direct effect (welfare is lower when "technology" worsens) and the indirect effect (a worse friend
might induce hiring from the pool). As established in Propositions 5.1 and 5.2, a change in the
distribution of friend quality has the potential to change hiring behavior in an unaffected part
of the distribution. We know from the previous section that, in partial equilibrium, a reduction
in cf can reduce welfare. In general equilibrium, this change also induces other entrepreneurs
to also rely more on network-based hiring, lowering welfare further. Therefore, the general
equilibrium effects of network-based hiring, through their effect on outside options, exacerbate
welfare losses from high-quality network connections.



                     6. Learning and Market-Level Organization

   We now turn to learning in this environment. As in much of the paper, we focus here on the
case with tethered wages. In the previous analysis we assumed that, while a specific worker's
type is not observable, entrepreneurs know the distribution Fc of types in the population. In
this section, we relax this arguably strong assumption and suppose instead that entrepreneurs
have initial beliefs and update these based on their experience of hiring strangers. We study
the distribution of firm organizational structures when -- as before -- entrepreneurs face con-
tracting frictions and have access to referral networks and -- in addition -- face uncertainty
about the quality of the general labor market pool.
   Crucially, the nature and quality of social learning will depend on the firm organizational
structure. Hiring a stranger, for instance, is necessary to deliver a signal to the entrepreneur
about the worker pool distribution. Clearly, operating a small firm with only one friend as a
worker never allows the entrepreneur to update her beliefs. In contrast, each stranger hired
delivers a signal about worker quality.
   There are two natural learning environments to investigate, but because of the technical
similarity in the arguments and results, we look at them in parallel. For tractability, we study
an environment in which the state of the world could be either "good," in which case the optimal
organizational choice involves hiring strangers, or "bad," in which case entrepreneurs optimally
hire only their friend or exit the market.
   The first environment looks at a single forward-looking Bayesian entrepreneur over time, who
is infinitely lived and who can choose how to organize each period. Therefore the entrepreneur
chooses an organizational structure balancing current-period profits with the value of experi-
menting to learn about the quality of the stranger pool, which affects expected future profits.
Here the market at large is characterized by the limiting distribution of organization choices by
a continuum of entrepreneurs in a market.
   The second environment studies social learning. In this case, we consider an individual
sequence of Bayesian entrepreneurs, each living a single period. Each entrepreneur observes
information generated by all prior agents. This is therefore along the lines of the classical
                                        NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                               29

sequential model of social learning (Banerjee, 1992; Smith and Sørensen, 2000; Eyster and
Rabin, 2010).25 In the typical sequential model, agents do not see the full signal received by
prior agents but instead see coarsenings, such as the outcome of a discrete decision, which are
not sufficient statistics for beliefs. Our setup departs from this literature because in our case
the agent at time t observes the entire history of all organizational structures, wages, profits --
the full information set -- of all previous firms.
   For both environments, we characterize the limiting distribution of firm organization and
demonstrate the existence of an information poverty trap. When the worker pool is actually
good, we show that in the limit, a positive fraction of entrepreneurs -- or sequences of en-
trepreneurs -- do not learn the state of the world and instead run small, networked firms.
Being pessimistic about the general labor market pool is an absorbing state -- a trap -- since
changing these beliefs would require overcoming the pessimism enough to start hiring from that
labor market. We show that, relative to a social planner defined as in Section 4, both learning
setups lead to an inefficiently large fraction of entrepreneurs stuck in the information poverty
trap. Furthermore, a simple but important asymmetry exists. If the worker pool is actually
bad, the market must learn it, and there is no such trap. Finally, we show how it can be the
case that an improvement in network quality exacerbates the information poverty trap.

6.1. Limit Distribution of Firm Organization. We index by t  N. When we study one
forward-looking entrepreneur, t indexes time, and when we study social learning, t indexes
entrepreneurs. Forward-looking entrepreneurs are infinitely lived and discount the future at
rate  . Assume that the distribution of worker quality is given by Fc, (·).  denotes the binary
state of the world,   {1, 0}. Fc,0 (·) first-order stochastically dominates Fc,1 (·). Fc,1 (·) is the
low-cost state of the world under which the optimal decision would be for the entrepreneur to
choose to organize as a large firm. Fc,0 (·) is the high-cost state of the world under which the
optimal decision would be to either remain small and networked or exit. Until otherwise noted,
the state is 1, unknown to the agents.
   An entrepreneur at t has belief qt := P( = 1|Zt-1 ) where the probability is taken with
respect to their information set: here this is a Bayesian update using their prior and all past
signals Zt-1 := (z1 , ..., zt-1 ) described below. An entrepreneur at t takes a decision xt  X
where X = {shutdown, F, S, F S, SS } is a finite set of firm organizational decisions.
   Given xt the entrepreneur generates a binary signal zt  G(·|xt , st , ) if x  X \ X0 . The
distribution of the signal depends on the state of the world , the organizational choice xt , and
the wages offered st . zt is either 1, if output is high, or 0, if no output is produced. Intuitively,
when output is high, the entrepreneur knows that the worker put in high effort, an outcome
more likely in the "good" state of the world. But if the decision xt  X0  X then no signal
25We  conjecture that, with some effort, one could extend our results to a setting that nests our own, such as
stochastic neighborhoods of observation (Acemoglu et al., 2011) but we leave that to future work and content
ourselves with the simpler setup.
                                         NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                        30

is generated. In our case, the set X0 = {F, shutdown} since for these organizational structures,
there can be no signal delivered about the quality distribution of the general worker pool.
   To select an organization in X0 , the entrepreneur must be sufficiently pessimistic about the
distribution of overall worker quality, so we say a decision in X0 is optimal if qt  q  for some
q.
   An entrepreneur at t + 1 forms beliefs according to Bayes' rule:
         P( = 0|Zt , xt , st )    P( = 0|Zt-1 , xt-1 , st-1 )) P(zt | = 0, Zt-1 , xt-1 , st-1 ))
                                =                             ·                                  .
         P( = 1|Zt , xt , st ))   P( = 1|Zt-1 , xt-1 , st-1 )) P(zt | = 1, Zt-1 , xt-1 , st-1 ))
   Firm organization as well as the wage are chosen to maximize flow profits and, in the case
of one forward-looking entrepreneur, the continuation value.

               {xt , st } := argmax E[(x, s)|qt ] +  E[V (qt+1 (qt , x, s)|x, s)], with
                           {xX ,st }
                                          flow profits          continuation value for
                                                            infinitely lived entrepreneur

                 V (qt ) = max         E[(x, s)|qt ] +  E[V (qt+1 (qt , s, x)|x, s)].
                          {xX ,st }

Recall that in the social learning case, t indexes individual entrepreneurs, each living one period
and therefore behaving with  = 0.
   This generates a stochastic process of beliefs {qt }, which depends on the equilibrium firm
organization decisions in previous periods. This also generates a stochastic process over the
organization of the firm {xt }.
   We are interested in the distribution of this stochastic process. When we are looking at a
single forward-looking entrepreneur making decisions over time, the limit distribution tells us
the share of firms under each organizational structure in the limit in the market. To the extent
that the share of firms making suboptimal decisions, i.e., decisions different from the ones they
would make if they knew the state of the world, is larger than what the social planner would
choose, there is an inefficiency.
   When we are considering the social learning case, we analogously consider the fraction of mar-
kets in which all but a finite number of firms choose the optimal firm organizational structure.
If that is smaller than what a social planner would choose, there is more mass on suboptimally
small and networked organizational decisions, and we say there is inefficient social learning and
a failure of information aggregation.
   Recall if xt  X0 = {F, shutdown} then no signal zt is generated. So at any belief, q < q  ,
that justifies such a decision learning stops: this is absorbing. Practically this means that if an
entrepreneur at time t ever becomes convinced that it is not worthwhile to try hiring from the
pool, then they may exit or hire only from the network, but in that case, no further information
on the worker pool is generated. Therefore, in subsequent periods the exact same decisions are
made.
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                          31

  This begs the question as to the behavior of this stochastic process. Does it converge to the
truth? Does it converge to this absorbing region of exit and conservative organization?

Proposition 6.1.
   (1) Consider a continuum of forward-looking, infinitely lived entrepreneurs in a market with
       no social learning. Under the above assumptions, for any initial priors that are interior
       and justify experimentation, i.e., q  < q0 < 1,
        (a) the share of firms that either exit or organize as small firms with only a friend as
            a worker is positive and
        (b) the share of firms that learn the state of the world and optimally organize is positive.
   (2) Consider an infinite number of sequences of one-period-lived Bayesian entrepreneurs.
       Under the above assumptions, for any priors that are interior and justify experimenta-
       tion, i.e., q  < q0 < 1,
        (a) the share of markets where all but a finite number of agents either exit or organize
            as a small firm with only a friend as a worker is positive and
        (b) the share of markets where all but a finite number of firms learn the state of the
            world and optimally organize is positive.

   This means that in both setups, for any initial priors that are interior such that entrepreneurs
are willing to experiment at least in the first period, there is always a positive probability that
entrepreneurs or the market never learn the true distribution even in the limit and remain
suboptimally small and networked. In the social learning setup, this information aggregation
failure happens despite the fact that full information sets are transmitted and entrepreneurs see
all choices and outcomes of all previous entrepreneurs. This does not always happen, though,
and depends on the equilibrium quality of signals that depend on fundamentals, which also
determines the cutoff q  .

6.1.1. Asymmetry in learning process. So far, we have assumed that the state of the world is
1, unknown to agents. In this state of the world, there is a positive share of entrepreneurs or
markets where firms fail to learn the state of the world even in the long run and are stuck in
an information poverty trap. Would a similar failure of learning imply that a positive share
of entrepreneurs or markets fail to learn that the state of the world is 0 and instead keep
organizing as large firms even in the long run? Proposition 6.2 shows that this is not the case.
If the state of the world is truly 0, all forward-looking entrepreneurs will eventually learn that
hiring from the general labor market pool is not optimal. Further, in the social learning setup,
in all markets, all but a finite number of firms are sufficiently pessimistic and behave as if they
know the state of the world is 0.

Proposition 6.2. Consider a continuum of forward-looking, infinitely lived entrepreneurs or
an infinite number of sequences of one-period-lived Bayesian entrepreneurs. Under the above
assumptions, when  = 0, then limt P(xt  X0 ) = 1.
                                        NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                           32

  We omit the proof of the straightforward result. While simple, it is important to notice
the asymmetry. If the priors are optimistic, since the negative state of the world is absorbing,
then, in any case, the optimal choice of scale and composition will be correct in the long run.
In contrast, if the world is actually good, then we get the result that not all entrepreneurs or
markets optimally organize and a nontrivial share suboptimally gets absorbed.


6.2. Network Quality and Learning. Next we look at how the relational and referral value
of network-based hiring affect learning. Specifically, we ask how forward-looking entrepreneurs
and the market organize as a function of whether or not the referred network members tend
to be of higher or lower quality. Here, as in much of the paper, we focus on what we consider
to be the empirically relevant case: network members are "good" in the sense that they have a
low cost of effort. This is consistent with the idea that referrals have some screening value.
   In this setting, the threshold belief q  such that below which the individual selects F instead
of F S actually declines in friend quality. That is, when the agent has a better friend, they
are more conservative in terms of taking a chance on a stranger as well and paying a premium
to their friend, which is required to incentivize the stranger. As a consequence, they simply
remain small, relying only on their network. The result is that with a better friend, individual
entrepreneurs or the market are more likely to be stuck in an information poverty trap, in which
firms are small and network-reliant.26

Proposition 6.3. Consider a value of the capital cost K such that c  [0, c       ^], x(1, cf , K,  ) =
F S and x(0, cf , K,  ) = F . Let c
                                  ^ f and c
                                          ~ f be as defined in Propositions 3.1 and 3.2.

       (1) c  [0, c ^], q   [0, 1] s.t. the entrepreneur is indifferent between F and F S .
                        q (c )
       (2) c  [0, c ^], cf f < 0
       (3) In the case of a continuum of infinitely lived forward-looking entrepreneurs,  {cf , cf }
           with cf > cf , such that the share of entrepreneurs who fail to learn the state of the world
           is larger under cf than under cf .
       (4) In the case of infinite number of sequences of one-period-lived Bayesian entrepreneurs,
           c  [0, c  ~], the share of markets where all but a finite number of firms organize as a
           small firm with only a friend as a worker is decreasing in cf .

6.3. Welfare and Learning. Last, we turn to the efficiency and welfare properties of the
information poverty trap. To this end, we consider a social planner in the spirit of Section 4.
The social planner takes wages set by entrepreneurs as given but chooses the organizational
form to maximize welfare. Welfare is defined as previously, with the addition that the social


26Inthe case of a fully-forward-looking entrepreneur, we show existence by simulation. In our example, the
proposition holds not only for two points but for the entire range of friend quality considered.
                                         NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                               33

planner now maximizes the expected discounted value of all future welfare, using the same
discount factor as entrepreneurs.27
   In either setup, there is too little experimentation in the private equilibrium, and conse-
quently, when the state of the world is truly "good," too many entrepreneurs or too many
markets fail to learn and so are stuck in the information poverty trap. The social planner has
a lower cutoff level of beliefs q  and would like to experiment more. In general, the fact that
the absorbing threshold is lower will also lead to a lower share of entrepreneurs or markets who
suboptimally organize small, networked firms. Compared to an infinitely-lived entrepreneur,
the social planner is more willing to hire strangers since the welfare of doing so exceeds pure
profits. In addition, since there is no difference between welfare and profits when only a friend
is hired, there are more returns to experimentation from the social planner's perspective. In the
social learning environment, the planner also corrects an additional learning externality. Since
entrepreneurs only live for one period, they do not internalize the value of signals generated by
their choice of organizational form or wages.

Proposition 6.4.
       (1) Consider a continuum of forward-looking, infinitely lived entrepreneurs in a market with
           no social learning. Under the above assumptions
                            
            (a)  {cf ,  }, qSP (cf ,  ) < q  (cf ,  ); the social planner stops experimenting for lower
                values of beliefs.
           (b) There exist parameters such that the share of entrepreneurs who fail to learn the
                state of the world in the limit is lower under social planner experimentation.
       (2) Consider an infinite number of sequences of one-period-lived Bayesian entrepreneurs.
           Under the above assumptions
                            
            (a)  {cf ,  }, qSP (cf ,  ) < q  (cf ,  ); the social planner stops experimenting for lower
                values of beliefs.
           (b) The share of markets in which all but a finite number of firms either exit or orga-
                nize as a small firm with only a friend as a worker is lower under social planner
                experimentation.

   In summary, Proposition 6.4 shows that in the presence of uncertainty, there is an additional
source of welfare losses from the relational and referral value. Similar to the previous case in
which the state of the world is known, welfare losses come from the interaction between friend
quality and the decision to scale up. When incorporating learning dynamics, higher-quality
friends can increase welfare losses not only because they discourage outside hiring conditional on
information, but also because they discourage information generation and increase the likelihood
that an information poverty trap occurs.
27In the case of forward-looking entrepreneurs, they do not internalize, when setting wages, that the planner
might force them to choose a different organizational form in the future. This is the most natural extension of
the one-period setup in the previous sections.
                                     NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                         34




                                         7. Conclusion

   In developing countries, particularly in new markets, entrepreneurs often hire from their
networks. We explore why this may be the case and study the welfare and market organizational
consequences. We set up a model that incorporates the primary reasons for network-based
hiring established in the empirical literature. We call these local benefits because the studies
primarily look at variation in outcomes conditional on a network-based worker being hired, or
the likelihood thereof. The literature argues that networks provide (a) referral value, including
screening benefits, and (b) relational value. Our study demonstrates that exactly these local
features can generate globally detrimental welfare effects, which stem from distorting the choice
of firm size and the composition of the workforce. Further, negative welfare consequences can
worsen with the strength of referral and relational value. In markets where entrepreneurs must
learn about the quality of the general labor market, such as when it consists of migrants or
general workers at large, information poverty traps will arise and again these traps can be
exacerbated as network value increases.
   This perspective suggests empirically exploring several policy initiatives. For example, ex-
posing entrepreneurs to outcomes across markets--such as in the experiment studied by Cai
et al. (2018)--helps to combat the information poverty trap. In trapped markets, entrepreneurs
who observe a large number of firms still only observe a few signals before the absorbing state
is reached. Clearly, these signals are predominantly generated from failured F S structures be-
fore almost all firms retreat to F structures. In contrast, entrepreneurs from successful markets
have seen a large number of firms and their signals are predominantly generated from successful
F S structures. Exposing entrepreneurs in failed markets to even a few other entrepreneurs in
successful markets would have large peer effects. Other examples of policy initiatives include
exploring subsidies to capital, which would also help optimize organizational structure, as well
as easy-to-anticipate initiatives such as directly subsidizing external hiring or screening services
directly.
   Our results also point to a potential and straightforward mechanism as to why we system-
atically see small, networked firms in the developing world. Complementary to the previous
literature (e.g., Akcigit, Alp, and Peters (2016); Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012)) we pro-
pose a mechanism whereby network-based hiring can exacerbate welfare losses. The information
poverty trap we propose also offers a rationale for the presence of subsistence entrepreneurs,
who are often interpreted as lacking the will or ability to scale up (Schoar, 2010; Decker, Halti-
wanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014; Hurst and Pugsley, 2011). In order to connect to this
literature, we plan to analyze, in future work, how network-based hiring shapes the equilibrium
in labor markets. In particular, our general equilibrium extension hints at the possibility that
                                 NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                   35

network-based hiring might impact (mis-)allocation of workers in the economy, an avenue we
plan to explore further in future work.
                                 NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                   36

                                      References

Acemoglu, D., M. A. Dahleh, I. Lobel, and A. Ozdaglar (2011): "Bayesian learning
 in social networks," The Review of Economic Studies, 78, 1201­1236. 25
Akcigit, U., H. Alp, and M. Peters (2016): "Lack of selection and limits to delegation:
 firm dynamics in developing countries," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
 1, 7
Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2009): "Social connections and incentives in
 the workplace: Evidence from personnel data," Econometrica, 77, 1047­1094. 1
Banerjee, A. V. (1992): "A Simple Model of Herd Behavior," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 107, 797­817. 1, 6
Beaman, L. (2016): "Social networks and the labor market," in The Oxford Handbook of the
 Economics of Networks. 1
Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and A. M. Mobarak (2014): "Can Network
 Theory based Targeting Increase Technology Adoption?" . 2.1, 2.2.1
Beaman, L. and J. Magruder (2012): "Who Gets the Job Referral? Evidence from a Social
 Networks Experiment," American Economic Review, 102, 3574­3593. 1
Bento, P. and D. Restuccia (2017): "Misallocation, Establishment Size, and Productiv-
 ity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9. 1
Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar (2006): "The Role of Family in Family Firms," Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 20, 73­96. 11
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2012): "The Organization of Firms Across
 Countries," qje. 1, 7
Breza, E., S. Kaur, and Y. Shamdasani (2017): "The morale effects of pay inequality,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 611­663. 4, 15
Burks, S. V., B. Cowgill, M. Hoffman, and M. Housman (2015): "The value of hiring
 through employee referrals," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 805­839. 1
Cai, J., A. Szeidl, et al. (2018): "Interfirm Relationships and Business Performance," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 1229­1282. 7
Calvo´ -Armengol, A. (2006): Social networks and labour market outcomes, vol. 17, CREI.
 1
Chandrasekhar, A. (2016): "Econometrics of network formation," The Oxford Handbook of
 the Economics of Networks, 303­357. 2
Chandrasekhar, A. G., C. Kinnan, and H. Larreguy (2018): "Social networks as
 contract enforcement: Evidence from a lab experiment in the field," American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 43­78. 1, 2.1, 2.2.1
Cross, R. and S. P. Borgatti (2004): "The ties that share: Relational characteristics that
 facilitate information seeking," Social capital and information technology, 137­161. 2
                                   NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                      37

Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014): "The Role of En-
  trepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism," Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 28, 3­24. 7
Eyster, E. and M. Rabin (2010): "Naive Herding in Rich-Information Settings," American
  Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2, 221­43. 1, 6
Fafchamps, M. and A. Moradi (2015): "Referral and job performance: Evidence from the
  Ghana colonial army," Economic development and cultural change, 63, 715­751. 1
Fainmesser, I. P. (2013): "Social networks and unraveling in labor markets," Journal of
  Economic Theory, 148, 64­103. 1
Feld, S. L. (1991): "Why Your Friends Have More Friends Than You Do," American Journal
  of Sociology, 96:6, 1464­1477. 17
Graham, B. S. (2015): "Methods of identification in social networks," Annu. Rev. Econ., 7,
  465­485. 2
Groh, M., N. Krishnan, D. McKenzie, and T. Vishwanath (2016): "Do Wage Subsidies
  Provide a Stepping-Stone to Employment for Recent College Graduates? Evidence from a
  Randomized Experiment in Jordan," Review of Economics and Statistics, 98, 488­502. 10
Heath, R. (2018): "Why do firms hire using referrals? evidence from bangladeshi garment
  factories," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 1691­1746. 1, 2.1, 2.2.1
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2014): "The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,"
  qje, 129. 1
Hsieh, C.-T. and B. A. Olken (2014): "The Missing "Missing Middle"," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 28. 1
Hurst, E. and B. Pugsley (2011): "What Do Small Businesses Do?" Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 2011. 7
Ioannides, Y. M. and L. Datcher Loury (2004): "Job information networks, neighbor-
  hood effects, and inequality," Journal of economic literature, 42, 1056­1093. 2
Jackson, M. O. (2008): Social and Economic Networks., Princeton University Press. 2
------ (2019): "The friendship paradox and systematic biases in perceptions and social norms,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 127, 777­818. 17
Karlan, D., M. Mobius, T. Rosenblat, and A. Szeidl (2009): "Trust and social collat-
  eral," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1307­1361. 1
Leskovec, J., K. J. Lang, A. Dasgupta, and M. W. Mahoney (2009): "Commu-
  nity structure in large networks: Natural cluster sizes and the absence of large well-defined
  clusters," Internet Mathematics, 6, 29­123. 2
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2016): "Business Practices in Small Firms in Developing
  Countries," Management Science, 63, 2967­2981. 1
Montgomery, J. D. (1991): "Social networks and labor-market outcomes: Toward an eco-
  nomic analysis," American Economic Review, 81, 1408­1418. 1, 17
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                         38

Munshi, K. (2003): "Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the US labor
  market," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 549­599. 1
Pallais, A. and E. G. Sands (2016): "Why the referential treatment? Evidence from field
  experiments on referrals," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1793­1828. 1, 2.1, 2.2.1
Salanie, B. (2005): The Economics of Contracts: A Primer, The MIT Press. 1
Schoar, A. (2010): "The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneur-
  ship," Innovation Policy and the Economy, 10. 1, 7
Schweinberger, M. and M. S. Handcock (2015): "Local dependence in random graph
  models: characterization, properties and statistical inference," Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 77, 647­676. 2
Smith, L. and P. Sørensen (2000): "Pathological outcomes of observational learning,"
  Econometrica, 68, 371­398. 1, 6
Ugander, J., B. Karrer, L. Backstrom, and C. Marlow (2011): "The anatomy of
  the facebook social graph," arXiv preprint arXiv:1111.4503. 2
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                         39

                                    Appendix A. Proofs

Proof of Proposition 3.1. For  = , subsumed in the proof of Propositions C.3 and C.4. .
For  = 0, the result follows from the fact that  (F S, cf ,  ) =  (F, cf ,  ) +  (S ).

Proof of Proposition 3.2. When  = 0, the proof follows again from the fact that  (F S, cf ,  ) =
 (F, cf ,  ) +  (S ). We prove the case of  =  below:
   Whenever cf  c     ~
                      f , the optimal wage and optimal profits are independent of the parameters
of the friend cf and  (see Proposition C.1). Therefore  (F S, cf , ) =  (F S, cf , 0) in that
region.
   (1) K¯ (cf , ) =  (F S, cf , ) -  (F, cf , ). Whenever K > K     ¯ (cf , ), hiring a friend only
       is more profitable. Further,  (F S, cf , )   (F, cf , ), since the entrepreneur could
       always offer the friend's optimal contract to the pool, so for lowe values of K , hiring a
       friend and a stranger is optimal. Since  (F S, cf , ) is independent of cf and  (F, cf , )
                                    ¯ (cf , ) is increasing in cf
       second is decreasing in cf , K
   (2) This follows directly from the fact that  (F, cf , )   (F, cf , 0) (with strict inequality
       whenever cf > 0) and  (F S, cf , ) =  (F S, cf , 0).
   (3)
                         ¯ (cf , ) =  (F S, cf , ) -  (F, cf , )
                         K
                                     (F, cf , ) +  (S ) -  (F, cf , )
                                     1
                                  =  (SS )
                                     2
       where the first inequality follows from the fact that in F S , there is a restriction of
       common wages.
This completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 3.3.
   (1) Proof of Proposition C.3 applies.
   (2) Proof of Proposition C.3 applies.



Proof of Proposition 4.1.
   (1) (a) This follows from the observation that whenever the firm size is either zero or one,
           welfare is equal to the entrepreneur's profits. If no worker is hired, W F =  = 0. If
           the firm has size one, it must be that the employee is a friend (see Propositions C.4
           and C.6). Since the wage is then chosen to exactly satisfy the friend's constraint,
           W F (F, cf ) = (F, cf ). In contrast, whenever two workers are hired, welfare is
           higher than entrepreneurial profits, the difference being given by the surplus of
                                   NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                           40

         workers hired from the pool, and any surplus for the friend in case the constraint
         is slack. It follows that the welfare maximizing choice can never feature a smaller
         firm.
     (b) Whenever a friend is hired, W F (F, cf ,  ) = (F, cf ,  ). But W F (S )  (S ),
         since welfare includes the expected surplus of workers which is strictly positive
         whenever Fc is non-degenerate. The entrepreneur chooses to hire her friend (and
         a stranger) whenever cf  c                                        
                                          f , where cf is defined as (F, cf ,  ) = (S ). On the
         other hand, the planner would like the entrepreneur to hire her friend only when
         (F, cf ,  ) = W F (S )  (S ).
(2) When  = 0, this follows simply from the fact that at the point where the entrepreneur
    switches from SS to F S , welfare in SS is strictly greater than in F S . We prove the
    case of  =  below.
     (a) Suppose K is such that x(0,  ) = F and x(cf ,  ) = F S for some cf < c     ~f , where c
                                                                                               ^ f is
         the level of friend cost for which the friends constraint starts to bind. The argument
         is structured as follows. We first show that welfare conditional on organizational
         choice is continuously decreasing in cf . Then we show that at c         ^
                                                                                  f ( ) (the level
         of cf where the entrepreneur is indifferent between F and F S ), there are strictly
         positive welfare losses from choosing F . It follows that there exists an > 0 s.t.
         W F (c f ( ) - ) > W F (c
                ^                   ^
                                    f ( ) + ).
         Welfare conditional on hiring a friend is given by
                                                           cf
                           W F (F, cf , 0) = p y - u-1            -K
                                                           p
                          W F (F, cf , ) = py - u-1 (cf ) - K

        Welfare is continuously decreasing in cf by assumption of concavity and differen-
        tiability of u(.).
        Conditional on choosing F S , welfare is independent of  as long as cf < c~f . When-
        ever the friend's constraint is not binding, the optimal contract is independent of
        both  and cf (see Proposition C.1). Since there is unobservable effort, the contract
        features s0 = 0 in this region. With s0 = 0, the participation constraint of a friend
        with  =  coincides with the incentive constraint of a friend with  = 0 which
        also implies that c ~f is independent of  .
                     ^ pu(w)                   ^ pu(w)
                                                                  c
   W F (F S, cf ) =          p(y - w)f (c)dc +         p w - u-1       f (c)dc - K +
                      0                         0                 p
                                           cf
                p(y - w) + p(w - u-1          )-K
                                           p


         which is again continuously decreasing in cf .
                                           NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                          41

             Summarizing,welfare is given by
                                  W F (F, cf , 0)
                                  
                                           if cf < c
                                                   ^ f (0)
             W F (cf , 0) = 
                            W F (F S, cf ) otherwise
             and            
                            W F (F, cf , ) if cf < c
                            
                                                        f ()
                                                        ^
             W F (cf , ) =
                            W F (F S, cf )
                            
                                              otherwise

             It remains to show that W F (F, c
                                             ^ f ( ),  ) < W F (F S, c
                                                                     ^ f ( )).
             Consider first  = 0.

                W F (F S, c
                          ^ f (0), 0) - W F (F, c
                                                ^ f (0))
                  ^ pu(w)                       ^ pu(w)
                                                                        c
                =          p(y - w)f (c)dc +             p w - u-1              f (c)dc - K
                      0                             0                   p
                      ^   pu(w)
                                               c                            ^
                                                                            c f (0)
                =                 p w - u-1         f (c)dc + pw - pu-1 (           )
                      0                        p                               p
                <0

            The last equality uses the definition of c       ^
                                                             f (0),
                  ´ pu(w)                                            c^ (0)
            K= 0          p(y - w)f (c)dc + p(y - w) - p(y - u-1 ( fp ). The inequality follows from
            the fact that the first term is the joint surplus of hiring a stranger net of capital
            cost, which is always positive, and the second term is positive since the friend's
            incentive constraint is slack.
            A similar argument holds for the case where  = 
        (b) Suppose K   ¯2 < K < K    ¯ 3 as defined in Proposition C.3, and let c ^f ( ) be the level of
            cf s.t. the entrepreneur is indifferent between F and SS (it exists by Proposition
            C.3). The proof is then similar to (a). If the organizational choice is F , welfare
            and entrepreneurial profits coincide. If the organizational choice is SS , W F =
                          ´ pu(w)
            (SS ) + 2 0           p w - u-1 p      c
                                                      f (c)dc > (SS ). Using the definition of c     ^
                                                                                                     f ( ),
            (SS ) = (c       f ( ) - K (c
                             ^             ^f ( )). It follows that there is a drop in welfare at c   ^f ( )
            from choosing F .
        (c) Since c ^f () > c    ^f (0), W F (c  f (), ) = W F (c
                                                 ^                   f (), 0). By the previous argu-
                                                                     ^
                        -                                                        -
            ment, limcf c^    f ()
                                    W F (cf , ) < W F (c    ^f (), ), while limcf c^  f ()
                                                                                           W F (cf , 0) =
            W F (c f (), 0) = W F (c
                   ^                     ^f (), )

  This completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 5.1. There are two possibilities for the organizational choice of entrepreneurs
                                           L                        L 
with cL
      f friends in the new equilibrium: x(cf ; v ,  ) = F S or x(cf ; v ,  ) = F .
                                               (1-)N +2N                                  
   (1) In the baseline equilibrium,  =            M +N
                                                           . Depending on whether x(cLf;v       , ) = FS
                                         (1-)N         0
       or   x(cL
               f;v    , ) = F,  =          M
                                               or  = M   , both of which are lower than .
                                      NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                             42

   (2) In the baseline equilibrium
                        2
              v =              [p u(s1 (SS, v  , ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (SS, v  , )] +
                    2 + (1 - )
                     (1 - )                                                    L 
                                p u(s1 (F S, cL
                                              f , v ,  ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (F S, cf , v ,  )
                    2 + (1 - )
                                                                                 L 
       If x(cL
             f ; v ,  ) = F , then v = 0, which is trivially less than v . If x(cf ; v ,  ) = F S ,
       then

                    v  = p u(s1 (F S, cL                                L 
                                       f , v ,  ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (F S, cf , v ,  )

       By assumption, the low-cost friends are in the good friend region where the wage is
       lower than the pool wage, so
       [p u(s1 (SS, v  , ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (SS, v  , )] >
                                                       L 
        p u(s1 (F S, cL
                      f , v ,  ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (F S, cf , v ,  ) . Further, the quality of the pool has
       increased with the removal of cH    f workers which implies that
                      L                                      
        p u(s1 (F S, cf , v ,  ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (F S, cL f,v , ) <
                                                       L 
        p u(s1 (F S, cL
                      f , v ,  ) + (1 - p) u(s0 (F S, cf , v ,  ) .
       Therefore, v  < v  .
   (3) Consider cL f such that the entrepreneur is close to indifferent between hiring her friend
                                                                                    
       only and a friend and a stranger,  (F, cL                              L
                                                        f , , v ) =  (F S, cf , , v ) - K +  for some
                                                                                              
       small  . It is easy to verify that  (F, cL   f , , v ) is decreasing in both  and v . Further,
                                                                           
       we show in the proof of Proposition C.4, that  (F, cL        f , , v ) is independent of cf in this
       range of the parameter space. This extends easily to  and v  , since the proof relies
       on the fact that the friend constraint is slack. Since v  < v  and  < , it follows
                                               
       that  (F, cL                      L
                   f ,  , v ) >  (F, cf , , v ) while the profits from hiring both a friend and a
       stranger are unchanged.


Proof of Proposition 5.2.
                                           2N                                    
   (1) In the baseline equilibrium,  = M    +N
                                               . Depending on whether x(cL  f ; v ,  ) = SS or
                                 (1-)N +2N         N
       x(cLf ; v ,  ) = F S,  =     M +N
                                            or  = M  , both of which are lower than .
   (2) The wage offered to the general labor market is now independent of hiring choices and
       depends only on the quality of workers. By assumption, both cH         L
                                                                     f and cf are of relatively
       low quality (entrepreneurs chose not to hire them in the baseline). When they are no
       longer in the pool of workers, the quality distribution improves and wages decline. It
       follows that v  < v 
   (3) Without fairness concerns, the choice between F S and SS is simply the choice between
       F and S . With a lower  and v  , the profits from hiring friends has increased, while
       the profits from hiring from the pool are unchanged.
                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                       43

                                                                              P(z |=0)
Proof of Proposition 6.1. The proof proceeds in two steps.28 Define LR(z ) := P( z |=1)
                                                                                        .
Step 1: Define a new martingale. Recall that the state of the world is  = 1. Let us consider a
likelihood ratio against the truth. Define a prior likelihood ratio
                                                      P( = 0)
                                               0 :=           .
                                                      P( = 1)
Mechanically, Bayesian updating gives us at any state

                                              t+1 = t · LR(z ).

It can be calculated that29
                                                 E[t+1 ] = t
and therefore this defines a martingale on R0 . By hypothesis, we have an absorbing point r
(a direct consequence of q ) and written this way for any r > r we have x  X and so no
signals are ever drawn in the future. This implies that t is a martingale for values above r
as well and as calculated above, it is also a martingale in the interior [0, r) and therefore it is
indeed a martingale throughout.
Step 2: Argue that the probability of absorption above r forever is less than 1. The first obser-
vation is {t } is a martingale and as it satisfies the hypotheses by the martingale convergence
theorem.
   So it remains to look at where the martingale converges to. We will show that it does not
almost surely converge past the boundary r. Observe that if the martingale converges to some
r < r then it must converge to 0. This is because if there is uncertainty that the agent faces,
any experiment will move the beliefs. By definition then the resting point can only be on the
truth.
   As a consequence, the only resting points are 0 and some collection of r  r. But because
we began with the fact that {t } is a martingale and 0 was less than r, which was a necessary
condition to even begin to draw signals, then to construct a limit expectation in the interior
there must be mass on 0.

Proof of Proposition 6.3.
   (1) In the case of a one-period lived entrepreneur, q  is defined as (F S, q  , cf ,  ) = (F, cf ,  ).
       First note that (F S, q  , cf ,  ) is non-decreasing in q everywhere. Consider q > q . Since
       F0 first-order stochastically dominates F1 ,
       maxs {[p(y - s)][1 + q F1 (pu(s)) + (1 - q )F0 (pu(s))] - 2K } >
       maxs {[p(y - s)][1 + qF1 (pu(s)) + (1 - q )F0 (pu(s))] - 2K }. (F, cf ,  ) on the other hand
       is independent of q . The existence of q  then follows from the assumed boundary condi-
       tions and continuity of the profit function. In the case of a forward-looking entrepreneur,
28We   are extremely grateful to Ben Golub for helping us with this argument.
29That   is, we are taking expectations as an external observer who knows the state of the world.
                                                   NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                       44

    note that the value of hiring the friend only is simply equal to 1/(1 -  )(F, cf ,  ), which
    is independent of q. This follows from the fact that if xt = F , then qt+1 = qt and all
    subsequent choices must be hiring the friend only as well. The value of hiring a stranger
    in addition to the friend on the other hand is increasing in q  , since (F S, q, cf ,  ) is
    increasing in q everywhere.
                                                    (F S,cf ,q  )        (F S,cf ,q  )       (F,c )
(2) Totally differentiating the definition of q  ,     cf
                                                                  dcf +    q 
                                                                                       dq  = cf f dcf
                    (F,cf )        (F S,cf ,q  )
                              -
         dq          cf          cf
    or   dcf
               =        (F S,cf ,q  )              . By (1), the denominator is > 0. As shown in C.4, the
                          q 
    numerator is < 0 cf < c^.
(3) We show existence by example. The following figure illustrates.




   Figure A.1.        This figures plots the share of entrepreneurs who organize as a small and networked
   firm in the long run (left axis), as well as the threshold level of beliefs such that entrepreneurs stop
   experimenting (right axis). The x-axis measures the cost of their network friend. The two lines are
   based on the following parametrization: u(c) = c1/2 , Fc (1)  U (0, 1), Fc (0)  U (0, 1), K = .1,  = 0,
    = .9 cf ranges from .1 to .2. For the share of firms who choose F, 2000 entrepreneurs were simulated
   over 40 periods each.



(4) We show this in two steps. First,  cf < c  ~, the wage is independent of cf . This follows
    from the definition of c
                           ~ as the lowest cf for which the friend's constraint is binding.
    Using Proposition C.2, whenever  = µ = 0, the optimal solution is independent of cf .
    Since wages are independent of cf , so is the distribution of the binary signal zt and the
    updating rule. Therefore, conditional on q > q  , the path of beliefs are independent of
    cf . Second, as shown above, q  is decreasing in cf . Therefore, as long as cf < c   ~, cf
    creates the same process for beliefs as cf > cf but with a higher absorbing threshold.


Proof of Proposition 6.4.
                                  NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                          45

(1) Consider a case where, even though the entrepreneur optimally chooses F if the state
    of the world were truly bad, the social planner still prefers to hire the stranger as well.
    Since welfare is strictly larger than profits whenever a stranger is hired, such a case
                                                              
    exists. (a) and (b) then follow immediately, since qSP         = 0 and all entrepreneurs learn
    the state of the world under social planner experimentation.
(2) (a) This follows directly from the definition of q  as well as the fact that (F, cf ,  ) =
         W F (F, cf ,  ), but (F S, q, cf ,  ) < W F (F S, q, cf ,  ).
     (b) This follows from (a) and the observation that since wages are still chosen by the
         entrepreneur, the resulting learning process is identical to the private equilibrium.
                                                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                                                                                            46

                                                                          Appendix B. Figures


                      1                                                                                                        1
                                                                            Private equilibrium                                                                                         Private equilibrium




                     0.8          Small, friend only                          Shutdown                                        0.8                        Small, friend only               Shutdown
Cost of capital, K




                                                                                                         Cost of capital, K
                     0.6                                                                                                      0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Large, strangers
                     0.4                                                                                                      0.4

                                      Large, mixed                        Large, strangers                                                                   Large, mixed

                     0.2                                                                                                      0.2



                      0                                                                                                        0
                           0    0.2          0.4        0.6                   0.8                 1                                 0            0.2             0.4        0.6           0.8                         1
                                        Friend cost of effort, cf                                                                                           Friend cost of effort, cf

                     (a) Referral value only: Independent wages                                                                         (b) Referral and relational value: In-
                                                                                                                                        dependent wages

                       Figure B.1.         This figure shows the social planner's organization choice, taking the wage contract
                       as given, in an environment with fully independent wages. Panel (A) shows the case where the network
                       has referral value only, panels (B) shows the case where the network has referral and relational value.
                       In each panel, the private equilibrium is shown as a black line. The dashed horizontal line shows the
                       maximum cost of capital before the stranger-only firm would shut down in the private equilibrium.



                                                            1
                                                                                                                                             Referral value only
                                                                                                                                             Referral + relational value

                                                           0.9

                                                                    Large, mixed                                                    Large, stranger

                                                           0.8

                                                                                  Large, mixed                                                  Large, stranger

                                                           0.7
                                                 Welfare




                                                           0.6



                                                           0.5



                                                           0.4



                                                           0.3
                                                             0.6   0.65        0.7         0.75         0.8           0.85                    0.9          0.95
                                                                                              Friend cost of effort, cf


                                                                              (a) Independent wages

                       Figure B.2.       This figure shows the welfare achieved by the private organizational structure in the
                       case of independent wages. The range of cf is chosen to show the jump where the market allocation
                       switches from running a large networked firm to running a large stranger-only firm.
                                                   NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                             47

          Appendix C. Auxiliary Results: Optimal Firm Size and Workforce
                                          Composition

C.1. Optimal Contracts.

Proposition C.1. Under the above assumptions, the following hold. Workers always accept
the contract and exert effort iff c  c
                                     ¯ = p (u(s1 ) - u(s0 )).
                                                      s0 solves                                        s1 solves
   (1)   small, stranger                                   0                               F (¯        c)u (s1 )p(y - s1 )
                                                                                               c) = f (¯
                                                                                                           c -(1-p)
   (2)   small, friend                           u(s0 ) = min{, cf }                        u(s1 ) = max{ f p        , cf }
   (3)   large, 2 strangers                             see (1)                                        see (1)
   (4)   large, mixed                           (1 - p) [1 + F (¯c)] +                     p [1 + F (¯
                                                                                                     c)] = s0 f (¯
                                                                                                                 c)pu (s1 )
                                {[p(y - s1 ) - (1 - p)s0 ]f (¯
                                                             c)pu (s0 ) - (1 - F (¯
                                                                                  c))} +[p(y - s1 ) - (1 - p)s0 ]pu (s1 ) [f (¯
                                                                                                                              c)]
                                             +u (s0 ) ((1 - p) - µ) = 0                           +pu (s1 )( + µ)


  is the Lagrange multiplier on the friend's IC constraint pu(s1 )+(1 - p)u(s0 ) - cf  u(s0 ) - f .
 It binds whenever  is sufficiently low. µ is Lagrange multipliers on the friend's IR constraint
 pu(s1 ) + (1 - p)u(s0 ) - cf  0. It binds whenever cf is sufficiently high.
                                                                              E []
                       (1)    small, stranger                      [p(y - s1 )] [F (¯
                                                                                    c)] - K
                       (2)    small, friend                     [p(y - s1 ) - (1 - p)s0 ] - K
                       (3)    large, 2 strangers                                     c)] - K }
                                                                 2 {[p(y - s1 )] [F (¯
                       (4)    large, mixed       [p(y - s1 ) - (1 - p)s0 ] [1 + F (¯c)] - s0 [1 - F (¯
                                                                                                     c)] - 2K


C.2. Optimal Contracts without Moral Hazard. For completeness, we study the case
with no moral hazard, that is both friend and stranger have  = . The equilibrium wage
offered, given the parameters, in such a case is of course state-independent. The nature of the
contract offered depends on both the selected size of the firm as well as the quality of the friend,
if one is available. We also consider the case where the entrepreneur has no friend, which can
be thought of as having a friend of infinite (or sufficiently high) cost of applying effort.

Proposition C.2. Assume f =  = . Under the above assumptions, the following hold.
Strangers accept the contract as long as their individual rationality constraint is satisfied. The
cutoff stranger who is indifferent between accepting and rejecting is given by c
                                                                               ¯ = u(s).
                                                                      s0 = s1  s solves
                                 (1)   small, stranger              c) = (py - s) u (s) f (¯
                                                                 F (¯                      c)
                                 (2)   small, friend                      u(s) = cf
                                 (3)   large, 2 strangers           c) = (py - s) u (s) f (¯
                                                                 F (¯                      c)
                                 (4)   large, mixed              c) = (py - s) u (s) f (¯
                                                          1 + F (¯                      c) + u (s)


  is the Lagrange multipliers on the friend's IR constraint u(s) - cf  0.
 It binds whenever cf is sufficiently high.
                                       NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                       48

                                                                E []
                             (1)   small, stranger        (py - s)F (¯
                                                                     c) - K
                                                                -1
                             (2)   small, friend         (py - u (cf )) - K
                             (3)   large, 2 strangers   2 ((py - s)F (¯
                                                                      c) - K )
                             (4)   large, mixed       (py - s)(1 + F (¯c)) - 2K

Proof of Proposition C.2. Standard calculations left to the reader.

   An entrepreneur operating a firm with only her friend simply needs to satisfy the friend's
participation constraint which depends on his cf . When trying to hire a stranger, the optimal
wage offered trades off the benefits of a marginal increase in the probability of the worker
accepting (the right-hand side of equation (i)) against extra the payments that have to be made
to all workers who accept the contract (left-hand side). Because the model has linear payoffs,
a entrepreneur who hires two strangers offers the same wage and payoffs simply scale linearly.
Since all workers in a firm need to be paid the same wage, there are interesting interactions
between friends and strangers in a large, mixed firm. First, if the friend is of low quality, so cf
is sufficiently high, then the wage is set to satisfy the friend's participation constraint. Second,
if the friend is of high enough quality, there is an additional cost of offering a higher wage, as
this higher wage also has to be paid to friend (see equation (iv)). The optimal wage is lower
than in a firm with only strangers. In other words, the presence of a high-quality friend -- who
must be paid the same wage offered to the pool -- makes the entrepreneur more selective in
terms of hiring from outside.

C.3. Optimal Firm Organization without Moral Hazard. When deciding on the com-
position of her workforce, a entrepreneur in principle has five choices: she could run a small
firm in which she hires only her friend (F ) or only a stranger (S ) or she could run a large firm
consisting either of two stranger (SS ) or her friend and a stranger (F S ). In addition, she could
also decide to shut down and not pay the fixed cost K .

C.3.1. Choice of composition. We start by analyzing, conditional on size, the optimal choice of
workforce composition as a function of cf , the quality of the entrepreneurs network connection.
For small firms the choice is between hiring a friend or a stranger: xs : R0 +  {F, S }. For large
firms the choice is between hiring a friend and a stranger or two stranger: xl : R0 +  {F S, SS }.
We use  (i, cf ), i  {S, F, SS, F S } to denote the optimal expected profits gross of the capital
cost of choosing to run each possible type of firm.
   First consider the case where the entrepreneur has a network connection of high enough
quality such that the wage she must pay him is lower than what she would optimally offer to
the pool. Clearly, hiring her friend is dominant in this region of cf , which we refer to as the
cost effect. Beyond that cost of effort, there is a region where the entrepreneur chooses to hire
her friend despite the fact that the wage is higher than she would offer to the pool. We refer to
this as the certainty effect. When the friend's cost of effort is too high relative to the certainty
                                      NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                          49

effect, the entrepreneur chooses to hire from the pool instead. For large firms, the range of cf
such that the certainty effect outweighs the higher cost is smaller. This is due to the fact that
having a high-cost friend also distorts the contract that has to be offered to the other worker.
Proposition C.3 formalizes the relationship between cf and firm composition.

Proposition C.3. Let c     f be the quality level of friend s.t. the entrepreneur is indifferent
between hiring a friend or a stranger,  (F, c                           
                                                 f ) =  (S, cf ). Let cf be the quality level of
friend s.t. the entrepreneur is indifferent between hiring a friend and a stranger, or 2 strangers
 (F S, c              
        f ) =  (SS, cf ).
                                                                           
                                            F       c    cf
                                                                           F S
                                                                           
                                                                                 c  cf
   (1) c       
        f and cf are unique; xs (cf ) =                         ; xl (cf ) =
                                            S
                                            
                                                    otherwise              SS
                                                                           
                                                                                 otherwise
                 -1
   (2) w(S ) < u    (cf ),
                                      -1
                             w(SS ) < u    (cf ).
   (3) u(w(S )) <   cf <     cf.


Proof of Proposition C.3.
   (1) Easy to show that  (F, cf ) is decreasing in cf while  (S, cf ) is independent of cf . Same
       applies to  (F S, cf ) and  (SS, cf ).
   (2) Assume the contrary. Then there exists a cf > c s.t. u(w(S )) > cf . But offering that
       w(S ) to a friend must give higher expected profits, since they accept with certainty.
       This contradicts cf > . The same argument holds for c .
   (3) u(w(S )) < c : Assume the contrary. Then there exists a value of cf such that
       u(w(SS )) > cf and cf > c , that is xl (cf ) = SS . But offering w(SS ) to the friend
       must give higher profits, since they accept with certainty and so  (F S, cf ) >  (SS, cf ).
       c < c : First notice that u(w(F S, c )) = c , that is the friend's participation con-
       straint is binding at c . This is because, as long as the constraint is not binding,  (F S )
       is independent of cf and higher than  (SS ). Therefore the constraint must bind at c
       where the two cross.
       This implies that  (F S, c ) =  (F, c ) +  (S )|w=u-1 (c ) . Also,  (F S, c ) =  (SS ) =
        (S )+  (S ) by the definition of c .  (S )|w=u-1 (cf
                                                             ) <  (S ) since  (S ) is the unrestricted
                                                         
       optimum, and therefore it must be that  (F, c ) <  (S ). By monotonicity of  (F, cf ),
       c < c follows.



C.3.2. Choice of size and composition. Next we analyze the choice of size and organizational
form of entrepreneurs, as a function of cf and the fixed cost K . x : R0    0
                                                                       + × R+  {0, F, S, F S, SS }.
x(cf , K ) = 0 corresponds to the entrepreneur choosing not to enter the market. Figure C.1
plots the optimal organizational choice for an entrepreneur facing a general market distribution
with relatively low variance (left panel) and relatively high variance (right panel).
                                    NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                        50




              Figure C.1. Optimal Firm Organization without Moral Hazard

   Given the linearity of payoffs, S is never chosen as it is dominated either by (SS ) = 2(S )
or 0. When the cost of capital is prohibitively high (above the dashed line in Figure C.1),
entrepreneurs never hire from the general market and enter only when their network connection
has exceptionally low cost. In that region, entrepreneurs with better (or more) connections run
larger businesses. On the other hand, when the complementary capital investment is very low,
entrepreneurs always run a big firm. The composition of that firm is solely a function of the
quality of their network connection.
   For intermediate levels of capital, firm size is a non-monotonic function of the quality of the
network connection. There is always a single threshold level of quality such that for any worse
quality (higher cost), the entrepreneur chooses to hire from the pool only. For lower values
of the cost, the entrepreneur either chooses to hire only their friend or to run a mixed firm
consisting of one friend and one relative. The value of hiring a stranger is highest when the
friend is most similar to the stranger, in the sense that the optimal wage offered to the friend
coincides with the optimal wage paid to a stranger. This corresponds to the peak of the F S
region in Figure C.1). For network connection with lower cost than that, hiring a stranger is
less valuable since the wage the entrepreneur would like to offer them is higher than what they
pay their friend. This is closely related to the cost effect introduced above.
   For network connection with higher cost than at the peak, entrepreneurs would need to offer
a higher-than-optimal wage to the general market, in order to also ensure that their friend
accepts. This again reduces the value of hiring a stranger, who might or might not accept even
the higher wage. This is closely related to the certainty effect introduced above.
   In summary, for intermediate values of the capital cost, a better network connection is in
general associated with choosing a smaller firm consisting of fewer strangers. If the friend's
effort cost is also intermediate, there are situations in which entrepreneurs would choose to run
                                         NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                           51

a large firm both with a higher- and a lower- quality friend. Proposition C.4 shows the result
formally.


        Proposition C.4. [i]
    (1) {cf , K : x(cf , K ) = S } = 
    (2) Let K ¯ 1 =  (F S, 0) -  (F, 0), K¯ 2 =  (F S, c                     ¯
                                                        F ) -  (F, cf ), and K3 =  (S )). Suppose
        that K ¯1 < K¯ 2 . 30 Then K¯2 < K
                                         ¯
                                        3 and the following holds:
                                         F S
                                         
                                                  c  c
                  ¯ 1 , x(cf , K ) =
         (a)  K < K
                                         SS
                                         
                                                 otherwise
                                                
                                                F
                                                
                                                         cf  c
                                                             ¯ 1 (K )
                                                
              ¯1 < K < K
         (b)  K        ¯ 2 , x(cf , K ) =               c               
                                                FS
                                                        ¯ 1 (K )  cf  c
                                                
                                                SS      otherwise
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                F        cf  c
                                                             ¯ 1 (K )
                                                
                                                
                                                  FS    c
                                                        ¯ 1 (K )  cf  c
                                                                      ¯ 2 (K )
              ¯2 < K < K
         (c)  K        ¯ 3 , x(cf , K ) =
                                                F
                                                        c
                                                        ¯ 2 (K )  cf  c
                                                                      ¯ 3 (K )
                                                
                                                SS
                                                
                                                        otherwise
                                         
                                         F
                                         
                                               cc
                                                ¯ 4 (K )
                  ¯ 3 , x(cf , K ) =
         (d)  K > K
                                         0
                                         
                                                otherwise
        Both c¯           ¯
               1 (K ) and c                                         ¯i (K ))- (F, c
                            2 (K ) are implicitly defined by  (F S, c             ¯i (K )) = K . c
                                                                                                 ¯ 3 (K ) =
        u [py - ( (SS ) - K )] and c    ¯4 (K ) = u(py - K )



Proof of Proposition C.4.

    (1) Follows immediately from linearity of payoffs: (SS ) = 2(S ) so either (SS ) > (S )
        or (S ) < 0.
    (2) Let cf denote the minimum level of cf such that the friend's participation constraint is
        binding, so w(F S, cf ) = u-1 (cf ). Let cf denote the minimum level of cf such that the
        wage offered in F S is the same as in SS , so w(F S, cf ) = w(SS ). Note that cf < cf < c ,
        since the presence of a low-cost friend reduces the optimal wage in the F S firm. It will
        be helpful to show the following:




                                                    
                                                    F S  cf  c
                                                                  1 (K )
                                                                  ¯
     ¯1 > K
30If K                ¯1 > K > K
          ¯ 2 , then  K           ¯ 2 , x(cf , K ) = F   c ¯1 (K )  cf  c
                                                                          
                                                    
                                                     SS otherwise
                                                    
Proposition, proof and intuition are otherwise similar and therefore omitted.
                                          NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                             52
                                     
                                     >0
                                             if 0  cf < cf
                                     
              (F S,cf )-(F,cf )
         ·          cf
                                  = = 0 if cf = cf
                                    
                                    < 0 if c > c
                                    
                                            f    f
                                      (F S,c )                 (F,c )
             For all cf < cF ,    cf
                                      f
                                          = 0 whereas cf f < 0cf . When the effort cost
             is low enough such that the friend's constraint is slack, the cost has no effect
             on profits in an F S firm. For all cf > cf ,  (F S, cf ) =  (F, cf ) +  (S )|w=w(F S,cf .
                         (F S,c )    (F,c )
             Therefore cf f = cf f +  (        S)
                                                  |
                                             cf w=w(F S,cf )
                                                             . Since w(F S, cf ) < w(SS )  cf < cf ,
              (S )
                   |
              cf w=w(F S,cf
                                  > 0 as the wage is getting closer to the optimal wage offered to the
             pool. This proves the first interval. By a similar argument,  (                 S)
                                                                                                |
                                                                                          cf w=w(F S,cf )
                                                                                                          =0
             and the derivative becomes negative as soon as cf > cf .
         ·   K¯1 < K ¯ 2   (F S, 0) -  (F, 0) <  (F S, c ) -  (F, c ) and K                  ¯ 1  0 since the
             entrepreneur can always offer w(F, 0) = 0 to the pool at no extra cost.
         ·   K¯2 < K¯ 3 follows from K   ¯ 2 =  (F S, c ) -  (F, c ) <  (F, c ) +  (S ) -  (F, c ) =
             K¯3
       (a)   Since K < K  ¯ 1 =  (F S, 0) -  (F, 0), x(0, K ) = F S . The choice between F S and SS
             follows from Proposition C.3. Since (F S, 0) - (F, 0) > (F S, c ) - (F, c ),
             K<K   ¯1 guarantees that F will never be optimal at high levels of cf either.
       (b)   Since K > K  ¯ 1 , x(0, K ) = F . Further, as long as K < K     ¯ 3 , x(cf , K ) = F S . cf < c ,
             so (F S, cf ) > (SS ). Also, by definition of cf ,  (F S, cf ) =  (S ) +  (F, cf ) >
              (F, cf ) as long as K < K      ¯ 3 =  (S ).  (F S, cf ) -  (F, cf ) is increasing, so there
             exists a value c   ¯f  [0, cf ] s.t.  (F S, c¯f ) =  (F, c ¯f ). From Proposition C.3, we
                                                               
             know that F S dominates SS for all cf > c . It remains to show that F cannot be
                                                         (F S,cf )-(F,cf )
             optimal for any cf  [cf , c ]. Since              cf
                                                                            < 0 in that region, it suffices
                                                     
             to show that F is not optimal at c . This is precisely the definition of K             ¯ 2.
       (c) In contrast to (c), we now have K >  (F S, c ) -  (F, c ). Because  (F S, c ) -
            (F, c ) is decreasing in this region, there exists a value cf < c s.t. (F S, cf ) =
            (F S, cf ) - 2K < (F, cf ) =  (F, cf ) - K . Let c  ¯2 (K ) denote the smallest such
           value for each K. As cf increases beyond u(py - ( (SS ) - K )), x(cf , K ) = SS .
       (d) Since K > K    ¯ 3 =  (S ), hiring two strangers gives negatives profits. Because
            (F S )   (F ) +  (S ), F S is never optimal either. In this region, entrepreneurs
           choose to hire their friend iff cf < u(py - K ).



C.4. Optimal Firm Organization with Moral Hazard. This section analyzes organiza-
tional choices when  of the stranger in , for both cases of the friend  and the entire range
of friend quality cf .

C.4.1. Choice of Composition.
                                     NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                          53

Proposition C.5. Let c     f ( ),   {0, } be the quality level of friend s.t. the entrepreneur is
indifferent between hiring a friend or a stranger,  (F, c                                    
                                                         f ( ),  )) =  (S, cf ( ),  )). Let cf ( ),  
{0, } be the quality level of friend s.t. the entrepreneur is indifferent between hiring a friend
and a stranger, and 2 strangers  (F S, c                       
                                          f ( ),  )) =  (SS, cf ( ),  )).

   (1)  , cf ( ) and
                  
                     c ( ) are unique;               
                   F
                   
                         c  cf ( )
                                                     F S
                                                     
                                                              c  c ( )
       xs (cf ,  ) =                ; xl (cf ,  ) =
                   S
                   
                       otherwise                   SS
                                                   
                                                              otherwise
   (2)  , w(S ) < u-1 (c                    -1 
                         f ( )), w (SS ) < u (cf ( ).
   (3)  , u(w(S )) < c            
                       f ( ) < cf ( ).
   (4) c                              
        f (0) < cf () and cf (0) < cf ()


C.4.2. Choice of size and composition.

       Proposition C.6. [i]
   (1)  , {cf , K : x(cf , K,  ) = S } = 
   (2) Let
         · K 1 ( ) =  (F S, 0,  ) -  (F, 0,  )
         · K 2 ( ) =  (F S, c ( ),  ) -  (F, c ( ),  )
         · K 3 ( ) =  (F S, c^,  ) -  (F, c
                                          ^,  )
         · K 4 ( ) =  (S ).
       where c ( ) is as defined in Proposition C.5 and c ^ = argmaxcf  (F S, cf ,  )- M H (F, cf ,  ).
       Suppose that K 1 ( ) < K 2 ( ).
       Then K 2 ( ) < K 3 ( )  K 4 ( ) and   the following holds:
                                            F S
                                            
                                                     c  c ( )
        (a)  K < K 1 ( ), x(cf , K,  )) =
                                            SS
                                            
                                                    otherwise
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     F         cf  c
                                                                   ¯ f (K, ())
                                                     
        (b)  K 1 ( ) < K < K 2 ( ), x(cf , K,  ) =                             
                                                     FS
                                                              c
                                                              ¯ 1 (K,  )  cf  c ( )
                                                     
                                                     SS       otherwise
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     F         cf  c
                                                                   ¯ 1 (K,  )
                                                     
                                                     
                                                      FS      c
                                                              ¯ 1 (K,  )  cf  c
                                                                              ¯ 2 (K,  )
        (c)  K 2 ( ) < K < K 3 ( ), x(cf , K,  ) =
                                                     F
                                                              c
                                                              ¯ 2 (K,  )  cf  c
                                                                              ¯ 3 (K,  )
                                                     
                                                     SS
                                                     
                                                              otherwise
                                                     
                                                     F
                                                     
                                                              cc
                                                               ¯ 3 (K,  )
        (d)  K 3 ( ) < K < K 4 ( ), x(cf , K,  ) = 
                                                   SS         otherwise
                                          
                                          F
                                          
                                                  cc
                                                   ¯ 4 (K,  )
        (e)  K > K 4 ( ), x(cf , K,  ) = 
                                         0        otherwise
                                        NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                                54

       Both c  ¯1 (K,  ) and c ¯2 (K,  ) are implicitly defined by  (F S, c¯i (K ),  ) -  (F, c
                                                                                              ¯i (K ),  ) = K .
                                 ( (SS )-K )                      K
       ¯
       c 3 (K, 0) = pu y -           p
                                             ,c
                                              ¯ 4 (K, 0) = pu y - p , c¯4 (K, ) = u(py - ( (SS ) - K )),
       and c ¯4 (K, ) = u(py - K )
   (3) The following comparisons hold
        (a) K 3 (0) = K 4 (0), K 3 () < K 4 () and K 4 (0) = K 4 ()
        (b) K 3 (0) = K 3
        (c) c¯ 4 (K, 0) < c¯4 (K )
        (d) c¯ 4 (K, 0) < c¯4 (K, )
        (e) c¯ 3 (K, 0) < c¯3 (K, )
         (f) c
             ¯ 3 (K, ) > c   ¯3 (K )




Proof of Proposition C.6.
   (1) As before, profits are linear and hiring two strangers always dominates hiring one.
   (2) For  = 0, the proof of Proposition C.4 applies. For  = , note that maxcf  (F S ) -
        (F ) <  (S ). Since now also the slope of the optimal wage schedule is different for
       friends and strangers, the two wages can never coincide and running a mixed firm is
       always less profitable than hiring a friend and a stranger separately. It follows that
       K4 > K3 .
   (3) Straightforward calculation.
                             NETWORK-BASED HIRING                                      55

                             Appendix D. Quotes

"I pay a piece rate for each cloth worked on by my workers (INR 3 per piece). I
will pay both a stranger and a friend the same rate. . . If I differentiate now, God
will give me less later."
                                           ­Dry cleaning shop owner, Bangalore

"You have to pay them the same for the same work. If I pay one person INR
15,000 and another person INR 10,000 they will talk to each other and get to
know one person is being paid less. This person will then come fight with me.
People will not stay if you pay less."
                                                ­Paint shop owner, Bangalore

"To known and unknown workers we don't pay different salary because they will
then not agree to work."
                                               ­Shoe shop owner, Bangalore

"One cannot differentiate between two eyes, they see the same. If we pay more
for one person, another will not work properly"
                                               ­Clothes shop owner, Bangalore

"Issues will happen (if we pay them differently), co-workers will discuss with
each other and may get jealous of each other. This may lead to misunderstand-
ings/fights, my business will not go good."
                                               ­ Watch shop owner, Bangalore
