                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       MARKUPS, LABOR MARKET INEQUALITY AND THE NATURE OF WORK

                                           Greg Kaplan
                                            Piotr Zoch

                                       Working Paper 26800
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26800


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We thank Fernando Alvarez, Susanto Basu, Ariel Burstein, Mark Gertler, Jan De Loecker, John
Fernald, Simon Mongey, Emi Nakamura, Brent Neiman, Ezra Oberfield, Esteban Rossi-
Hansberg, Rob Shimer, Jon Steinsson and Chad Syverson for valuable comments and
discussions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26800.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Greg Kaplan and Piotr Zoch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Markups, Labor Market Inequality and the Nature of Work
Greg Kaplan and Piotr Zoch
NBER Working Paper No. 26800
February 2020
JEL No. D2,D3,D4,E3,E5,J2,L1

                                         ABSTRACT

We demonstrate the importance of distinguishing between the traditional use of labor for
production, versus alternative uses of labor for overhead, marketing and other expansionary
activities, for studying the distribution of both factor income and labor income. We use our
framework to assess the impact of changes in markups on the overall labor share and on labor
income inequality across occupations. We identify the production and expansionary content of
different occupations from the co-movement of occupational income shares with markup-induced
changes in the labor share. We find that around one-fifth of US labor income compensates
expansionary activities, and that occupations with larger expansionary content have experienced
the fastest wage and employment growth since 1980. Our framework can rationalize a counter-
cyclical labor share in the presence of sticky prices and can be used to study the distributional
effects of demand shocks, monetary policy and secular changes in competition.


Greg Kaplan
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th St
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gkaplan@uchicago.edu

Piotr Zoch
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th St
Chicago, IL 60637
pzoch@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction

The wedge between the marginal cost paid to factor inputs and the price of final goods paid
by consumers, known as the markup, plays a central role in macroeconomics. In the long-
run, the markup reflects the nature of competitive forces and is the key channel through
which industrial and trade policy affect the economy. In the short-run, movements in the
markup are the main channel through which demand shocks and monetary policy affect the
economy, when viewed through the lens of New Keynesian models of the business cycle. In
this paper, we develop a framework for understanding the effects of a change in the markup
on the factor income and labor income distributions. We use our framework to rationalize
cyclical movements in the labor share versus the profit share, to interpret differences in the
exposure of different occupations to aggregate fluctuations, and to offer a new perspective
on the relative wage and employment growth in different occupations.
    Our main innovation is to distinguish theoretically and empirically between two uses
of labor in a modern economy. We refer to the traditional role of labor as an input to
the production of existing goods for sale in existing markets as production, or Y -type,
labor. We contrast this with an alternative role of labor that facilitates extensive-margin
replication, which we refer to as expansionary, or N -type, labor. N -type labor encompasses
a broad array of corporate activities that include overhead, product design, research and
development, logistics and marketing. Incorporating these expansionary uses of labor turns
out to have important implications for the dynamics of aggregate labor income and for labor
income inequality. We estimate that roughly one-fifth of total US labor income compensates
N - type activities, and that those occupations whose share of N -type activities is largest
are the same occupations that have experienced the fastest wage and employment growth
over the last forty years.
     The first part of the paper is theoretical. In Section 2, we consider a static model of pro-
duction in which labor is the only input, but is used for both production and expansionary
purposes. Our theoretical results are summarized in three simple but powerful theorems
that describe how a change in the markup redistributes national income. Theorem 1 shows
that whether an increase in the markup leads to an increase or a decrease in the labor share
depends on the share of N -type labor in the economy. In existing models that abstract from
the expansionary role of labor, the markup and the labor share move in opposite directions.
This negative relationship is so strongly engrained in macroeconomic thinking that it forms
the basis for most empirical efforts to measure the cyclicality of markups. But when a
sufficiently large fraction of labor income compensates N -type activities, this co-movement
is reversed. Theorem 2 shows that despite the theoretical ambiguity in the effect of the
markup on the overall labor share, an increase in the markup unambiguously redistributes

                                               1
income away from Y -type labor and towards N -type labor. Thus when the markup changes,
some workers' incomes rise and some workers' incomes fall, depending on the nature of the
work that they perform. Theorem 3 then shows that the markup is counter-cyclical in our
environment, as it is in standard business cycle models with sticky prices.
    Since the labor share is strongly counter-cyclical in US data, together these three the-
orems imply that the share of labor income compensating expansionary labor is positive,
and that in economic downturns labor income falls less for workers performing these expan-
sionary activities than for workers performing traditional production activities. Moreover,
since demand shocks and monetary policy transmit through changes in markups in New
Keynesian models, our framework offers an explanation for why the labor share increases
in response to contractionary demand shocks or monetary policy shocks. And since Y -type
labor is more exposed to these aggregate shocks than is N -type labor, our framework also
offers a mechanism through which aggregate demand and monetary policy affect the labor
income distribution.
   The second part of the paper is empirical. We attempt to quantify just how much
of US labor income compensates N -type labor, how it has changed over time and which
occupations are most N -intensive. We estimate the structural parameters that govern these
quantities in two stages.
    In Section 3 we exploit the prediction of Theorem 1 that the sign and strength of the
co-movement of the markup with the labor share reveals what fraction of labor income com-
pensates Y -type versus N -type labor. We explain how the aggregate structural parameters
can be identified given de-trended time-series data on the labor share and the aggregate
markup. We estimate these parameters using post-war US data and show that they imply
that between 5% and 35% of labor income compensates expansionary activities, depending
on the assumption we make about the average markup over this period. We show that this
fraction has increased since the 1970's, before which it was declining.
     In Section 4 we introduce the notion of an occupation into our framework. We exploit the
prediction of Theorem 2 that, given the parameter estimates from the first stage, the sign
and strength of the co-movement of occupational labor income shares with markup-induced
variation in the overall labor share reveals the relative intensity of each occupation in the
two types of activities. Occupations that are more intensive in expansionary activities are
those occupations whose share of aggregate labor income increases when the overall labor
share increases due to a change in the markup. We estimate the model parameters using
three different approaches to isolate markup-induced variation in the labor share: (i) using
the de-trended labor share itself; (ii) using the de-trended markup as an instrument; and
(iii) using external estimates of lagged monetary policy shocks as a set of instruments. We
clarify the orthogonality conditions that are required for each approach.

                                             2
    Regardless of which of these sources of variation that we exploit, we find that the
occupations that are the most N -intensive are those that are typically associated with white-
collar jobs (high-tech, service, managerial and admin occupations), while those that are the
most Y -intensive are those that are typically associated with blue-collar jobs (construction,
extractive, production, repair and farming occupations). We find both high-wage and low-
wage occupations among the N -intensive occupations, so the correlation of wages with the
expansionary content of occupations is weak. But we find a strong positive correlation
between the expansionary content of occupations and both wage growth and hours growth
over the last 40 years. This suggests that the demand for N -type labor is growing faster
than is the demand for Y -type labor.
    Although our main contribution is to offer new insights into how the aggregate labor
share and the labor income distribution are affected by markups, we also shed new light
on several issues in the recent macroeconomics and labor economics literatures. First, we
offer a simple explanation for the counter-cyclicality of the labor share, conditional on a
monetary policy shock, which has been a long-standing puzzle for New Keynesian models
(Cantore et al., 2019). Indeed, when we estimate a medium-scale DSGE model as in Smets
and Wouters (2007) with our production structure, we obtain similar parameter estimates
to what we obtain in our baseline approach, and the estimated model generates the correct
co-movement of the labor share with output.
    Second, a corollary of the counter-cyclical labor share is that our framework offers a
mechanism for generating pro-cyclical profits in response to monetary policy and other
aggregate demand shocks in New Keynesian models. This is a problematic feature of exist-
ing Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) models in which the counter-cyclicality
of profits generates counterfactual patterns of wealth redistribution (McKay et al., 2016;
Kaplan et al., 2018; Bhandari et al., 2018). Third, our occupational framework suggests
a mechanism for endogenizing the labor income distribution in HANK models. Together,
these two features pave the way for using HANK models to analyze the effect of monetary
policy and aggregate demand on the the joint distribution of labor income and wealth.
    Fourth, our measures of the expansionary and production content of different occupa-
tions offer an alternative to the task-based framework of Autor et al. (2006) and Acemoglu
and Autor (2011) as a lens through which to view changes in the US occupational structure
over the last forty years. We correlate our measures of the N -intensity of occupations with
the manual, routine and abstract content of occupations as measured by Autor et al. (2006).
We find that N -intensity is weakly negatively correlated with the manual content of occu-
pations and weakly positively correlated with the abstract content, but is not correlated
with the routine content.


                                              3
    Our model and exercises are also related to several other strands of literature that we
discuss at appropriate points in the paper.


2     Theoretical Framework

2.1    Wholesale sector
A representative wholesaler hires labor LY in a competitive labor market at wage WY , which
it uses to produce a homogeneous intermediate good Y . We refer to the labor used in the
wholesale sector as Y -type labor or production labor. The intermediate good Y is then sold
to retailers in a competitive market at price PW . The wholesaler thus chooses labor and
output to maximize profits W :

                                W := max PW Y - WY LY
                                       LY ,Y

                                    subject to
                                  Y = ZY LY
                                           Y




Wholesale profits may be non-zero if there are decreasing returns to scale in production
(Y < 1), in which case we interpret these profits as rents arising from a fixed factor in
production.


2.2    Retail Sector
A unit measure continuum of identical retailers each hire labor LN in a competitive labor
market at wage WN , which they use to manage product lines. We refer to the labor used
in the retail sector as N -type labor, overhead labor, or expansionary uses of labor. Each
product line j generates gross profits j , which the retailer's expansion department takes
as given when deciding on the number of lines to operate. The retailer thus chooses labor
and product lines to maximize net profits R :
                                                 N
                              R := max               j dj - WN LN
                                     LN ,N   0
                                 subject to
                               N = ZN LN
                                        N




We allow for the possibility of decreasing returns to scale in managing product lines (N  1)
to reflect span-of-control considerations. Although we will use the language of "expansion"

                                                 4
and "product lines" for the N margin, this language should not be interpreted literally.
N might represent any activity by which the retailer can replicate its gross profits ­ such
as developing new products, operating in a new geographic market, marketing to different
demographic markets or increasing advertising or sales effort for existing products in existing
markets.
   The retailer's pricing department for product line j purchases homogenous intermediate
goods from the wholesale sector, which it costlessly differentiates and sells to consumers at
a markup µ  1 over marginal cost PW . Hence the price charged for product line j is

                                          pj = µPW

and the gross profits in each product line are given by

                                     j := yj (pj - PW )

where the quantity yj of differentiated goods sold is determined by a demand curve (yj , pj )
that the retailer takes as given.
    For now, we will treat the markup µ as exogenous and we will remain agnostic about
the source of variations in the markup µ, because the theorems that follow about the effects
of changes in the markup do not depend on a particular micro-foundation. In Section 2.6
we describe various market environments and preferences that are all consistent with this
structure. However, readers who prefer to have a concrete example in mind can think
of a model of monopolistic competition with a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES)
aggregator over product lines, in which the markup µ is equal to the elasticity of substitution
across varieties  , and variation in µ a rises from exogenous variation in  .


2.3    Factor Shares

We focus on symmetric equilibria in which pj = p j and yj = y j . Market clearing for
intermediate goods then implies that

                                           yN = Y

and nominal GDP in the economy is given by pY .
   The shares of total income accruing to Y -type labor and N -type labor are defined as

                                     W N LN           WY LY
                             SN :=          and SY :=       ,
                                      pY               pY

                                              5
and the overall labor share is defined as SL = SN + SY . The overall profit share in the
economy is given by the sum of profit shares in the wholesale and retail sectors, S =
SR + SW , where
                                       W             R
                                SW :=      and SR :=    .
                                       pY            pY
Lemma 1. In an economy with this production structure, the equilibrium factor shares are
given by

                                        1
                                 SY =     Y
                                        µ
                                              1
                                 SN =    1-       N
                                              µ
                                     1
                                 SW =  (1 - Y )
                                     µ
                                           1
                                 SR = 1 -     (1 - N ) .
                                           µ

Proof. See Appendix A.1.

    Lemma 1 shows that the factor shares in this economy are determined by only three
parameters: the level of the markup µ and the degrees of decreasing returns to scale in
production and expansion, (Y , N ). In particular, neither the demand structure that gives
rise to the markup µ, nor the relative productivities in the two sectors, matter for the
income shares. The latter property is a feature of having assumed iso-elastic production
functions, which we relax in Section 2.7. The following two theorems about the effect of a
change in the markup on the income distribution follow directly from the factor shares in
Lemma 1.


2.4    Effect of the Markup on Labor Income Shares

The majority of existing macroeconomic models abstract from N -type labor. These models
are a special case of our framework in which N = 0, so that the labor share and profit share
are given by (SL , S ) = µ   Y
                               , 1 - µ
                                     Y
                                        . In this familiar case, an increase in the markup µ
unambiguously increases the profit share and lowers the labor share, redistributing income
away from workers and towards the owners of claims on profits. Indeed, the tight negative
relationship between the markup and labor share is so strongly engrained in macroeconomic
thinking that empirical work on measuring movements in the markup often equates the
markup with the inverse of the labor share (Bils and Klenow, 2004; Nekarda and Ramey,
2019), or estimates the markup as the ratio of the labor (or other variable input) share to

                                              6
the output elasticity of labor (or other variable input) (De Loecker and Warzynski, 2012;
De Loecker et al., 2019).
    But in economies in which some workers are engaged in N -type activities (N > 0), this
relationship can break down. The following Theorem shows that, away from this special
case, the relationship between the markup and the labor share is ambiguous.

Theorem 1. An increase (decrease) in the markup µ leads to an increase (decrease) in the
overall labor share if and only if the degree of decreasing returns to scale is stronger for
Y -type workers than for N -type workers, i.e.

                              SL
                                     0 if and only if N    Y .
                              µ

Conversely, an increase (decrease) in the markup µ leads to an increase (decrease) in the
overall profit share if and only if the degree of decreasing returns to scale is stronger for
N -type workers than for Y -type workers, i.e.

                              S
                                     0 if and only if Y    N .
                              µ

Proof. See Appendix A.2.

    Theorem 1 reveals that a change in the markup has an ambiguous effect on the share of
income accruing to labor versus profits. In particular, an increase in the markup leads to a
fall in the labor share if and only if Y > N . In the special case when N = Y , a change in
the markup has no effect on the labor share relative to the profit share. And when N > Y ,
which we will argue below is the empirically relevant case, an increase in the markup leads
to an increase in the labor share and a decrease in the profit share. Thus the co-movement
of the markup with the labor share is informative about the relative sizes of N versus Y ,
and hence about the share of total labor income that compensates Y -type activities versus
N -type activities.
    The reason why a change in the markup has an ambiguous effect on the profit share
is because economic profits in this economy arise from two different sources. To see the
importance of the relative sizes of N versus Y , it is useful to consider two extreme cases.
When Y = 1 and N < 1, all economic profits accrue to the retail sector and profits reflect
rents from charging prices above marginal cost. In this case, an increase in the markup
unambiguously raises the profit share because it raises the rents that are the source of
profits in the economy. When Y < 1 and N = 1, all economic profits accrue to the
wholesale sector and reflect rents accruing to the fixed factor in production. Although the

                                             7
retail sector still charges a markup above marginal cost, those profits are eaten up by entry
of new product lines. In this case, an increase in the markup unambiguously lowers the
profit share because the additional entry diverts resources away from the wholesale sector,
limiting the scope for the wholesale sector to use the implicit fixed factor. In the general
case where Y < 1 and N < 1, which of the two effects dominates depends on which source
of profits is more responsive to a change in the markup, which depends on the relative sizes
of Y versus N . The co-movement of the profit share with the markup is hence informative
about the nature of economic profits in the economy.
   Despite this ambiguity in the effect of a change in the markup on the overall labor
share, the next theorem shows that a change in the markup unambiguously redistributes
labor income between between Y -type and N -type workers.

Theorem 2. An increase (decrease) in the markup µ leads to a decrease (increase) in the
income share of Y -type labor and an increase (decrease) in the income share of N -type labor.

                                   SY         SN
                                      < 0 and    >0
                                   µ          µ

Proof. See Appendix A.3.

   The theorem states that a change in the markup redistributes national income between
the two types of labor in the economy. Whereas the labor income of workers performing
traditional activities (Y -type labor) is negatively exposed to markups, the labor income of
workers performing expansionary activities (N -type labor) is positively exposed to markups.
    The intuition behind Theorem 2 is that whether the demand for an input rises or falls
with an increase in the markup depends on whether the real marginal value of that input
to producers (in terms of final goods) is higher or lower when the markup is higher. For
the retail sector, the marginal value of N -type labor is higher when markups, and hence
gross profits, are higher because N -type workers allow retailers to replicate their existing
activities. For the wholesale sector, a higher markup translates into a lower value of the
intermediate good in units of the final good, which lowers the marginal value of the Y - type
labor that is used to produce the good.
    Theorem 2 suggests a strategy for learning about which types of workers are compensated
for traditional versus expansionary activities. The theorem suggests that in response to an
increase in the markup, the labor income paid to N -type labor should increase relative to
the income paid to Y -type labor. In Section 4, we will pursue this strategy in the context
of occupations in the US labor market.


                                              8
2.5    Effect of the Markup on Output

The previous theorems emphasized the connection between movements in the markup and
movements in the labor share. We now establish a relationship between movements in the
markup and movements in output. This will allow us to interpret the cyclicality of the labor
share through the lens of our framework, which will help us to learn about the relative size of
Y and N , and help us to resolve some puzzles that have plagued New Keynesian business
cycle models. However, in order to make statements about output, we need to impose some
additional structure on the household side of the model.
   We assume that there is a representative household with preferences

                             U (C, LY , LN ) = log C -  (LY , LN )

where C = C {c }[0,] ,  is a symmetric homothetic aggregator over distinct varieties
c and  is the measure of varieties. This implies that there exists a price index P =
P {p }[0,] ,  , and in a symmetric equilibrium in which p = pj = p j,  , nominal
GDP satisfies pY = P C . At this point we make no additional assumptions about the
measure of unique varieties , nor its relationship to the measure of product lines N operated
by the retail sector.

Theorem 3. Suppose that (i) the aggregator C does not exhibit love of variety and (ii)  is
convex in (LY , LN ), i.e. LN LN > 0, LY LY > 0 and and LY LY LN LN  (LY LN )2 and (iii)
LN LY  0. Then an increase in µ leads to a decrease in aggregate nominal output pY .

Proof. See Appendix A.4.

   Theorem 3 states that the markup is always countercyclical in this environment. The
convexity condition on preferences is sufficient but not necessary. Two simple examples are
                                                     1+ 1

perfect substitutes,  (LY , LN ) =  (LY + LN )
                                        1+ 1
                                                            , and imperfect substitutes with the same
                                                  
                                      1+ 1             1+ 1
                                     LY            LN 
Frisch elasticity,  (LY , LN ) = Y   1+ 1    +   N 1+ 1       . The restriction on love-of-variety is also
                                                      
sufficient but not necessary for the result.
   The intuition behind the theorem is that we can write total output Y as the product of
the number of product lines N and the total sales of each product line y . The elasticity of
output with respect to a change in the markup can then be expressed as

                                  log Y    log y  log N
                                        =       +       .
                                   µ       µ       µ


                                                      9
The first term is always negative for the reasons discussed in the previous section: a higher
markup lowers the real value to the wholesaler of producing additional output per product
line. The second term is positive because a higher markup raises the real return on expand-
ing through replication. As long as the labor supply curves faced by the two sectors are not
too different, the first effect always dominates. In Section 2.7, we describe modifications of
the environment that can reverse this finding by making the second term more responsive.


Taking stock We have established that in our framework, an increase in the markup
is associated with a fall in output. We have also established conditions under which an
increase in the markup is associated with an increase in the labor share. This means that
we can now look at evidence on the cyclicality of the labor share, conditional on changes
in the markup, to infer which of N and Y is larger, and evidence on the co-movement
of the labor share and the markup to estimate the absolute size of Y and N . We will
pursue this in Section 3. However, before turning to estimation, we first analyze a series
of generalizations to the model and we discuss alternative interpretations of the source of
movements in the markup.


2.6    Interpretations of Movements in the Markup

We have so far treated the aggregate markup µ as an exogenous wedge between the (compet-
itive) wholesale price for intermediate goods produced by Y -type labor, and the retail price
paid by consumers. In this section we describe a number of micro-founded environments
in which markup variation arises either as a result of exogenous variation in a structural
parameter or for endogenous reasons. Full details on each environment are described in
Appendix B. The results of Theorems 1 and 2 hold in each case.
    Recall that  is the measure of unique varieties in the economy and N  is the number
of product lines or establishments operated by firms. This allows for the possibility that
more than one establishment or sales unit produces the same variety. We focus on symmetric
equilibria and denote the measure of retail sales units operating in each variety market as
M := N/. We denote the elasticity of demand by

                                                         p c
                               {p }[0,] , C,  := -
                                                         c p

which in a symmetric equilibrium is  (p, C, ) and with a homothetic aggregator can be
written as  (P, ) where P = P (p, ) is the price index. Below we provide several examples.



                                             10
2.6.1   Monopolistic Competition

Under monopolistic competition, each sales unit has a monopoly over a single unique variety
(M = 1, N = ) so adding or subtracting product lines N induces one-for-one changes in
the measure of goods  available for consumption. The markup is given by
                                                 
                                            µ=      .
                                                 -1

Theorems 1, 2 and 3 apply to movements in the markup due to exogenous changes in
parameters that enter the demand elasticity, due to endogenous changes in variables that
enter the demand elasticity (C ,,p) or due to frictions in price setting that induce a wedge
                              
between the markup µ and -     1
                                 . Importantly, our theorems apply in dynamic versions of
the model in which the pricing department faces costs of adjusting prices as in Rotemberg
(1982) or Calvo (1983), which lead to endogenous movements in the markup.
Example 1. With a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) demand system as in
Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987), the elasticity takes the form
 =  so with flexible price setting, exogenous changes in  are the only source of markup
variation.1
Example 2. With a Translog demand system as in Feenstra (2003), Bilbiie et al. (2012)
and Maggi and Félix (2019), the elasticity takes the form  =   + 1 = N + 1. Any
changes (other than to Y or N ) that lead to a decrease in the number of product lines
in the economy, such as a fall in ZN , will induces a rise in markups and the distributional
effects in Theorems 1 and 2 will apply. Changes in Y or N also have direct effects on
factor shares, but the indirect effects that arise through the resulting change in the markup
also satisfy Theorems 1 and 2.
Example 3. With a Linear Demand system as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), the elas-
                            
ticity takes the form  =  C    = N  C
                                      . Since preferences are not homothetic, the elasticity of
demand depends on the level of consumption. Any shock that affects aggregate consump-
tion without directly impacting factor shares (examples of such shocks include technology
(ZY , ZN ) or labor supply  (.) ) leads to a change in the markup and the results of Theorems
1 and 2 hold.


2.6.2   Cournot Competition

Under Cournot competition, there are a large number of sales units M >> 1 producing
each unique variety. If M is sufficiently large so that individual retailers do not internalize
  1
    In a symmetric equilibrium with homogenous goods the Kimball (1995) demand as used in Klenow and
Willis (2016) and Edmond et al. (2018) has a constant markup as in CES.

                                                 11
the effect of their own price on the aggregate price index, then the equilibrium markup is
                                               
                                         µ=     1 .
                                              - M

    Consider first the case in which M is a primitive technological or policy parameter
describing the nature of competition. In this case the creation of new product lines N by
retailers generates proportionately more varieties . A change in the markup then arises
as a result of exogenous shifts in M , and the distributional and aggregate effects of such
changes satisfy Theorems 1, 2 and 3.
    Alternatively, one could consider the measure of unique varieties  as a primitive. In
this case, a shock that leads to the creation of new product lines by retailers generates a
proportionate increase in M , the measure of sales units competing in each market, and
hence leads to a fall in the markup. Theorems 1 and 2 apply to this change in the markup.
An example of such a shock would be a shock to the relative productivities in the two
sectors ZN
        ZY
           .


2.6.3   Oligopoly

Oligopoly refers to the case in which M > 1 retail sales units produce each variety, but M
is sufficiently small that retailers take strategic considerations into account when setting
prices. As in the previous case we can treat either the number of firms in each market M
or the total measure of unique varieties  as a primitive. We focus on the nested CES case
as in Atkeson and Burstein (2008), Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008) and Mongey (2019),
in which the elasticity of substitution across the same variety sold by different retailers is
 >  . The previously considered case in which the same varieties sold by different retailers
are perfect substitutes corresponds to   .
Example 4. Under Bertrand competition the markup is given by
                                                 -
                                             + M
                                      µ=          -
                                            - 1 + M

which gives µ = 1 when   .
Example 5. Under Cournot competition the markup is given by
                                             
                                    µ=                 -
                                          ( - 1) +    M

                  
which gives µ =     1
                  - M
                        when   .

                                              12
    In either case a change in the markup arising from a change in either demand elasticity,
or from a change in the degree of concentration M , induces the distributional effects implied
by Theorems 1 and 2.


2.6.4   Limit Pricing

As in Barro and Tenreyro (2006), assume that there exists an alternative technology for
retailers to operate a product line that does not require hiring any N -type labor. Instead the
retailer incurs additional input costs so that their effective marginal cost of undifferentiated
goods is PW , with  > 1. This captures, for example, the costs of licensing an existing
product to sell in a new market, or the costs of trying to compete in a product market
without setting up the necessary sales infrastructure or overhead. If  < µ in any of the
aforementioned market structures, then the markup is  and any change in  will generate
the redistributive effects described in Theorems 1, 2 and 3.


2.7     Generalizations of Production Structure

Our assumed production structure contains several special features that are not strictly
necessary for a change in the markup to have the redistributive effects described in Theorems
1 and 2. Relaxing these features is useful for understanding the economic forces at work.
For simplicity we describe these generalizations in the context of monopolistic competition
with N = .


2.7.1   Variety-specific DRS in production

Our baseline model features a homogenous intermediate good that is then differentiated.
This implies that DRS in the use of Y -type labor operates at the economy-wide level. In the
absence of love-of-variety in preferences, the production of new product lines is a socially
wasteful activity and a planner would choose to set N  0. Some readers may find this
feature of our environment unappealing. However, this assumption is not important for
Lemma 1 or for Theorems 1 or 2. In Appendix C we describe an alternative version of the
model, in which each variety is produced with a separate DRS production function in the
wholesale sector. We show that in this alternative model, the factor shares are identical
to those in the baseline model. With this alternative formulation, there is indeed a social
benefit to introducing new product lines, and a planner would choose a value of N > 0 as
in Bilbiie et al. (2016). But the distributional effects of a change in the markup are not
affected.

                                              13
   The main difference with variety-specific DRS is in the effects of the markup on aggregate
output, i.e. the cyclicality of markups. Unlike in the baseline model the cyclicality of
markups is theoretically ambiguous. Aggregate output is still given by the product of the
number of product lines N and output per product line, so

                                 d log Y   d log y d log N
                                         =        +        .
                                    dµ       dµ       dµ

As before, the first term is always negative and the second term is always positive. However,
unlike in the baseline model, the fall in output in each product line y may not be large enough
to overcome the increase in the number of product lines N , and for economies in which the
degree of DRS is strong (low Y ) the second term may dominate, leading to pro-cyclical
markups.
    For example when Y = 0 so that all labor is expansionary, as in Kaplan and Menzio
(2016), this is indeed what happens. However for calibrations of (Y , N ,  ) in which an
intermediate fraction of labor income goes to N -type workers it is typically the case that
markups remain counter-cyclical.


2.7.2   Integrated wholesale and retail sectors as single firms

The model described above assumes that wholesalers' decisions about how much Y -type
labor to hire are independent of retailers' decisions about how much N -type labor to hire.
This means that when a retailer is deciding about whether to expand its number of product
lines, it does not internalize the effect that this will have on the marginal cost of production.
    In Appendix C, we analyze a version of the model in which a single firm decides jointly
on production and expansion. In this model, Theorem 2 is unaffected. It remains the case
that an increase in the markup re-distributes labor income away from Y -type labor towards
N -type labor. However, Theorem 1 no longer holds. Rather, one can show that when
the production and expansion decisions are integrated, the labor share is always inversely
related to the markup, and so is pro-cyclical.
    Thus, in order for the model to generate a counter-cyclical labor share, it is important
that the production and expansion decisions are separated. The reason why the baseline
model can generates a positive co-movement between the labor share and the markup is
because when markups rise, the marginal value of expansion rises, and expansion requires
N -type labor. But in the integrated model, retailers internalize the fact that expanding
N requires more goods to be produced, which raises the marginal cost of production, and
lowers the marginal benefit of expansion. This latter force is strong enough so that total
demand for labor of both types of workers always falls when the markup rises.

                                               14
    In Section 3, we will re-confirm the well-known fact that the labor share is strongly
counter-cyclical in post-war US data. This is what leads us to prefer our baseline production
structure over this alternative.


2.7.3   Capital

So far we have considered a production structure in which labor is the only factor of pro-
duction. Embedding our framework in a general equilibrium macroeconomic model that we
can take to the data requires adding capital. We add capital by assuming that producing
output and operating product lines both require labor and capital, with possibly different
factor intensities. We thus extend the production functions as


                             -Y         Y                 -N          Y
                   Y = ZY L1
                           Y
                                 Y
                                KY          and N = ZN L1
                                                        N
                                                              N
                                                             KN           .


    Including capital in the model has only a minimal impact on the equilibrium factor
shares in Lemma 1. The only difference is that SY and SN are now defined as the share of
national income going to all inputs used in the Y and N sectors, respectively. With this
definition, the shares are given by those in Lemma 1. Within the Y sector, the split between
capital and labor is given by SLY = (1 - Y ) SY and SKY = Y SY , and within the N -sector,
the split between capital and labor is given by SNY = (1 - N ) SN and SKN = N SN
    The result in Theorem 1 concerning the relationship between the markup and the profit
share is unaffected. However, the result concerning the relationship between the markup
and the labor share must be modified when the capital intensities within each sector are
different. In Appendix C, we show that the condition for the labor share to increase when
the markup increases becomes N (1 - N ) > Y (1 - Y ). In words, this says that the
degree of decreasing returns to scale in labor must be stronger in the Y sector than in the
N sector. We also show in Appendix C that adding capital in this way does not change the
redistributive effects of a change in the markup (Theorem 2), nor the relationship between
the markup and output, if capital is in fixed supply (Theorem 3).


2.7.4   Other Generalizations

We also generalize the model to allow for CES production functions, for entry in the whole-
sale sector, and for markups in both the labor market and the market for wholesale goods.
Details of these generalizations, along with the modifications to the conditions of Theorems
1 and 2 that they require, are contained in Appendix C.

                                             15
2.8    Interpretation of the Y -type vs N -type Distinction

Before moving to estimation, some notes about the distinction between the two types of
labor are in order. We have thus far referred to Y -type labor as production labor and
N -type labor as overhead or expansionary labor; but the words we use are less important
than the economic distinction. We think that the key distinction between the two types
of labor is that N -type labor facilitates extensive margin replication, i.e. the possibility of
replicating a profit-generating activity without lowering gross profits, whereas Y -type labor
does not.
    This distinction is easiest to appreciate in the versions of the model described in Section
2.7.1 and Section 2.7.2, in which each product line requires its own wholesale sector, or when
both sectors are integrated within a single firm. In these cases, expansion through using
more Y -type labor requires producing and selling more in existing product lines - which
incurs either higher input prices or lower sales prices, and hence lowers gross profits j . But
expansion through using more N -type workers does not lower gross profits. Since a change in
the markup changes gross profits, it changes the relative attractiveness of expanding through
N -type or Y -type labor. This is why we think of N -type labor as performing any activities
that expand real output without lowering gross profits. Various activities fit this description:
(i) innovation activities like R&D that literally invent new goods; (ii) marketing activities
that inform or persuade new customers to purchase existing goods at existing prices; (iii)
management activities that allow firms to operate in more geographic markets or manage
more product lines; (iv) expansion activities that open additional establishments; (v) any
other activities that are complementary with these activities.
    In the baseline two-sector version of the model, a similar force is at work, but it occurs
only in general equilibrium. Hiring additional Y -type labor raises the wholesale price pW
in equilibrium, and thus lowers gross profits, whereas hiring additional N -type labor does
not.
    For practical purposes, the most useful description of the distinction, is probably the
result rather than the definition: N -type (Y -type) labor is labor whose income share falls
(rises) when the markup falls. Indeed, this is the distinction we will exploit in the remainder
of the paper. Hence an alternative approach might have been to define Y -type and N -type
labor in this way, and then to the think of our theory as providing an explanation for how
the labor income distribution covaries with the markup.
   Finally, one element that is not an important part of the distinction between the two
types of labor is adjustment costs. We have purposely focused on a static model to emphasis
that the distinction between the two types of labor is not fundamentally about differences


                                              16
in the nature of adjustment costs they incur. It may turn out that adjustment costs do in
fact differ, but this is not important for the forces driving the effects of a change in the
markup in Theorems 1 or 2.



3    Estimation of Aggregate Parameters

Our goal in this and the following section is to estimate the parameters of the model that
determine what share of aggregate US labor income compensates N -type versus Y -type
activities, how this share has changed over time, and which workers in the economy perform
N -type activities. However, measuring N -type workers poses several challenges. First, as
discussed in the previous section, the notion of N -type workers is abstract. It encompasses
a broad range of activities and refers to any workers whose real marginal value to firms rises
when markups rise. Second, firms do not hire workers directly into N -type jobs and Y -type
jobs. Rather, firms hire workers into occupations, and most occupations perform a variety
of different activities, some of which are better characterized as N -type and some of which
are better characterized as Y -type.
    One possible approach would be to try to identify N -type and Y -type occupations by
examining their daily activities (using data from a source such as O*NET) or by measuring
their contribution to specific corporate activities (such as R&D, product design, overhead,
sales and marketing). We choose not to take this route because we do not presume to
know ex-ante the mapping from specific tasks to N -type versus Y -type activities. Instead,
we prefer to infer the aggregate share of N -type labor income, as well as the N -type and
Y -type content of different occupations, by exploiting the model predictions underlying
Theorems 1 and 2. According to the model, N -type workers are workers whose share of
total labor income increases in response to a markup-induced increase in the overall labor
share, whereas Y -type workers are those whose share of total labor income falls in response
to a markup-induced increase in the overall labor share.
    We pursue this approach in two stages. In this section, we start by explaining how to
identify the two key elasticities (Y , N ) given data on the markup µ and the overall labor
share SL . Knowledge of these parameters is then sufficient to infer the aggregate fraction
of US labor income that compensates N -type activities. Then, in Section 4, we introduce
occupations into our framework and show how to identify the parameters that govern the
N -type and Y -type content of each occupation, given estimates of (Y , N ) and data on the
occupational labor income shares, under various assumptions about the availability of data
on the markup or instruments for the markup.


                                             17
3.1     Identification of Overall Shares (Y , N )

Our starting point is the expression for factor shares in the version of the model with capital,
described in Section 2.7.3. Throughout our empirical analysis we restrict attention to the
case where all capital is used in the wholesale sector for Y -type activities and capital is not
used for N -type activities (N = 0).2 Under this assumption, the factor share equation can
be re-arranged to give the following expression relating the markup to the labor share,

                                                            1
                                  SL = N + (Y (1 - Y ) - N ) .                                         (1)
                                                            µ

Given data on the markup µ, in which variation arises from any of the sources described
in Section 2.6 that do not involve a change in (N , Y ), equation (1) implies that we can
recover (N , (1 - Y ) Y ) from the average levels of the markup and the labor share, and
the co-movement of the labor share with the markup. Intuitively, Lemma 1 showed that the
factor shares are determined by (N , Y , µ) and thus three moments are required. The levels
of the labor share and the markup provide two of these. The third moment exploits the
insight of Theorem 2: the sign and strength of co-movement between the labor share and
the markup identifies the gap between N and Y (1 - Y ). In order to separately identify
Y from Y we also need to make an assumption about the average capital share relative
to the average profit share.
    According to equation (1), time-variation in the measured labor share could arise because
of variation in the markup due to one of the forces described in Section 2.6, because of
variation in the production parameters or because of measurement error. Allowing for non-
linear deterministic trends in the production parameters and the markup, we thus obtain
the following estimating equation,

                                                                    1
                            SL,t = N,t + (Y,t (1 - Y ) - N,t )         +    L,t                        (2)
                                                                    µt
                            N,t = gN (N , t)
                            Y,t = gY (Y , t)
                            1
                                = gµ (µ , t) +    µ,t .
                            µt
   2
    Identifying the capital share parameters (Y , N ) would require us to observe capital income and
economic profits separately at a quarterly frequency. If this were possible, we would be able to identify
both parameters from the level of the capital share and its co-movement with the markup, analogously to
how we use the co-movement of the labor share with the markup to identify (Y , N ). However, splitting
accounting profits into these components is a challenging task. As it stands, we need to make an assumption
about the average profit share and capital share. Separating these components at a high frequency is beyond
the scope of this paper. See Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019) for further discussion of this issue.


                                                    18
Measurement error in the labor share is captured by L,t and flexible deterministic trends
are captured by the parametric functions gi (i , t) i  {N , Y , µ}. Hence the labor share
could exhibit a trend, because of either a trend in the production parameters or the markup.
    The assumption required for identification of {N , Y , µ } is that de-trended variation
in the inverse markup µ,t is independent of other stochastic variation in the labor share L,t

                                       E[    L,t ]   = 0 t                                (3)
                                  E[   L, | µ,t ]    = 0  (t,  ) .                        (4)

These moment conditions form the basis of our estimation strategy.
    An important assumption is that the model parameters other than the markup (Y , Y , N )
vary at a lower frequency than the de-trended variation in the markup ( µ,t ). In our estima-
tion, we impose this by removing the trend in the markup in a first stage, and then using a
de-trended series for the markup that isolates variation at business cycle frequencies. Thus
our implicit assumption is that the technological parameters (Y , Y , N ) do not vary at
business cycle frequencies. This assumption is pervasive in the business cycle literature - it
is imposed, either explicitly or implicitly, in almost all existing applications that use Real
Business Cycle and New Keynesian models. We also use a de-trended series for the labor
share in our estimation, which we remove in a first stage. Hence we implicitly treat the
trends in N and Y as nuisance parameters. Equation (2) implies that we can interpret
the trend that we remove from the labor share as a combination of the trends in N and
Y , the trend in the markup and the structural parameters.


3.2    Labor Share and Markup Data

In order to implement this estimation approach, we require data on the labor share SL,t
and the markup µt .


Labor share data. We construct our baseline measure of the labor share using quarterly
data from the National Economic Statistics produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis,
following the procedures in Gomme and Rupert (2004) to adjust for ambiguous components
of income. We use data for 1947:Q1 to 2019:Q2 and de-trend using an HP-filter with a
smoothing parameter of 1600. All of our estimates are robust to using alternative measures
of the labor share and alternative methods for de-trending. Appendix D.1 contains full
details of the construction of the series and Appendix D.2 reports estimates using alternative
data series for the labor share.


                                                 19
                                                                               1.3




                                                                                                   .68
  .7




                                                                               1.25
  .68




                                                                                                            .67
                                                                                      Detrended Labor Share
  .66




                                                                               1.2




                                                                                                   .66
                                                                               1.15
  .64




                                                                                           .65
  .62




                                                                               1.1




                                                                                                   .64
                                                                               1.05
  .6




        1950q1   1960q1   1970q1    1980q1 1990q1   2000q1   2010q1       2020q1




                                                                                                   .63
                                         yq
                                                                                                                  1.1   1.15          1.2         1.25   1.3
                    Labor Share (left axis)         Markup (right axis)                                                        Detrended Markup


                            (a) Raw time series                                                                          (b) De-trended data

Figure 1: Panel (a): Raw time series for labor share and markup. Labor share (left axis) is
defined is computed from BEA data following Gomme and Rupert (2004). Markup (right
axis) is defined as ratio of PPI series WPSFD49207 to series WPSID61. Shaded areas are
NBER recessions. Panel (b): De-trended labor share and de-trended markup. Labor share
and inverse markup are de-trended with a HP-filter with smoothing parameter 1600.

    The raw series for the labor share is displayed in Figure 1a (black solid line, left axis).
The mean of this series over the sample is 65.1%. The series displays the well-documented
downward trend in the labor share, from an average of 67.0% pre-1960 to 61.2% post-2010.
The labor share is also counter-cyclical, which can be seen in Figure 1a, by noting that the
NBER recessions (shaded grey areas) typically correspond to local maxima of the series.
The correlation of the de-trended labor share series with de-trended log per-capita real
output is -0.13. The counter-cyclicality of the labor share is consistent with a large body
of evidence, and is one of the key reasons that we will estimate N > Y (1 - Y ) and
conclude that part of the US labor force is engaged in N -type activities.
    We do not attempt to split the remaining 34.9% of national income between capital
income and economic profits. For our baseline estimates, we simply assume that the overall
profit share is 10%, and we report the sensitivity of our estimates to assuming a profit
share between 5% and 15%. The assumption about the mean profit share affects only the
estimates of Y and Y , and does not affect the estimate of the overall fraction of labor
                                        SLN
income compensating N -type activities, S L
                                            .


Markup data. Estimating markups and their co-movement with aggregate economic ac-
tivity has a long and controversial history in economics. We refer the reader to the recent
paper by Nekarda and Ramey (2019) for an excellent discussion of the relevant literature

                                                                             20
and different approaches to estimating the dynamics of the markup at business cycle fre-
quencies.3 Unfortunately, none of the approaches used in this literature are appropriate in
the context of our model. Most existing approaches require the researcher to specify which
are the variable factors that are used in the production of goods (as opposed to revenue).
In our model that would require distinguishing between N -type versus Y -type labor as a
pre-requisite to estimating the markup. Instead, we desire to go in the opposite direction
and to learn about the split between N -type versus Y -type from movements in the markup.
We thus we cannot adopt one of these existing methods and use it as an input to our
estimation procedure.4
    Starting with Bils (1987), the most common approach to investigating the cyclicality of
markups is to use the mapping between the labor share and the markup to infer movements
in the markup from movements in the labor share. This general idea also underlies the
approach taken by Nekarda and Ramey (2019). But in our framework, the mapping between
the markup and the labor share is ambiguous since it depends on (Y , N ). Indeed, this
entire literature has worked with production structures in which the markup and the labor
share are inversely related, effectively assuming that N < Y (1 - Y ) (typically that N =
0). Clearly, we cannot use such estimates of the markup to estimate the relative size of
((1 - Y ) Y , N ).
    Since we require a markup series that has been constructed without assumptions on the
production function, we instead construct a measure of markups by comparing the prices
of goods at different stages of the production process, similarly to Barro and Tenreyro
(2006). In our model, the markup is defined as the ratio of the retail price (i.e the price of
differentiated final goods that are sold to consumers) to the wholesale price (i.e. the price
of undifferentiated good produced from raw materials, capital and labor). The Bureau of
Labor Statistics's (BLS) Producer Price Index (PPI) program produces prices indexes under
its Production Flow structure that closely match these definitions and date to 1947. We
construct a series for the markup by taking the ratio of the series for "Finished demand"
(WPSFD49207), which measures the price changes of goods for (i) personal consumption
and (ii) capital investment, and the series for "Processed goods for intermediate demand"
(WPSID61), which measures the price changes of (i) partially processed goods that have to
undergo further processing before they can be sold to the public and (ii) supplies consumed
by businesses.
   3
     Nekarda and Ramey (2019) classify four approaches that have been used to estimate a time-series for
the markup: (i) using direct data on price and average variable costs; (ii) generalizations of the Solow
residual as in Hall (1986); (iii) generalized production functions with quasi-fixed factors; (iv) using factor
share equations, adjusted for fixed costs.
   4
     In a companion note, Kaplan and Zoch (2020), we explain why the methods used in De Loecker and
Warzynski (2012) and De Loecker et al. (2019) cannot be used in the context of our model, unless one could
separately observe N -type and and Y -type workers.

                                                     21
    Our markup measure is constructed by comparing two indexes. It thus allows us to
measure changes in the markup but does not provide an estimates of the level of the
markup, which is also required for our estimation procedure. So for our baseline estimates,
we simply assume that the average markup over the post-war period is 1.2, and we show
how our estimates are affected by assuming a value between 1.05 and 1.35. It turns out that
the level of the markup has very little effect on the estimates of (N , Y , Y ), since these
are identified by the co-movement of the markup with the labor share, and the level of the
                                                                                        SLN
profit share. However, the level of the markup does matter for the implied estimate of S  L
                                                                                            .
    The raw markup series is displayed in Figure 1a (red dashed line, right axis), re-scaled
to have a mean of 1.2. The raw series displays a slight downward trend. The markup
is also counter-cyclical and co-moves positively with the labor share at business cycle fre-
quencies. The correlation of the de-trended markup with de-trended log per-capita real
output is -0.28, and the correlation with the de-trended labor share is 0.28. This posi-
tive co-movement between the markup and the labor share is the key feature of the data
suggesting that N (1 - Y ) Y and that the share of N -type labor is positive.
   It is important to note that the counter-cyclicality of our markup series is not at odds
with the conclusions in Nekarda and Ramey (2019) that the markup based on labor com-
pensation is pro-cyclical, since this is simply the inverse of the labor share which is also
pro-cyclical in our data.


3.3    Estimates of Overall Shares (Y , N )

Baseline estimates We estimate equation (2) by OLS, subject to the constraints that
N , Y  1 (which do not bind at our estimates). The scatter plot corresponding to this
regression, which illustrates the positive co-movement of the labor share and the markup,
is displayed in Figure 1b. Our baseline estimates are shown in the first column of Table
1. We estimate a value for N of 0.73 and a value for Y of 0.93, implying a value for
Y (1 - Y ) = 0.64 < N . Given our assumptions of a profit share of 10% and a mean
markup of 1.2, our estimates imply that roughly 19% of labor income compensates activities
that are better characterized as N -type than Y -type.
    The second and third columns of Table 1 show that if we assume a higher or lower
profit share than in the baseline, neither our estimates of N and Y (1 - Y ), nor the
implied share of N -type labor income, are affected. The only effect is to change the split of
non-labor income in the Y sector between profits and capital income. The fourth and fifth
columns show that the estimate of the share of labor income compensating N -type activities
is sensitive to the assumption about the mean markup. If one believes that the mean level

                                             22
                                       (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)
                                     Baseline      Low             High          Low        High
                                                Profit Share    Profit Share    Markup     Markup

 Y                                     0.934          0.994         0.874        0.908      0.963
                                      (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.001)    (0.008)
 N                                     0.730          0.730         0.730        0.741      0.721
                                      (0.024)        (0.024)       (0.024)      (0.027)    (0.021)

                   S
                  N,L
 Implied value of SL
                                       19%            19%           19%           5%         29%
 P-val for test N = Y (1 - Y )         0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00       0.00

 Assumed mean markup, µ                 1.20          1.20          1.20          1.05       1.35
 Assumed profit share, S               10%            5%            15%          10%        10%
 Capital share parameter, Y            0.320         0.361          0.273        0.288      0.349


                            Table 1: First stage estimation results


of the markup is lower (higher) than 1.2, then one would obtain lower (higher) estimates
of this share. However, the estimates of the production function parameters Y , N are not
sensitive to the assumed level of the markup. Tables 4 and 5 in Appendix D.2 show that
none of these results are sensitive to using alternative series for the labor share or alternative
assumptions about how we de-trend the data.


Changes over time In order to understand whether the share of labor income compen-
sating expansionary activities has changed over time, we repeat the estimation using 23-year
rolling windows that span our sample period. The estimates are displayed in Table 2 and
Figure 2.
    This exercise requires us to make an assumption about how the markup and the labor
share has trended over time. Recall that our estimation strategy removes trends from both
the markup and labor share series and uses only cyclical variation to identify the structural
parameters. Given the broad consensus on the downward trend in the labor share, we
incorporate this trend into our estimates (although it matters very little for the results).
But given the recent debate over the trend in the markup, we prefer not to take a strong
stand on the direction of this trend. Accordingly, in Panel A of Table 2 we report estimates
under the assumption that the markup has remain constant at 1.2, and in Panel B we report
estimates under the assumption that the markup has followed the broad downward trend
in our markup series.


                                                23
                                                       P-val test
                                                         N =          Implied   Assumptions
                                                                        SL,N
                 Y     N          N - Y (1 - Y )       Y (1 - Y )        SL
                                                                                 µ    SL
 Panel A: Fixed Markup
 1947-1969      0.932 0.853             0.219             0.016        21%      1.20   67.0%
 1957-1979      0.874 1.000             0.406             0.000        25%      1.20   66.2%
 1967-1989      0.999 0.632             -0.048            0.262        16%      1.20   67.1%
 1977-1999      0.947 0.646             0.002             0.977        17%      1.20   64.5%
 1987-2009      0.914 0.805             0.183             0.000        21%      1.20   65.2%
 1997-2019      0.902 0.712             0.098             0.004        19%      1.20   63.0%

 Panel B: Changing Markup
 1947-1969     0.917 0.842              0.219             0.016        27%      1.27   67.0%
 1957-1979     0.845 1.000              0.425             0.000        31%      1.26   66.2%
 1967-1989     1.000 0.632              -0.048            0.262        17%      1.22   67.1%
 1977-1999     0.947 0.646              0.002             0.977        13%      1.14   64.5%
 1987-2009     0.915 0.805              0.183             0.000        20%      1.20   65.2%
 1997-2019     0.905 0.714              0.098             0.004        16%      1.16   63.0%


Table 2: First stage estimation results, 23-year rolling windows. Capital share parameter
Y assumed equal to 0.32 throughout.



    The time series for the full set of rolling window estimates in Figure 2 indicates a broadly
                                        SLN
U-shaped pattern for both N and S         N
                                            , irrespective of whether the average markup is flat
or declining over this period. If one believed that the average markup had risen over this
period, then the estimates would imply a steeper increase in the labor income share of
N -type labor since the 1980's. These pattens reflect the changing cyclical co-movement of
the markup and the overall labor share during the post-war period. In periods where the
cyclical co-movement was more positive, such as before 1970 (correlation = 0.42 ) and after
1990 (correlation = 0.40), we infer a higher share of N -type labor. In periods where the
cyclical co-movement was weaker, such as from 1970 to 1990 (correlation = -0.01 ), we
infer a lower share.


Taking Stock What should we take away from these estimates? Almost all existing mod-
els of the business cycle implicitly assume that N = 0 and that all workers perform Y -type
activities. Our estimates imply that N is substantially larger than zero; in fact it is larger
even than the labor share in the production sector, Y (1 - Y ). This means that unless
one believes that markups are very small, one must conclude that a non-trivial fraction of

                                              24
                                                                              .3
    1




                                                                              .25
    .9
    .8




                                                                              .2
                                                                              .15
    .7
    .6




                                                                              .1
         1960q1   1970q1      1980q1        1990q1     2000q1        2010q1         1960q1    1970q1        1980q1        1990q1        2000q1         2010q1
                                       yq                                                                            yq

                    Y: Fixed Markup            Y: Changing Markup                              SLN / SL: N-type labor income share (fixed markup)
                    N: Fixed Markup            N: Changing Markup                              SLN / SL: N-type labor income share (changing markup)


                                                                                                                                           SLN
                   (a) Estimates of Y and N                                              (b) Implied share of N -type labor,                SL


Figure 2: Estimates from 23-year rolling windows. Windows are centered. Capital share
parameter Y assumed equal to 0.32 throughout. Panel (a): Estimates of Y and N
assuming a constant markup (solid lines) and markup changing as in Figure 1a (dashed
lines). Panel (b): Implied share of labor income compensating N -type labor ssuming a
constant markup (solid line) and markup changing as in Figure 1a (dashed line).


the US labor force is engaged in N -type activities, which has two important implications.
First, it explains the positive co-movement of markups with the labor share and, as we will
see below, the negative co-movement of monetary shocks with the labor share. Second,
it means that some workers stand to gain and some workers stand to lose from changes
in markups, whether they be cyclical changes induced by shifts in aggregate demand, or
structural changes induced by changes in the competitiveness of product markets. In the
next section, we shed light on which workers are which.



4         Estimation of Occupation-Specific Parameters

In Section 2, we distinguished between Y -type labor, whose share of income falls when the
markup rises, and N -type labor, whose share of income rises when the markup rises. In
Section 3, we showed that the co-movement of the markup and the labor share implies
that some workers in the economy are better characterized as N -type workers than Y -type
workers. The goal of this section is to learn about which workers in the US economy these
are.




                                                                    25
4.1    Occupational Framework

We assume that there are a fixed set of J occupations, indexed by j = 1 . . . J . Each
occupation is defined by a pair (jY , jN ) which describe the share of each occupation out
of the total labor input that is needed to produce output Y and manage product lines N ,
respectively. The production functions are Cobb-Douglas in labor of each occupation and
in capital,
                                                          1-Y
                                                                Y
                                             J
                                   Y                 jY
                           Y = ZY KY               LjY          
                                            j =1
                                                          1-N
                                                                N
                                             J
                                   N                 jN
                           N = ZN KN               LjN              .
                                            j =1


The occupation factor share parameters are jointly restricted by jY , jN  0 and J  j =1 jY =
  J
  j =1 jN = 1. Labor market clearing requires that the total quantity of labor supplied in
occupation j , denoted by Lj is equal to the sum of the quantities of labor from occupation
j demanded for production and expansion,

                                   Lj = LjY + LjN j.


   We show in Appendix A.5 that the income share of each occupation in total income,
which we denote by Sj , can be expressed as a weighted sum of the labor income shares of
the two sectors
                                Sj = jY SY,L + jN SN,L ,                             (5)

where SY,L = (1 - Y ) SY is the income share for Y -type labor and SN,L = (1 - N ) SN
is the income share for N -type labor. If SY,L and SN,L were directly observed, it would
be straightforward to estimate the occupation factor share parameters {jY , jN }J j =1 , by
projecting occupational income shares onto these variables. Since SY,L and SN,L are not
directly observed, we instead infer the occupation factor shares parameters from the co-
movement of occupational income shares Sj with markup-induced variation in the overall
labor share SL . We explain this identification strategy in the next section.


4.2    Identification of Occupational Factor Shares {jY , jN }J
                                                              j =1

Combining equation (5) with the expressions for factor shares yields an expression that
                                                                                SJ
relates the share of total labor income going to occupation j (denoted by sj := SL
                                                                                   with

                                            26
   j   sj = 1) to the overall labor share,

                                                                     -1
                                                 Y (1 - Y )                                 1
             sj = jY + (jN - jY ) 1 -                                     1 - Y (1 - Y )            j.          (6)
                                                     N                                     SL

As in Section 3, we assume that N = 0. Equation (6) shows that time variation in
occupational labor income shares could arise from time-variation in (jN , jY ), or from the
variation in (N , Y , SL ) described in the previous section. Given knowledge of (N , Y ),
we can recover (jN , jY ) from the average occupational labor income shares and the co-
movement of occupational labor income shares with any variation in the labor share SL
that is independent of variation in the occupational factor share parameters (jN , jY ).
    We derive an estimating equation by allowing for shocks and non-linear determinis-
tic trends in the occupational factor share parameters, and for measurement error in the
occupational labor income shares. Hence (6) becomes
                                                                -1
                                             Y (1 - Y )                                 1
        sj,t = jY t + (jN t - jY t ) 1 -                              1 - Y (1 - Y )            +   sj ,t   j   (7)
                                                 N                                     SLt
       jY,t = gjY jY , t +      jY,t

   jN,t = gjN jN , t +          jN,t,


where Y,t := ( 1Y,t . . . , JY,t ) , N,t := ( 1N,t . . . , JN,t ) and s,t := ( s1 ,t . . . , sJ ,t ) are mu-
tually independent J × 1 random vectors that are IID over time and each sum to zero.
We define j,t := jY,t , jN,t , sj ,t ' and assume that E [ j,t ] = 0 t, j .5 We now describe
three different sets of moment conditions that can be used as the basis for estimation. Each
differs in the type of variation in the labor share that it exploits.


De-trended Markup From equations (1) and (6), we see that movements in the markup
affect occupational labor shares only through their effect on the overall labor share. Thus
a valid source of variation in the labor share that can be used for identification is markup-
induced variation. To exploit such variation we can use the markup, or lags of the markup,
as an instrument for the de-trended labor share in 7. This identification strategy thus
imposes the moment condition

                                        E[   j, | µ,t ]   = 0  (t,  ) , j.                                      (8)
   5
    An example that satisfies these assumptions is that Y,t , N,t and s,t are each drawn from translated
                                                                                     J
Dirichlet distributions. We also implicitly assume that the trends gjY (t) , gjN (t) j =1 are such that the
                                                                J
adding-up and non-negativity constraints on {jY,t , jN,t }j =1 hold for all t.



                                                           27
In our baseline specification we use the contemporaneous de-trended markup as an instru-
ment for the de-trended inverse labor share. We choose this specification as our baseline
because it uses the same variation to estimate the occupational factor share parameters
{jY , jN }J
          j =1 as we used to estimate the overall factor share parameters (Y , N ) in Section
3.


De-trended Labor Share A simple alternative approach is to assume that the de-
trended inverse labor share itself is orthogonal to shocks to the occupational factor share
parameters and to measurement error in the occupational income shares sj,t . Formally, this
means assuming that
                                  SL,t = gSL (SL , t) + SL ,t

and imposing the moment condition

                                E[   j, | SL ,t ]   = 0  (t,  ) , j                        (9)

Equation (9) says that any movements in occupational labor shares sj,t that are correlated
with movements in the overall labor share SL,t must be at lower frequencies than are cap-
tured by the trend in the labor share gSL (SL , t). Recall from equation (6) that the sources
of the trend in the labor share gSL (SL , t) are the trends in the production parameters and
the markup. Hence this assumption requires that business cycle variation in the labor share
does not arise from sources that directly affect the occupational income shares, other than
through the channel in equation (6). Through the lens of the model, this means that busi-
ness cycle variation in the labor share must come from variation in the markup µ, rather
than from the technology parameters (Y , N ). Assuming that technological parameters are
fixed at business cycle frequencies is a common assumption.
   We also need to assume that any shocks to individual occupation shares ( Y,t , N,t ) are
independent of shocks to the overall labor share SL ,t . This is a relatively weak assumption
because the random vectors ( Y,t , N,t ) each sum to zero - so failure of this assumption would
require a re-shuffling of occupations at exactly the same time as a shock to the labor share,
without any change in the markup. Finally, we need to assume that measurement error in
the occupational labor income shares is independent of measurement error in the overall
labor share. This assumption is likely to be satisfied because we use different data sources
to measure sj,t and SL,t , rather than constructing a measure of SL,t by summing over Sj,t .


Monetary Policy Shocks Given estimates of (Y , N ), it is also possible to estimate
the occupational factor shares without data on the markup. Assume that a variable Zt is


                                                    28
available, which is related to the inverse markup by

                                     1
                                        = gµ (µ , t) + Zt +       µ,t ,                              (10)
                                     µt

where  = 0, so that there is a valid first-stage, and with E [Zt ] = 0. Then if the moment
condition

                                     E[   j, | Zt ]   = 0  (t,  ) , j                                (11)

holds, we can estimate (jN , jY ) by using Zt as instrument for the labor share in Equation
(7). This assumption requires that the instrument Zt only affects the occupational labor
income shares through its effect on the overall labor share, which in our framework can only
occur if the instrument causes a change in the markup.
    Two types of variables that are likely to satisfy these assumptions are monetary and
fiscal policy shocks. In general equilibrium models with sticky prices, such as New Key-
nesian DSGE models, contractionary monetary and fiscal policy shocks (as well as other
contractionary demand shocks) generate a rise in the markup (so  = 0), and do not affect
the labor share except through their effect on the markup.6
    Monetary policy shocks in particular are a good candidate instrument for the labor share.
Cantore et al. (2019) undertake a comprehensive empirical investigation of the dynamic
effects of a monetary policy shock on the labor share. Using various different strategies for
identifying monetary policy shocks, they document robust evidence that a contractionary
monetary shock leads to an increase in the labor share, with a peak response after 1-2 years.
They also show that standard New Keynesian models (with N = 0) cannot re-produce those
dynamics, exactly because a contractionary monetary shock is associated with an increase
in the markup, which is incompatible with a fall in the labor share in standard models.
However, in a New Keynesian model with our production structure, and the parameters
estimated in Section 3, a contractionary monetary shock does lead to rise in the labor share.
Thus, given N > Y (1 - Y ), monetary policy shocks can be used as an instrument for
the labor share.
    Based on the dynamic responses in Cantore et al. (2019) we use three monetary shock
series produced with three different strategies: (i) Romer and Romer (2004), extended
by Coibion et al. (2017), (ii) Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2018), and (iii) Gertler and
Karadi (2015). For each series we include lags at horizons of 4 to 8 quarters, for a total of 15
instruments, and estimate the parameters using optimally-weighted GMM. The instrument
   6
    This is true in a broad class of New Keynesian models. See for example Christiano et al. (2005), Smets
and Wouters (2007) and Galí et al. (2015).


                                                       29
                                                                               De-trended Occupational Labor Income Share
                                                                                                                    .015
 .25




                                                                                                              .01
 .2




                                                                                                      .005
 .15




                                                                                               0
 .1




                                                                                -.01 -.005
 .05




       1990q1               2000q1            2010q1                 2020q1
                                         yq

                Managerial Occs                  Professional Specialty                                                     .645                          .65                              .655
                                                                                                                                            Predicted Detrended Labor Share
                High-tech Occs                   Sales Occs
                Admin Support, Clerical          Service Occs                                                                      Managerial, High-tech, Admin, Service
                Constr, Extractive, Farming      Production, Repair                                                                Construction, Extractive, Production, Repair, Farming
                Machine Operators, Transp                                                                                          Professional Specialty, Sales


       (a) Trend components of occupational share sj .                                  (b) Cyclical components of occupational shares sj .

Figure 3: Panel (a) Trend components of occupational labor income shares. Trends ex-
tracted using an HP-filter with smoothing parameter = 1600. Panel (b): Horizonal access is
predicted value of overall labor share from OLS regression of labor share on markup. Ver-
tical axis is cyclical component of occupational labor income shares. Occupations grouped
into three broad categories based on estimates of N -intensity in table 3.

set has a strong first stage and we fail to reject the test of over-identification restrictions.


4.3         Data on Occupational Income Shares

We use data from the monthly Outgoing Rotation Groups of the Current Population Survey
(CPS-ORG) to construct quarterly series for occupational income shares sj . We restrict
attention to employed individuals aged 16 and over and measure labor income with the
IPUMS variable `earnweek', which records gross weekly earnings on the respondent's main
job. We compute labor income for individuals in each of 9 broad occupation categories,
which we construct from the 389 OCC1990 occupation codes. We then aggregate monthly
earnings in each occupation to the quarterly level and compute the occupation shares sj
in each quarter from 1989 to 2018. We de-seasonalize the quarterly series and then de-
trend using an HP-Filter. The trend components for each of the 9 occupation groups
are displayed in Figure 3a. Managerial and professional specialty occupations display the
strongest growth in income shares in our sample, while machine operators, transportation,
administrative and clerical occupations show the steepest decline.
   Figure 3b shows a scatter plot of the cyclical components of the occupational income
shares that illustrates our identification strategy. To construct this figure we split the
occupations into three broad groupings, based on our baseline estimates of the occupational

                                                                          30
factor share parameters. For each of the three groups, we plot the de-trended labor income
share of those occupations against the predicted value of the de-trended overall labor share,
from an OLS regression of the labor share on the markup. Thus the fitted line reflects
the IV estimate of equation (7) using the markup as an instrument, and the slope of the
relationship reveals the sign of jN - jY .
    The group represented by the red circles in Figure 3b consists of the most N -intensive
occupations and comprises approximately 45% of total labor income. The relatively large
N -component for these occupations is revealed by the fact that markup-induced variation
in the overall labor share is associated with an increase in the share of labor income going to
these occupations. In contrast, the group represented by the blue triangles consists of the
least N -intensive occupations and comprises approximately 23% of total labor income. The
relatively small N -component for these occupations is revealed by the fact that markup-
induced variation in the overall labor share is associated with a decrease in the share of labor
income going to these occupations. The remaining occupations represented by the green
squares are intermediate occupations whose share of labor income is roughly unaffected
by markup-induced variation in the overall labor share. Figure 6 in Appendix D.3 shows
very similar patterns for the OLS relationship between the de-trended labor share and
occupational income shares, and for the reduced-form relationship between the markup and
occupational income shares.


4.4    Estimates of Occupational Factor Shares

We estimate {jY , jN }J  j =1 using a GMM estimator, based on the moment conditions out-
lined in Section 4.2. Table 3 displays our baseline estimates using each of the three
types of variation described in Section 4.2. In each specification we set (Y , N , Y , µ)
= (0.934, 0.730, 0.320, 1.2), based on the estimates in Table 1. Appendix D.3 contains esti-
mates from additional specifications.
    Our estimates using the de-trended markup as an instrument for the de-trended inverse
labor share are shown in Panel A of Table 3. The occupations are ordered from the most N -
intensive to the least N -intensive, as measured by the share of occupational labor income
                                        SjN     SN
that compensates N -type activities, S    j
                                            = jN Sj
                                                    . As anticipated by Figure 3b, there
is heterogeneity across occupations, with N -content shares ranging from 24% for high-
tech occupations to 13% for machine operators and transportation. It is striking that the
ranking of occupations lines up with traditional notions of white-collar versus blue-collar
occupations, yet these estimates were obtained entirely from the relative co-movement of
occupational income shares with markups, and no prior knowledge of the tasks that these
occupations actually do was used in constructing this ranking.

                                              31
                                                     P-val      Elasticity   Share   P-val
                                                                              SjN
                                   Y     N           Y = N        Sj ,SL       Sj
                                                                                     overid
   Panel A: Instrument: De-trended Markup (IV)
   High-tech Occs                0.041 0.055     0.027             3.38      24%
   Service Occs                  0.078 0.094     0.050             2.54      22%
   Admin, Clerical               0.105 0.127     0.014             2.49      22%
   Managerial Occs               0.206 0.243     0.007             2.30      21%
   Prof. Specialty               0.227 0.226     0.909             0.96      19%
   Sales Occs                    0.100 0.090     0.083             0.21      17%
   Production, Repair            0.068 0.051     0.022            -0.92      15%
   Constr., Extract., Farm       0.054 0.038     0.014            -1.38      14%
   Machinists, Transp.           0.121 0.076     0.002            -1.98      13%
   First stage: R2         0.16
   First stage F           11.2
   Panel B: Instrument: De-trended Labor Share (OLS)
   High-tech Occs                0.043 0.046     0.194             1.60      20%
   Service Occs                  0.080 0.082     0.398             1.19      19%
   Admin, Clerical               0.108 0.117     0.025             1.65      20%
   Managerial Occs               0.211 0.220     0.068             1.30      19%
   Prof. Specialty               0.227 0.228     0.731             1.05      19%
   Sales Occs                    0.099 0.096     0.374             0.79      18%
   Production, Repair            0.065 0.062     0.122             0.58      18%
   Constr., Extract., Farm       0.052 0.047     0.021             0.17      17%
   Machinists, Transp.           0.115 0.102     0.000             0.13      17%
   Panel C: Instrument: Lagged Monetary Shocks (GMM)
   High-tech Occs                0.043 0.047     0.287             1.68      20%     0.214
   Service Occs                  0.079 0.088     0.022             1.80      20%     0.556
   Admin, Clerical               0.105 0.126     0.000             2.39      22%     0.287
   Managerial Occs               0.210 0.224     0.060             1.48      20%     0.650
   Prof. Specialty               0.224 0.239     0.067             1.51      20%     0.341
   Sales Occs                    0.101 0.088     0.006             0.04      17%     0.222
   Production, Repair            0.066 0.061     0.096            0.43       18%     0.670
   Constr., Extract., Farm       0.054 0.039     0.001            -1.19      14%     0.437
   Machinists, Transp.           0.117 0.092     0.000            -0.68      15%     0.244
   First stage: R2         0.16
   First stage F           3.14

Table 3: Stage 2 estimates of occupational factor share parameters. Estimates in Panel A
use de-trended markup as an instrument for de-trended invesrse labor share. Estimates in
Panel B use OLS. Estimates in Panel C use optimally-weighted GMM with lagged monetary
policy shocks at horizons of four to eight quarters, from three series. See text for details of
monetary policy shock series.


                                              32
    The relatively small, but statistically significant, differences between jN and jY , man-
ifest as large differences across occupations in their exposure to fluctuations in the overall
labor share. This can be seen in the column labelled Sj ,SL , which reports the elasticity of
occupational income shares to the overall labor share, implied by the estimates of (jY , jN ).
The share-weighted average of these elasticities sums to one. High N -content occupations
have an elasticity above one, whereas low N -content occupations have an elasticity below
one (and even negative for some occupations).
    The remaining panels of Table 3 report estimates without an instrument (Panel B) and
using monetary shocks as an instrument (Panel C). The occupations are reported in the
same order as in Panel A. In both cases, the results are very similar. The main difference
is that when all of the cyclical variation in the labor share is used (Panel B), the additional
variation leads to less precise estimates and less heterogeneity across occupations.


4.5    Characteristics of N -intensive Occupation

Having estimated the extent to which workers in different occupations are engaged in pro-
duction activities versus expansionary activities, in this section we explore the characteris-
tics of these different occupations.
    We start by using the 1980 Census and 2015 American Community Survey (ACS) to
measure total hours and median hourly wages for each of the nine occupation groups. Figure
4a shows a scatter plot of median hourly wages in 2015 against the N -content share of each
occupation group. There is only a weak relationship between the level of wages and N -
content. Although the high-wage occupation groups are mostly high N -content occupations
(managerial, high-tech), there are also low-wage occupations with high N -content (service,
admin), and the low N -content occupations are in the middle of the distribution. (Viewed
on its side, Figure 4a suggests a U-shaped relationship between N -content and wages).
    Wage growth, on the other hand, is strongly correlated with N -content. This can be
seen in Figure 4b, which plots the cumulative nominal growth in median wages from 1980
to 2015 in each occupation against the N -share. Figure 4c also shows a positive correlation
between N -content and the growth in the share of total hours from 1980 to 2015. The
fact that growth has been strongest in both the quantity and price of occupations with
high N -content, suggest that labor demand for expansionary activities has increased faster
than labor demand for traditional production activities. This is also consistent with the
rolling-window estimation in Figure 2a over the corresponding period.
   The remaining three panels of Figure 4 show how the estimated N -content of each oc-
cupation correlates with the three broad task measures constructed by Autor et al. (2006)

                                              33
                                                                                                                                                                  300
                           30


                                                                                                                     Managerial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   High-tech




                                                                                                                                              Growth in median wages, 1980-2015 (%)
                                                                                                    Prof Specialty                                                                                                                                    Managerial
                       25




                                                                                                                                  High-tech




                                                                                                                                                                          250
 Median wage, 2015 ($)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Prof Specialty
              20




                                                                         Prod., Repair                                                                                                                                                                  Admin




                                                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sales                       Service
     15




                                                                                                                       Admin
                                                                  Constr., Extract., Farm Sales
                                                          Machinists, Transp.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Machinists, Transp.




                                                                                                                                                   150
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Prod., Repair
                                                                                                                        Service
                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Constr., Extract., Farm




                                                                                                                                                                  100
                           5




                                                     12         14              16           18         20            22          24                                                  12         14              16           18         20            22          24
                                                                                         N-type share (%)                                                                                                                 N-type share (%)


                                                                       (a) Median wages 2015                                                                                               (b) Median wage growth, 1980-2015
                                               100




                                                                                                                                                                  2
 Growth in share of total hours, 1980-2015 (%)




                                                                                                                                              Mean task_manual 2000 weights
                                                                                                    Prof Specialty
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Constr., Extract., Farm
                                    50




                                                                                                                                  High-tech
                                                                                                                        Service
                                                                                                                                                                    1



                                                                                                                                                                                           Machinists, Transp.
                                                                                            Sales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Service
                        0




                                                                                                                     Managerial
                                                                  Constr., Extract., Farm                                                                                                                 Prod., Repair
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Prof Specialty
                                                                                                                       Admin
                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   High-tech
                                                          Machinists, Transp.
                                                                         Prod., Repair
         -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sales                    Managerial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Admin
                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                           -100




                                                     12         14              16           18         20            22          24                                                  12         14              16           18         20            22          24
                                                                                         N-type share (%)                                                                                                                 N-type share (%)


                                                     (c) Growth in share of total hours, 1980-2015                                                                                            (d) Manual content, 2000 weights
                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                           2




                                                                                                                     Managerial                                                                           Prod., Repair
 Mean task_abstract 2000 weights




                                                                                                                                               Mean task_routine 2000 weights
                                                                                                                                                                           1
                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Constr., Extract., Farm                              Admin      High-tech
                                                                                                    Prof Specialty
                                                                                                                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                  High-tech

                                                                                            Sales
               0




                                                                         Prod., Repair                                                                                                     Machinists, Transp.
                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                  Constr., Extract., Farm
                                                                                                                       Admin
                                                                                                                        Service                                                                                                      Prof Specialty
   -1




                                                          Machinists, Transp.                                                                                                                                                Sales
                                                                                                                                              -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Managerial
                           -2




                                                                                                                                                                  -1




                                                     12         14              16           18         20            22          24                                                  12         14              16           18         20            22          24
                                                                                         N-type share (%)                                                                                                                 N-type share (%)


                                                            (e) Abstract content, 2000 weights                                                                                                (f) Routine content, 2000 weights

Figure 4: Correlation of N -content of occupations with other occupation characteristics.
Wage and hours data from 1980 Census and 2015 American Community Survey. Routine
corresponds to average of DOT measures: "set
                                           34limits, tolerances and standards," and "finger
dexterity." Manual corresponds to DOT measure "eye-hand-foot coordination". Abstract is
average of DOT measures: "direction, control and planning" and "GED math." See Autor
et al. (2006) for details.
(a) Share of labor income compensating N -type labor in      (b) Share of total labor income going to each region.
each region.

Figure 5: Geography of N -intensive occupations. Left panel is constructed by taking a
                                                         SjN
weighted average of the estimates of the N -type shares S  j
                                                              of each occupation j , using
the labor income of occupation j in each region as weights for that region. Right panel is
constructed as

from the US Labor Department's Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT).7 These figures
suggest that N -content is negative correlated with the manual content of occupations (as
reflected in the DOT measure "eye-hand-foot coordination"), and weakly positively corre-
lated with the abstract content of occupations (as reflected in the DOT measures "direction,
control and planning" and "GED math"). But the estimated N -content bares little relation-
ship to the routine content of occupations (as reflected in the DOT measures "set limits,
tolerances and standards," and "finger dexterity").
   The strong relationship between wage growth, hours growth and the N -content of oc-
cupations, together with the relatively weak relationship between N -content and the task-
based categorizations of occupations used in previous work, suggest that the distinction we
emphasize between production activities and expansionary activities is related, but distinct,
from the ocupational categorizations that this previous work has emphasized.


4.6     Geography of N -intensive Occupation

Figure 5a offers a visual representation of the geography of N -type labor in the USA. To
construct this figure we first compute the distribution of labor income across the nine broad
   7
     These measures are standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. They are aggregated
from detailed occupation groups using 2000 Census weights. In Figure 7 in Appendix D.3 we present
analogous figures using the six Work Context and Work Activity measures from O*NET as defined in
Acemoglu and Autor (2011).

                                                   35
occupation groups in each of 2,336 Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMA) for the lower
50 states. We then use these PUMA-specific occupation distributions to form weighted
                                                      SjN
averages of the estimated N -content of occupations S   j
                                                          in each PUMA. The figure thus
shows spatial heterogeneity in the occupational distribution as measured by the extent
to which some occupations perform relatively more expansionary activities, while others
perform relatively more production activities. For comparison, Figure 5b shows the spatial
distribution of total labor income.
    The figures show that the spatial distribution of compensation for N -type labor activities
looks different from the spatial distribution of total labor compensation. In particular,
relative to their share in overall labor compensation, compensation for N -type activities is
over-represented in northern California, Florida, Arizona and New Mexico, and is under-
represented in the Mid-West.



5    Conclusion

We have differentiated between two uses of labor in modern economies: expansionary, or
N -type, activities, versus traditional production, or Y -type, activities. We have demon-
strated that some occupations are more N -intensive and less Y -intensive than are other
occupations, and we have offered a strategy for detecting which are the more N -intensive
occupations. More N -intensive occupations are those whose relative income shares rises in
response to a markup-induced rise in the overall labor share. Applying our strategy to US
data reveals that N -intensive occupations are those we typically associate with white-collar
occupations and Y -intensive occupations are those that we typically associate with blue-
collar occupations. Since recessions are associated with an increase in the labor share in
post-war US data, this provides an explanation for why the labor income of white collar
workers falls less than that of blue collar workers in recessions,
   Our work can be extended in several directions. First, with high-frequency data on
payments to aggregate capital and disaggregated types of capital, it would be possible to
measure the relative capital intensity in expansionary activities versus production activities.
Second, one could use a dynamic version of our framework to explore differences across the
two activities in the cost of adjusting input usage over time. Third, our production frame-
work can be introduced into New Keynesian DSGE models as a mechanism for generating
pro-cyclical profits and a counter-cyclical labor share. This is particularly useful in hetero-
geneous agent (HANK) versions of these models, where the cyclicality of profits matters for
the distributional effect of policies and shocks. Fourth, our structure can be used to study
quantitatively the distributional effects of both secular trends in markups from changes in

                                              36
the nature of competition and production, as well as cyclical variation in markups from
changes in aggregate demand and monetary policy in the presence of sticky prices.




                                          37
References
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor, "Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for
 employment and earnings," in "Handbook of labor economics," Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2011,
 pp. 1043­1171.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, "Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and interna-
 tional relative prices," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1998­2031.

Autor, David H, Lawrence F Katz, and Melissa S Kearney, "The polarization of
 the US labor market," The American economic review, 2006, 96 (2), 189­194.

Barro, Robert J and Silvana Tenreyro, "Closed and open economy models of business
 cycles with marked up and sticky prices," The Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (511), 434­
 456.

Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas J Sargent, "In-
 equality, business cycles, and monetary-fiscal policy," Technical Report, National Bureau
 of Economic Research 2018.

Bilbiie, Florin O, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J Melitz, "Endogenous entry, product
  variety, and business cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 304­345.

  , , and , "Monopoly Power and Endogenous Product Variety: Distortions and Reme-
  dies," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2016.

Bils, Mark, "The cyclical behavior of marginal cost and price," The American Economic
  Review, 1987, pp. 838­855.

   and Peter J Klenow, "Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices," Journal of
  political economy, 2004, 112 (5), 947­985.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic competition and the
  effects of aggregate demand," The American Economic Review, 1987, pp. 647­666.

Calvo, Guillermo A, "Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework," Journal of
 monetary Economics, 1983, 12 (3), 383­398.

Cantore, Cristiano, Filippo Ferroni, and Miguel A León-Ledesma, "The missing
 link: monetary policy and the labor share," Journal of the European Economic Associa-
 tion, 2019, forthcoming.



                                           38
Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L Evans, "Nominal
 rigidities and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy," Journal of political
 Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 1­45.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Lorenz Kueng, and John Silvia, "Innocent
 Bystanders? Monetary policy and inequality," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2017, 88,
 70­89.

Dixit, Avinash K and Joseph E Stiglitz, "Monopolistic competition and optimum
 product diversity," The American economic review, 1977, 67 (3), 297­308.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu, "How costly are markups?,"
 Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Feenstra, Robert C, "A homothetic utility function for monopolistic competition models,
  without constant price elasticity," Economics Letters, 2003, 78 (1), 79­86.

Fernald, John G., "A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity,"
  Technical Report, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2014.

Galí, Jordi et al., "Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
 the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications Second edition," Economics Books,
 2015.

Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, "Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic
 activity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2015, 7 (1), 44­76.

Gomme, Paul and Peter Rupert, "Measuring labor's share of income," FRB of Cleve-
 land Policy Discussion Paper, 2004, (7).

Hall, Robert E, "Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations," Brookings Papers
 on Economic Activity, 1986, 17 (2), 285­338.

Jaimovich, Nir and Max Floetotto, "Firm dynamics, markup variations, and the busi-
  ness cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55 (7), 1238­1252.

Kaplan, Greg and Guido Menzio, "Shopping externalities and self-fulfilling unemploy-
 ment fluctuations," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (3), 771­825.

   and Piotr Zoch, "Some unpleasant markup arithmetic," Technical Report, University
  of Chicago 2020.

  , Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L Violante, "Monetary policy according to HANK,"
  American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (3), 697­743.

                                            39
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, "Accounting for factorless income," NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual, 2019, 33 (1), 167­228.

Kimball, Miles S, "The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model," Jour-
 nal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1995, 27 (4), 1241­1277.

Klenow, Peter J and Jonathan L Willis, "Real rigidities and nominal price changes,"
 Economica, 2016, 83 (331), 443­472.

Loecker, Jan De and Frederic Warzynski, "Markups and firm-level export status,"
  American economic review, 2012, 102 (6), 2437­71.

  , Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger, "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeco-
  nomic Implications," Technical Report, Mimeo 2019.

Maggi, Chiara and Sónia Félix, "What is the Impact of Increased Business Competi-
 tion?," 2019.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson, "The power of forward guidance
 revisited," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3133­58.

Melitz, Marc J and Gianmarco IP Ottaviano, "Market size, trade, and productivity,"
 The review of economic studies, 2008, 75 (1), 295­316.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Giovanni Ricco, "The transmission of monetary policy
 shocks," 2018.

Mongey, Simon, "Market Structure and Monetary Non-Neutrality," Technical Report,
 University of Chicago 2019.

Nekarda, Christopher J and Valerie A Ramey, "The cyclical behavior of the price-cost
 markup," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Romer, Christina D and David H Romer, "A new measure of monetary shocks: Deriva-
 tion and implications," American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (4), 1055­1084.

Rotemberg, Julio J, "Monopolistic price adjustment and aggregate output," The Review
 of Economic Studies, 1982, 49 (4), 517­531.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, "Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: A
 Bayesian DSGE approach," American economic review, 2007, 97 (3), 586­606.




                                         40
A      Proofs and Derivations

A.1      Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. The wholesaler solves

                                       W := max PW Y - WY LY
                                               LY ,Y

                                           subject to
                                         Y = ZY LY
                                                  Y




and the first order condition with respect to LY is
                                                         Y -1
                                          WY = PW Y ZY LY     .

Use Y = ZY L Y
            Y to write it as
                                                                 Y
                                             WY = PW Y
                                                                 LY
and use the fact that in symmetric equilibrium p = µPW to rewrite it as
                                                          p   Y
                                              WY =          Y                (12)
                                                          µ LY
which can be rearranged as
                                              WY LY    1
                                                    = Y .
                                               pY      µ
                       1
This shows that SY = Y µ .
    The retailer solves
                                                          N
                                      R := max                j dj - WN LN
                                             N,LN     0
                                         subject to
                                       N = ZN LN
                                                N




which, in a symmetric equilibrium with j =  for all j , can be written as

                                        R := max N  - WN LN
                                               N,LN

                                           subject to
                                         N = ZN LN
                                                  N




and the first order condition with respect to LN is
                                                      N -1
                                          WN = N ZN LN     .

and in a symmetric equilibrium

                                                                 1
                                             = py 1 -                 .
                                                                 µ




                                                       41
Use this fact in the first order condition to get

                                                      N -1
                                                                                      1
                                          WN = N ZN LN     py 1 -
                                                                                      µ

and recall market clearing Y = N y to write

                                                   N -1
                                                                     Y                1
                                       WN = N ZN LN     p                  1-             (13)
                                                                     N                µ

which can be rearranged (using N = ZN L N
                                       N ) as

                                             WN LN                        1
                                                   = N               1-           .
                                              pY                          µ

                                 1
This shows that SN = N 1 -       µ   . Finally,

                                            SL = SN + SY
                                                        1                     1
                                                  = Y     + N         1-
                                                        µ                     µ

      To obtain profit shares note that


                                                  R
                                          SR :=
                                                  pY
                                                                 1
                                                  pN y 1 -       µ   - WN LN
                                             =
                                                             pY
                                                        1                         1
                                             =     1-        - N          1-
                                                        µ                         µ
                                                                      1
                                             = (1 - N ) 1 -
                                                                      µ

and
                                                      W
                                             SW :=
                                                      pY
                                                     PW Y - WY LY
                                                   =
                                                          pY
                                                     1
                                                   = - SY
                                                     µ
                                                              1
                                                   = (1 - Y )
                                                              µ
so

                                     S = SW + SR
                                                        1                1
                                          = (1 - Y )      + (1 - N ) 1 -
                                                        µ                µ




                                                            42
A.2       Proof of Theorem 1
Proof. As shown in Lemma 1

                                            1                1
                                   SL = Y     + N       1-
                                            µ                µ

with
                                    SL   1
                                       = 2 (N - Y )
                                    µ   µ
which is positive if and only if
                                            N > Y .
Similarly, since

                                       S = 1 - SL

we have
                                    S     1
                                      = - 2 (N - Y )
                                    µ    µ
which is positive if and only if
                                            N < Y .




A.3       Proof of Theorem 2
Proof. As shown in Lemma 1
                                               1
                                     SY = Y
                                               µ
                                                        1
                                     SN = N        1-
                                                        µ
so
                                     SY       1
                                        = -Y 2 < 0
                                     µ       µ
                                     SN     1
                                        = N 2 > 0.
                                     µ     µ




                                              43
A.4      Proof of Theorem 3
Proof. The representative household solves

                                        max           log C -  (LY , LN )
                                 C,LY ,LN ,{c }[0,]

                                                      subject to
                                            
                                               p c d = WY LY + WN LN + 
                                        0

                                                 C =C {c }[0,] , 

where  denotes profits from wholesale and retail. We assumed homothetic preferences and no love of
variety (see the definition of love of variety in Appendix B.1) which allows us to rewrite the household's
problem in symmetric equilibrium as

                                        max log C -  (LY , LN )
                                      C,LY ,LN

                                                 subject to
                                               pC = WY LY + WN LN + 

with first order conditions
                                            WY
                                               = CLY (LY , LN )
                                             p
                                            WN
                                               = CLN (LY , LN ) .
                                             p

Use equations 12 and 13 to rewrite the above first order conditions)

                                                        Y 1
                                   LY (LY , LN )C = Y
                                                        LY µ
                                                        N       1           Y
                                   LN   (LY , LN )C = N      1-
                                                        LN      µ           N

which by market clearing, pC = pY , become
                                                            1 1
                                     LY (LY , LN ) = Y
                                                           LY µ
                                                            1      1
                                     LN     (LY , LN ) = N      1-          .
                                                           LN      µ

Total differentiation of the above equations results in

              1    1             1 1
            Y       2
                      dµ = - Y 2 + LY LY (LY , LN ) dLY - LN LY (LY , LN ) dLN
             LY    µ            LY µ
              1    1                                 1     1
          -N        2
                      dµ = -LN LY (LY , LN ) dLY - N 2 1 -   + LN LN (LY , LN ) dLN
             LN    µ                                LN     µ




                                                        44
                            dLY         dLN
which can be solved for      dµ   and    dµ

        dLY            1         1                        1 1       1 1
            = T - N 2 1 -           + LN LY (LY , LN ) Y       - N      L L (LY , LN )
         dµ           LN         µ                       LY µ2     LN µ2 N Y
        dLN                         1 1          1 1                     1 1
            = T LN LY (LY , LN ) Y     2
                                         + Y 2 + LY LY (LY , LN ) N
         dµ                        LY µ        LY µ                     LN µ2

with
                                                                 1
       T :=
                   1 1                                                                                      2
              Y   L2 µ   + LY LY (LY , LN )      N L1
                                                    2     1-     1
                                                                 µ   + LN LY (LY , LN ) - (LN LY (LY , LN ))
                   Y                                 N


Recall that we assumed

                                                    LN LN   >0
                                                    LY LY   >0
                                                    LN LY   0
                                              LY LY LN LN    LN LY LY LN

so
            1 1                          1       1                                         2
       Y    2   + LY LY (LY , LN )   N 2 1 -        + LN LY (LY , LN ) - (LN LY (LY , LN )) > 0
           LY µ                         LN       µ
                         1         1                       1 1         1 1
                 - N 2 1 -           + LN LY (LY , LN ) Y        - N       L L (LY , LN ) < 0
                        LN         µ                      LY µ2       LN µ2 N Y
                                               1 1        1 1                         1 1
                           LN LY (LY , LN ) Y       + Y 2 + LY LY (LY , LN ) N               >0
                                              LY µ2      LY µ                        LN µ2

and therefore
                                                         dLY
                                                             <0
                                                          dµ
                                                         dLN
                                                             >0
                                                          dµ
                                                                                        dpY
Since Y = ZY LY we have dµ < 0 and since we can normalize p = 1 we have
               Y            dY
                                                                                         dµ   < 0. Since N = ZN LN
                                                                                                                  N


we have dN
        dµ > 0 . If there is no love of variety we have

                                                         C=Y

and
                                                         dC
                                                            < 0.
                                                         dµ




                                                            45
A.5      Factor shares in model with occupations
The wholesaler solves
                                                                     J
                             W :=       max            PW Y -                WjY LjY - RY KY
                                     {LjY },KY ,Y
                                                                    j =1

                                 subject to
                                                                   1-Y Y
                                                           J
                                       Y                        jY 
                               Y = ZY KY                       LjY
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                       j =1


where RY is the rental rate and WjY is the occupation's j wage in the wholesale sector. First order condition
with respect to LjY is
                                                                   Y
                                     WjY = PW Y jY (1 - Y )           .                                  (14)
                                                                 LjY

    The retailer solves
                                                       N                 J
                           R :=       max                  j dj -             WjN LjN - RN KN
                                  {LjN },KN ,N     0                 j =1

                              subject to
                                                               1-N N
                                                   J
                                    Y                       jN 
                            N = ZN KN                      LjN
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                  j =1


where RN is the rental rate and WjN is the occupation's j wage in the retail sector. First order condition
with respect to LjN is
                                                            N
                                   WjN = N jN (1 - N )         N .                                    (15)
                                                           LjN

   Each occupation has its own wage and labor market clearing condition. In symmetric equilibrium
equations 14 and 15 can be written as
                                   Wj  1               Y
                                      = Y jY (1 - Y )
                                   P   µ              LjY
                                   Wj      1                 Y
                                      = 1-    N (1 - N ) jN
                                   P       µ                LjN

so the factor shares for the occupations are
                                             1
                                     SjY =     Y (1 - Y ) jY
                                             µ
                                                  1
                                     SjN    = 1-      N (1 - N ) jN
                                                  µ




                                                               46
Define
                                                                  J
                                                                          jY
                                                       LY :=            LjY
                                                                 j =1
                                                                  J
                                                                          jN
                                                       LN :=            LjN
                                                                 j =1

and the wage indices WY , WN

                                                   WY LY :=             Wj LjY
                                                                   j

                                                   WN LN :=             Wj LjN
                                                                   j


      Use equations 14 and 15 to solve for

                         Lj := LjY + LjN
                                   1               PY      1                                     PY
                               =     Y jY (1 - Y )    + 1-                       N (1 - N ) jN
                                   µ               Wj      µ                                     Wj

and express LjY and LjN as
                                                         1
                                                         µ Y    jY (1 - Y )
                               LjY =                                                            Lj
                                       1                                    1
                                       µ Y   jY (1 - Y ) + 1 -              µ   N (1 - N ) jN
                                                            1
                                                       1-   µ   N jN (1 - N )
                               LjN =                                                            Lj
                                       1                                    1
                                       µ Y   jY (1 - Y ) + 1 -              µ   N (1 - N ) jN

and
                                    1                     1                                     PY
                         Wj =         Y jY (1 - Y ) + 1 -                       N (1 - N ) jN
                                    µ                     µ                                     Lj
                        J                       J
Using the fact that     j =1   jY = 1 and       j =1   N = 1 total labor income in each sector can be expressed as

                                                    1
                                        WY LY =       Y (1 - Y ) P Y
                                                    µ
                                                         1
                                        WN LN      = 1-      N (1 - N ) P Y
                                                         µ

and labor share in each sector is
                                                    1
                                              SY =    Y jY (1 - Y )
                                                    µ
                                                        1
                                              SN   = 1-     N (1 - N ) .
                                                        µ

Labor share of occupation j is defined as
                                                                  Wj Lj
                                                         Sj :=
                                                                  PY



                                                                47
thus
                                   1                     1
                            Sj =     Y (1 - Y ) jY + 1 -             N (1 - N ) jN
                                   µ                     µ
                               = jY SY + jN SN



B      Details of Alternative Preference and Market Struc-
       tures
This Appendix provides further details of the preference and market structures referred to in Section 2.6.


B.1      Demand System Preliminaries
Definitions We define the following objects:

    ·  is the measure of unique varieties being produced in the economies.   [0, ] are individual
      varieties. p is the price faced by consumers for variety  .
    · N the measure of establishments or retail sales units. Some varieties might be produced by more
      than one retail sales unit but each sales units produces only one variety. j  [0, N ] are individual
      retail sales units. pj is the price charged by sales unit j . Yj is the quantity sold by sales unit j . µj
      is the markup over marginal charged by sales unit j .
    · M := N  is the measures of sales units producing each variety. We assume that when a sales unit
      produces a new variety it is chosen randomly, so that the same measure of firms operate in each
      variety.


Households Households choose c given prices p . Households have utility defined over an aggregator
of varieties C {c }[0,] ,  . The household solves the following problem:

                              V {p }[0,] , I,  = max U C {c } , 
                                                        c

                                                       subject to
                                                                
                                                      I            p c d
                                                            0

where V (·) is the indirect utility function and U (·) is the direct utility function which is assumed to be
strictly increasing. The household as income I .


Definition of love-of-variety Consider a household with income I . Assume that p = p and
that a household purchases the same quantity c = c of each good, meaning they allocate expenditure
equally across the goods. Define the indirect utility associated with this pattern of expenditure as V (p, I, ).
We say that the demand system features love-of-variety if V (    p,I,)
                                                                       > 0 and no love-of-variety if V (p,I,)
                                                                                                              =
0. Note that this in this symmetric case
                                                    I = pc




                                                      48
                                                                                   I
and the indirect utility function is a monotonic function of C (c, ) = C           p ,    . So the condition for
no-love-of-variety is equivalent to
                                                 c C   C
                                             -       +    =0
                                                  c    
                                                       c, = 1

i.e. the elasticity of substitution between c and  is equal to 1. To a first-order this implies that

                                                      C = c


Definition of price index Recall that definition of an expenditure function
                                                                        
                                  E {p }[0,] , C,  = min                   p c d
                                                               c    0
                                                              subject to
                                          C {c } ,   C

For homothetic preferences, meaning that the aggregator is homogenous of degree 1, the price index P is
defined as the minimum cost of obtaining one unit of the bundle C :

                                 P {p }[0,] ,  = E {p }[0,] , 1, 

and the expenditure function takes the form

                                E {p }[0,] , C,  = P {p }[0,] ,  C

If presences are not homothetic, then we can define a price index that depends on the level of the consump-
tion bundle as
                                                       E {p }[0,] , C, 
                             P {p }[0,] , C,  =
                                                                  C


Market clearing The total measure of variety  sold must equal the measure of variety  consumed
                                                  N
                                             c =    Yj = M Yj
                                                  
                                             c = N Y
                                              C = NY

where the last line follows from no love- of variety. In the more general case, we would have
                                                -1
                                            C        (C, )  = N Y

Typically this takes the form
                                                 Cf () = c




                                                        49
So the market clearing condition gives
                                                   N
                                                c =  Yj = KYj
                                                   
                                               c = N Y
                                           Cf () = N Y


Symmetric equilibria We will focus on symmetric demand systems and symmetric equilibria. This
means that the price index takes the form P (p, C, ) or P (p, ) in the case of homothetic preferences. In
the case of homothetic preferences, we can express the love of variety condition in terms of the price index.
With p = p and c = c, the expenditure function and definition of the price index imply

                                               pc = P (p, ) C

the condition for no-love-of-variety is then

                                               pc = P (p, ) c
                                                p = P (p, )

which implies that the price index satisfies P = p and does not depend on .


Demand functions The demand functions solve
                             c {p }[0,] , I,  = max U C {c } , 
                                                             c

                                                      subject to
                                                                     
                                                      I                 p c d
                                                                 0


using the definition of the expenditure function, i.e that I = P {p }[0,] , C,  C we can write these
as c {p }[0,] , C,  , With homothetic preferences, these take the form c = f {p }[0,] , P,  C .
The elasticity of demand is denoted by
                                              p c
                                        =-
                                              c p


B.2      Demand Systems
B.2.1     CES

The aggregator function is
                                                                           
                                                                           -1
                                                               -1
                                                 -
                                         C=                  c 
                                                                     d
                                                      0

In a symmetric equilibrium this gives
                                                              -
                                                 C =  -1 c
so the preferences feature no love of variety if  = 1. The preferences are homothetic because the aggregator
is homogenous of degree 1 in c.



                                                      50
    The price index is
                                                                                   1
                                                                                  1-
                                                      -                  -
                                            P =                        p1
                                                                           d
                                                                0

which gives in a symmetric equilibrium
                                                                       1-
                                                      P =  1- p

    The demand functions are
                                                             p         -
                                                c =                         C -
                                                             P
so the elasticity of demand is
                                                             =


B.2.2     Translog

There is no closed form expression for the aggregator but the preferences are homothetic.
    The price index is given by
                                                                            
                           1   1                         1                     
                log P =      +             log p d +                            log p (log p - log p ) dd
                          2         0                    2      0       0      

In a symmetric equilibrium this gives
                                                                1
                                                    log P =       + log p
                                                               2 
                                                     P          1
                                              log            =
                                                     p         2 
                                                                           1
                                                         P = pe 2

so this features love of variety.
    The demand function is
                                                             
                              1            1                                         I
                       c =      -  log p -                      log p d
                                                         0                          p
                             1                     I
                         =     -  (log p - log p)
                                                  p
                             1                        1    PC
                         =     -  log p - log P +
                                                     2     p
                                1                        1
                   log c = log    -  log p - log P +         + log P + log C - log p
                                                        2 

where the second line follows from symmetry and the third line follow form the fact that preferences are
homothetic. In a symmetric equilibrium this implies
                                                    1    1
                                            log c = log+   + log C
                                                     2 
                                                       1
                                              C = ce- 2

which does not give C = c because of the love of variety.


                                                                51
      The elasticity of demand is
                                                                  
                                         =          1                         1  +1
                                                        -  log p - log P + 2   
                                                                 
                                             =      1                       1   +1
                                                        -  log p - log P + 2 
                                                    
                                             =      1   +1
                                                    
                                             =  + 1


B.2.3       Linear Demand

The aggregator is
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                            
                                                       1                               1
                                   C=           c d -                          c2
                                                                                 d   +                         c d
                                         0            2                 0              2                0

which gives in a symmetric equilibrium
                                                                        C = c
So in a symmetric equilibrium they do not feature love of variety.
      Are preferences homothetic?
                                                                                 2                                                                   2
                                                                                                                             
                 1             2       1                                                                        t2                      t2
         tc d -             (tc ) d + 1                            (tc ) d           =t            c d -                        c2
                                                                                                                                  d +      t   c d
  0             2    0                2                     0                               0                   2        0              2

which equals tC only in the symmetric case, so no, because homotheticity requires this to equal tC even in
the non-symmetric case.
      We can derive the price index as
                                                            
                                    P = min                     c p d
                                                c       0
                                        subject to
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                        
                                                                    1                        1
                                   1            c d -                          c2
                                                                                 d +                        c d
                                         0                         2    0                   2       0


which gives
                                                                                                
                                                                        1     1
                                         p =  -1 +                        c -                      c d
                                                                                            0
                                                                                         
                                                            p      1
                                         c =                  +1 +                          c d
                                                                                     0

In a symmetric equilibrium
                                                                               p
                                                            c =                  +1 +c
                                                                               




                                                                            52
and substituting into the constraint at equality
                                                                    
                                                                           p
                                                     1=                      + 1 + c d
                                                                0          
                                               p     1 - c
                                                 +1=
                                                       
so
                                                             1
                                                         c =
                                                             
                                                                              
                                                             1
                                                         P =                      p d
                                                                          0

which gives
                                                                       P =p
in a symmetric equilibrium
     The demand function is given by
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                            
                                                               1                               1
                                        max             c d -                        c2
                                                                                       d     +                 c d
                                           c     0            2               0                2        0

                                        subject to
                            
                               p c d = I
                        0

which gives
                                                                                         
                                                                1     1
                                           p = 1 -                c +                       c d
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                  
                                                                          1     1
                                           p d =                    1-      c +                      c d d
                                    0                    0                                    0
                                                                                         
                                                                1     1
                                           p =  -                 c +                       c d
                                                                                     0

Dividing
                                                       1      1                           
                                                p   1-   c +                             0 
                                                                                           c d
                                                  =                                      
                                                p   -   1
                                                          c + 1
                                                                                           c d
                                                                                         0 
                                                       1     1
                                                    1-   c +   c
                                                     =
                                                         
                                                    C          p
                                                c =   + 1-
                                                               P

     The elasticity of demand is
                                                                         p
                                                                    =
                                                                        P c
                                                                         
                                                                       =
                                                                         C



                                                                        53
B.2.4    Kimball

The aggregator C is defined implicitly by
                                                    
                                            1               c
                                                                     d = 1
                                                0           C

where  satisfies  (1) = 1. In a symmetric equilibrium this implies C = c
   The demand function is given by
                                                        C -1 p
                                            c =                D
                                                             P
where P is a price index defined by
                                                                
                                                PC =               p c d
                                                            0
and D is a demand index defined by
                                                        
                                                           c        c
                                       D=                                  d
                                                    0      C        C

   In a symmetric equilibrium, the demand index is just

                                                           c        c
                                                D=           
                                                           C        C

They propose the following functional forms
                                                                           
                                                       -1             1 - x
                                       (x) =              exp
                                                                         

which elasticity of demand
                                                                      
                                                                     -
                                                            c
                                                =
                                                            C
which equals  in a symmetric equilibrium.


B.3     Market Structures
Under each of the following market structures, the factor shares take the same form as in Lemma 1, where
the (possibly endogenous) markup µ is given as follows.


B.3.1    Monopolistic Competition

There is one firm producing each variety: M = 1, N = . So changes in N coincide with change in . The
markup is given by
                                                     
                                               µ=
                                                   -1




                                                           54
B.3.2     Cournot competition

There are M >> 1 firms producing each variety. When M is large so that firms do not internalize effect
on price index P , the markup is
                                                  
                                            µ=     1
                                                - M


B.3.3     Oligopoly.

There are M > 1 firms producing each variety, but M small, so that firms do internalize effect on price
index P . Can think either.
    With nested CES preferences, the demand elasticity under Bertrand competition is given by
                                                  M -1   1
                                           =           +   
                                                   M     M
where  >  is elasticity of substitution across firms producing the same good. This implies a markup
                                                              -
                                                        +     M
                                            µ=                  -
                                                  -1         + M

which is decreasing in M .
    With nested CES preferences, the residual demand elasticity under Cournot competition is given by
                                                                        -1
                                            1    M -1             1 1
                                      =                       +
                                                  M               M

so that the markup is
                                                     
                                          µ=                       -
                                                 ( - 1) +         M
which is also decreasing in M .



C       Details of Generalizations of Production Structure

C.1      Entry in the wholesale sector
We generalize the model to allow entry in the wholesale sector. The wholesaler operates E plants. For each
plant the problem is

                                       W := max PW Y - WY LY
                                                LY ,Y

                                           subject to
                                         Y = ZY LY
                                                  Y




                                                        55
and the first order condition with respect to LY is the same as in the baseline model (see equation 12). To
operate plants the wholesaler needs to hire N-type labor. The problem is

                                              max E W - WN LE
                                              LE ,E

                                            subject to
                                           E = ZE LE

with the first order condition
                                                              E
                                                WN =             W
                                                              LE
The retailer's problem remains unchanged
                                                              N
                                       R := max                   j dj - WN LN
                                              LN ,N       0
                                          subject to
                                        N = ZN LN
                                                 Y




with the first order condition (in a symmetric equilibrium with j =  for all j )

                                                                  N
                                                WN = N               .
                                                                  LN
Market clearing for intermediate goods implies that

                                                   yN = EY

and in a symmetric equilibrium

                                                      EY                1
                                             =p                   1-          .
                                                      N                 µ

Factor shares are
                                                   EWY LY
                                           SY :=
                                                    pEY
                                                   WN (LN + LE )
                                           SN   :=
                                                       pEY
and in a symmetric equilibrium

                                                      1                1
                                      SN =      1-            N +        (1 - Y )
                                                      µ                µ
                                             1
                                      SY =     Y
                                             µ
and the overall labor share is
                                                      1                 1
                                                1-                N +     .
                                                      µ                 µ
Theorem 1 does not hold. The reason is that all profits are retail and it is the nature of profits that matters
for Theorem 1. In this case an increase in markups always leads to a fall in the labor share. For Theorem




                                                          56
2, we have
                                                     1             1
                                       SN =    1-        N +         (1 - Y )
                                                     µ             µ
and
                                                           1
                                                    SY =     Y .
                                                           µ
So SY always falls after an increase in µ but for SN to rise we need N > 1 - Y . For redistribution, i.e.
SN
SL to rise:

                                          1     1
                                  SN   1- µ N + µ (1 - Y )
                                     =
                                  SL         1
                                          1- µ N + µ 1


                                  SN
                          log     SL            -N + 1 - Y                        1 - N
                              1        =                                     -
                              µ            1-   1
                                                     N +      1
                                                                  (1 - Y )       1-   1
                                                                                          N +   1
                                                µ             µ                       µ         µ

                             SN
                      log    SL
                         1        < 0  N > 0
                         µ
             SN
       log   S
          L
i.e.   µ      > 0 as long as N > 0. This means that the share of labor income accruing to N -type workers
always increases when markups go up.


C.2          Markups In Labor and Wholesale Markets
We generalize the model to allow for markups in the wholesale good market and labor markets. We assume
that the wholesaler is a monopsonist in the labor market and a monopolist in the product market. First
order condition of the wholesaler is
                                              µY            Y
                                                  WY = PW Y                                         (16)
                                              µLY           LY

where µY  1 and µLY  1. Similarly, we assume some degree of monopsonistic power (µLN  1) in the
retail sector and so
                                      1 WN        N
                                             = N     N                                     (17)
                                     µLN p        LN
and in symmetric equilibrium factor shares become
                                                    µLY 1
                                           SY =           Y
                                                    µY µ
                                                                   1
                                           SN = µLN        1-          N
                                                                   µ

where µLY and µLN are markups in the labor markets for Y -type labor and N -type labor, and µY is the
markup in the market for intermediate goods.
    We assume that markups are independent of each other and exogenous. The presence of markups
in these other markets does not change Theorem 2; an increase in the markup still redistributes factor
income away from Y -type labor and toward N -type labor. However, the condition for Theorem 1 is
                                                                                      µ
modified. Positive co-movement between the markup and the labor share requires N > µL LY µ Y . When
                                                                                       N Y
µLN = µLY , the presence of a markup in the wholesale sector (µY > 1) thus expands the set of (N , Y )


                                                         57
which are consistent with co-movement observed in US data. We also have
                                                 SY
                                                    <0
                                                 µY
                                                 SN
                                                    =0
                                                 µY
                                                 SL
                                                    <0
                                                 µY
meaning that an increase in wholesale markup reduces the Y -type share and the overall labor share. It has
no effect on the N -type share. In addition
                                                SY
                                                    >0
                                                µLY
                                                SN
                                                    =0
                                                µLY
                                                SL
                                                    >0
                                                µLY

and
                                                SY
                                                    =0
                                                µLN
                                                SN
                                                    >0
                                                µLN
                                                SL
                                                    >0
                                                µLN

so a decrease in the degree of monoposonistic power always increases the overall labor share in the economy
and that happens through an increase in the share of one type of labor. Any type of markup or markdown
that appears as a wedge between the real wage and the marginal rate of substitution of households (as it is
often the case in New Keynesian models with wage rigidities) would not affect our results as long as µLY
and µLN would not be affected by it.
    So far we have simply assumed the presence of exogenous wedges µY , µLY , µLN in equations 16 and
17. Below we show an example in which these wedges are functions of structural parameters of the model.
Suppose there is a representative household with preferences

                                                  1+ 1         1+ 1
                                              L      Y
                                                            L      N

                                     log C - Y Y    1    - N N    1
                                              1+    Y       1+    N

where C = C {c }[0,] ,  is a symmetric homothetic aggregator over distinct varieties c and  is the
measure of varieties. We assume this aggregator features no love of variety. The representative household
solves
                                                      1+ 1         1+ 1
                                                L        Y
                                                                L      N

                                   max log C - Y Y       1   - N N     1
                                 C,LY ,LN       1+       Y      1+     N
                                        subject to
                                      pC = WY LY + WN LN + 




                                                    58
First order conditions are
                                                          1
                                                          
                                                 Y CLY Y = WY
                                                         1
                                                         
                                                N CLNN = WN

Belowe we describe an example of micro-founded environment in which markup variation arises as a result
of exogenous variation in a structural parameter. There is a wholesaler takes household's labor supply
schedule as given and solves

                                      W := max (1 -  ) PW Y - WY LY
                                               LY ,Y

                                           subject to
                                        Y = ZY LY
                                                 Y

                                                         Y
                                                WY
                                       LY =
                                                Y C

where  is a tax rate on wholesaler's revenue.8 Ther rst order condition is
                                           1                                 Y
                                      1+          WY = (1 - W ) PW Y            .
                                           Y                                 LY

       The retailer takes household's labor supply schedule as given and solves
                                                             N
                                        R := max                 j dj - WN LN
                                                LN ,N    0
                                            subject to
                                         N = ZN LN
                                                  N

                                                             N
                                                  WN
                                        LN =
                                                  N C

and rhe first order condition with respect to LN is (in a symmetric equilibrium with j =  for all j )

                                              1                    N -1
                                         1+            WN = N ZN LN     .
                                              N

Define
                                                                        -1
                                                                  1
                                              µLY :=         1+
                                                                  Y
                                                                   -1
                                               µY := (1 -  )
                                                                        -1
                                                                  1
                                              µLN :=         1+
                                                                  N

to obtain equations 16 and 17. In this framework shifts in µLY and µLN can be interpeted as changes in
Frisch elasticities Y , N whole shifts in µY result from changes in the tax rate  .
   8
    Alternatively we could assume that there is a continuum of monopolistically competitive wholesalers
and the retailer's pricing department has to purchase a CES bundle of them.




                                                          59
C.3      Capital
In this section we introduce capital in both sectors of the economy. Production functions are
                                                 -Y                  Y
                                        Y = ZY L1
                                                Y
                                                     Y
                                                    KY
                                                 -N                  Y
                                        N = ZN L1
                                                N
                                                     N
                                                    KN                   .

To obtain expressions for factor shares do not need to assume anything about supply of capital. Other than
that, everything else remains the same as in Section 2. The wholesaler solves

                                W :=      max        PW Y - WY LY - RY KY
                                        LY ,KY ,Y

                                    subject to
                                           -Y                   Y
                                  Y = ZY L1
                                          Y
                                               Y
                                              KY

and the retailer solves
                                                     N
                              R :=     max               j dj - WN LN - RN KN
                                     LN ,KN ,N   0
                                  subject to
                                        -N                  Y
                               N = ZN L1
                                       N
                                            N
                                           KN

where RY and RN are capital rental rates in Y and N sector respectively. First order conditions in the
                                                              Y     1
wholesale sector in symmetric equilibrium (i.e. with J =  = p N 1- µ   ) are

                                        WY  1           Y
                                           = Y (1 - Y )                                              (18)
                                         p  µ           LY
                                        RY  1      Y
                                           = Y Y                                                     (19)
                                         p  µ     KY
and in the retail sector
                                    WN            1                          Y
                                       =       1-          N (1 - N )                                (20)
                                     p            µ                          LN
                                    RN            1                 Y
                                       =       1-          N N                                       (21)
                                     p            µ                 KN

    We define
                                                            WY LY
                                               SLY :=
                                                             pY
                                                            WN LN
                                               SLN       :=
                                                             pY
                                                            RY KY
                                               SKY       :=
                                                             pY
                                                            RN K N
                                               SKN       :=
                                                             pY




                                                          60
By rearranging the first order conditions we have
                                                1
                                         SLY =    Y (1 - Y )
                                                µ
                                                     1
                                         SLN   = 1-      N (1 - N )
                                                     µ
                                                1
                                         SKY   = Y Y
                                                µ
                                                     1
                                         SKN   = 1-      N N
                                                     µ

Total labor share SL := SLY + SLN is increasing in µ if and only if

                                          N (1 - N ) > Y (1 - Y ) .

As in Section 2
                                                   SLY
                                                       <0
                                                   µ
                                                   SLY
                                                       > 0.
                                                   µ
To study response of consumption to a change in the markup we need to make assumptions about capital
supply. For example, if capital is sector-specific and its supply is perfectly inelastic, comparative statics will
be qualitatively the same as in the baseline economy. We assume that there is a representative household
with preferences
                                     U (C, LY , LN ) = log C -  (LY , LN )

where C = C {c }[0,] ,            is a symmetric homothetic aggregator over distinct varieties c and  is
the measure of varieties. This implies that there exists a price index P = P {p }[0,] ,  , and in a
symmetric equilibrium in which p = pj = p j,  , nominal GDP satisfies pY = P C . At this point we make
no additional assumptions about the measure of unique varieties , nor its relationship to the measure of
product lines N operated by the retail sector.

Theorem 4. Suppose that (i) the aggregator C does not exhibit love of variety and (ii)  is convex in
                                                                              2
(LY , LN ), i.e. LN LN > 0, LY LY > 0 and and LY LY LN LN  (LY LN ) , (iii) LN LY  0 and (iv)
capital can be moved costlessly between sectors and there is a fixed stock of capital in the economy. Then
an increase in µ leads to a decrease in aggregate nominal output pY .

Proof. We assumed assume that capital can be used with both sectors (it can be costlessly moved between
sectors) and that there is a fixed stock of capital in the economy (which implies that rental rates must be
equalized) i.e.

                                                 K = KY + KN
                                                 R = RY + RN




                                                       61
The representative household solves

                                max            log C -  (LY , LN )
                         C,LY ,LN ,{c }[0,]

                                               subject to
                                     
                                        p c d = WY LY + WN LN + RK + W + R
                                 0

                                          C =C {c }[0,] , 

where W and R denote profits from the wholesale and the retail. We assumed no love of variety (see the
definition of love of variety in Appendix B.1) which allows us to rewrite the household's problem as

                                max log C -  (LY , LN )
                              C,LY ,LN

                                          subject to
                                        pC = WY LY + WN LN + RK + W + R

which results in the following first order conditions
                                                  WY      1
                                                     = CL 
                                                   p
                                                  WN      1
                                                     = CL  .
                                                   p
In symmetric equilibrium with first order conditions
                                              WY
                                                 = CLY (LY , LN )
                                               p
                                              WN
                                                 = CLN (LY , LN ) .
                                               p

In symmetric equiilibrium (use equations 18 and 20 to rewrite the above first order conditions)

                                                           Y 1
                                     LY (LY , LN )C = Y
                                                           LY µ
                                                           N       1     Y
                                     LN    (LY , LN )C = N      1-
                                                           LN      µ     N

which by market clearing, pC = pY , become
                                                              1 1
                                         LY (LY , LN ) = Y
                                                             LY µ
                                                              1      1
                                         LN   (LY , LN ) = N      1-     .
                                                             LN      µ

These are exactly the same as in the baseline version of the model and therefore (see Appendix A.4 for the
proof)

                                                     dLY
                                                         <0
                                                      dµ
                                                     dLN
                                                         >0
                                                      dµ



                                                        62
Use 19, and 19 to write
                                                 KY   Y  Y 1
                                                    =
                                                 KN   N  N µ - 1
so, because capital is in fixed supply,
                                                     dKY
                                                         <0
                                                      dµ
                                                     dKN
                                                         >0
                                                      dµ
               -Y            Y                                                                  dpY
Since Y = ZY L1
              Y
                   Y
                  KY             we have    dY
                                            dµ   < 0 and since we can normalize p = 1 we have    dµ   < 0. Since
             -N        Y
N = ZN    L1
           N
                 N
                KN         we have   dN
                                     dµ   > 0 . If there is no love of variety we have

                                                      C=Y

and
                                                      dC
                                                         < 0.
                                                      dµ




C.4      CES Production Function
We explore the effects of extending the production production functions in each sector to Constant Elasticity
of Substitution functions:
                                                                        Y
                                       Y = ZY [(1 - Y ) L       
                                                         Y + Y KY ]
                                                                        

                                                                         N
                                     N = ZN [(1 - N ) L       
                                                       N + N KN ]
                                                                         



We will first show the conditions under which Theorems 1, 2 and 3 still hold in a special case with N =
Y =  and  close to 0. Then we will analyze a second special case with Y > 0 and N = 0. Throughout
this section we will assume
                                                                     1+ 1
                                                           (LY + LN ) 
                                U (C, LY , LN ) = log C -         1       ,
                                                               1+ 
that capital and labor are perfectly mobile between sectors and that capital is supplied inelastically.

Lemma 2. In an economy with this production structure, the equilibrium factor shares are given by

                                           1      (1 - Y ) L Y
                                 SLY =       Y
                                           µ (1 - Y ) L Y + Y KY
                                                                 

                                               1          (1 - N ) LN
                                 SLN      = 1-    N
                                               µ     (1 - N ) LN +      
                                                                     N KN
                                                          
                                           1         Y KY
                                 SKY      = Y
                                           µ (1 - Y ) L Y + Y KY
                                                                 

                                                                 
                                               1             N KN
                                 SKN      = 1-    N
                                               µ     (1 - N ) LN + N KN
                                                                        




                                                        63
Proof. The wholesaler solves

                                    W := max PW Y - WY LY - RY KY
                                            LY ,Y

                                        subject to
                                                                             Y
                                      Y = ZY [(1 - Y ) L       
                                                        Y + Y KY ]
                                                                             



and the retailer solves
                                                        N
                                R :=     max                j dj - WN LN - RN KN
                                       LN ,KN ,N    0
                                    subject to
                                                                         N
                                N = ZN [(1 - N ) L       
                                                  N + N KN ]
                                                                         



First order conditions in wholesale and retail sector are, in symmetric equilibrium with j =  =
 Y       1
pN 1-    µ   ,

                                                                  -1
                 W    1                         Y     (1 - Y ) L
                   = Y ZY [(1 - Y ) L        
                                     Y + Y KY ]             
                                                                Y
                                                                     
                 p    µ                           (1 - Y ) LY + Y KY
                                                               -1
                  R    1                         Y      Y KY
                    = Y ZY [(1 - Y ) L        
                                      Y + Y KY ]
                  p    µ                           (1 - Y ) L       
                                                             Y + Y KY
                                                                                          -1
                 W              1                                    N   Y     (1 - N ) L
                   = N     1-       ZN [(1 - N ) L       
                                                  N + N KN ]
                                                                                         N
                 p              µ                                        N (1 - N ) LN + N KN
                                                                                             

                                                                                       -1
                  R             1                                    N   Y      N KN
                    = N    1-       ZN [(1 - N ) L       
                                                  N + N KN ]
                                                                     
                                                                                            
                  p             µ                                        N (1 - N ) LN + N KN

where R is rental rate of capital. Divide by
                                                                             Y
                                      Y = ZY [(1 - Y ) L       
                                                        Y + Y KY ]
                                                                             



to rewrite them as
                                          -1
                 W      1     (1 - Y ) LY
                    = Y                      
                 pY     µ (1 - Y ) LY + Y KY
                                      -1
                  R     1      Y KY
                    = Y
                 pY     µ (1 - Y ) L       
                                    Y + Y KY
                                                                                          -1
                 W              1                                    N   1     (1 - N ) L
                    = N    1-       ZN [(1 - N ) L       
                                                  N + N KN ]
                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                         N
                                                                                             
                 pY             µ                                        N (1 - N ) LN + N KN
                                                                                       -1
                  R             1                                    N   1      N KN
                    = N    1-       ZN [(1 - N ) L       
                                                  N + N KN ]
                                                                     
                                                                                             .
                 pY             µ                                        N (1 - N ) LN + N KN




                                                            64
                                                                        N
which can be rewritten (using N = ZN [(1 - N ) L       
                                                N + N KN ]
                                                                        
                                                                            ) as

                               W LY       1      (1 - Y ) L Y
                                      = Y
                                pY        µ (1 - Y ) LY + Y KY
                                                               
                                                        
                               RKY        1         Y KY
                                      = Y                      
                                pY        µ (1 - Y ) LY + Y KY
                               W LN             1        (1 - N ) LN
                                      = N 1 -
                                pY              µ (1 - N ) L  N +      
                                                                    N KN
                                                                
                               RKY              1           N KN
                                      = N 1 -                           .
                                pY              µ (1 - N ) LN + N KN




C.4.1     Y = N = 

Theorem 5. In an economy with preferences given by
                                                                                         1
                                                                                      1+ 
                                                                (LY + LN )
                                U (C, LY , LN ) = log C -              1                     ,
                                                                    1+ 

CES production functions with Y = N = , perfect mobility of capital and labor between sectors and
with inelastic supply of capital an increase (decrease) in the markup µ leads to an increase (decrease) in the
overall labor share if and only if the degree of decreasing returns to scale is stronger for Y sector than for
N sector, i.e.
                                       dSL
                                               0 if and only if N Y .
                                        dµ
Conversely, an increase (decrease) in the markup µ leads to a increase (decrease) in the overall profit share
if and only if the degree of decreasing returns to scale is stronger for Y sector than for N sectors, i.e.

                                      dS
                                              0 if and only if Y                N .
                                       dµ

Proof. In this case
                                                  KY   KN
                                                     =
                                                  LY   LN
and we can use Lemma 2 to write
                                                      1                 1
                                                  Y   µ   + N 1 -       µ
                                           SL =                             .
                                                               KN
                                                  1+      1-   LN


                                                                        1
Total differentiation of the above expression with respect to           µ   gives
                                                                                                              
                 dSL       Y - N                  1                 1            d                1
                   1 =                     + Y      + N        1-                 1                        
                                                                                                              .
                 dµ         
                       1 + 1-  KN                 µ                 µ           dµ  1+                KN
                               LN                                                                1-   LN




                                                          65
Now notice that
                                                                                     
                                                                            KN                                KN
                       d             1                            1-        LN                  KN
                                                                                                     -1   d    LN
                                                
                                                  = -
                        1                                                                2      LN              1
                      dµ   1+            KN                                     KN                            dµ
                                1-       LN                   1+      1-        LN


            KY       KN             KN       K                                                                      d( K
                                                                                                                       L)
and since   LY   =   LN   we have   LN   =   L.     Since we assume K is supplied inelastically, the sign of         dµ1    will
repend only on the comovement of labor supply and (inverse) markup.
                                                                  1     W
                                                            CL  =
                                                                        p
so                                                                1
                                                           L1+  = SL
and thus
                                                    KN
                                                d    LN           K 1            1 dSL
                                                      1     =-              1        1
                                                    dµ            L 1+      
                                                                                SL d µ

which results in
                                         dSL                      Y - N
                                           1 =                                                  .
                                         dµ    1+                     KN
                                                                                    1-    
                                                                                            1
                                                            1-        LN                 1+ 
                                          
We restrict   1, the sign of 1 -         1+ 1    is thus always posiitve. Therefore

                                                dSL
                                                          0 if an only if N              Y .
                                                 dµ
Since
                                                    1                1
                                         S =          (1 - Y ) + 1 -                 (1 - N )
                                                    µ                µ
                                              dS
                                                          0 if an only if Y             N .
                                               dµ


                                                                                                                            SLN
     We can also show that an increase in markup always increases relative labor share of N-type labor,                      SL
                                                                       SLY
and always reduces relative labor share of Y-type labor                 SL      . We have
                                                                       1
                                                    SLY                µ Y
                                                        =
                                                    SL      1
                                                                  + 1-          1
                                                            µ Y                 µ    N
                                                                        1
                                                    SLN           1-    µ       N
                                                        =
                                                     SL     1
                                                                  + 1-          1
                                                            µ Y                 µ    N




                                                                  66
and so
                                      SLY
                            d log      SL                   µN
                                     1       =                                  >0
                                    dµ            1
                                                           + 1-       1
                                                  µ Y                 µ    N
                                     SLN
                            d log      SL                                 µY
                                     1       =-                                                     < 0.
                                    dµ                (µ - 1)        1
                                                                           + 1-      1
                                                                     µ Y             µ   N


C.4.2       N = 0

Theorem 6. In an economy with preferences given by
                                                                                            1
                                                                                         1+ 
                                                           (LY + LN )
                                U (C, LY , LN ) = log C +         1                             ,
                                                               1+ 

CES production functions with Y > 0 and N = 0, perfect mobility of labor between sectors and with
inelastic supply of capital
                              dSL                      1 - Y
                                   0 if and only if N          Y
                               dµ                     1 -  Y
where
                                                                      1
                                             Y :=                               .
                                                                 Y         KY
                                                           1+   1-Y        LY

Conversely,

                                    dS                                    1 - Y
                                             0 if and only if                   Y         N .
                                     dµ                                  1 -  Y

Proof. It is easier to work with loglinearized equilibrium conditions in order to prove this results.
                                                                     LY      LN
                                                            l=          lY +    lN
                                                                      L       L
                                                   1
                                                     l = lY ( Y - 1)
                                                      µ
                                                      ^+
                                                   
                                             1     1
                                          -     ^ + l = -lN
                                                µ
                                            µ-1    
We can solve for
                                                      LY  1               LN 1
                                                       L  Y -1       +     L µ-1
                                            l=                                       µ
                                                                                     ^
                                                       1    LN         1   LY
                                                 1+          L   -     Y -1 L

and since                                                        1
                                                       L1+  = SL
SL is increasing in markup if and only if
                                                 LY  1               LN 1
                                                  L  Y -1       +     L µ-1
                                                                                   >0
                                                  1    LN            1LY
                                            1+          L   -     Y -1 L




                                                                67
so we need
                                     LY    1     LN 1
                                               +        >0
                                      L  Y - 1    L µ-1
                                        LN      1   LY
                                   1+       -           >0
                                         L     Y - 1 L
or
                                     LY    1     LN 1
                                               +        <0
                                      L  Y - 1    L µ-1
                                        LN      1   LY
                                   1+       -           <0
                                         L     Y - 1 L

Observe that
              LY   1      LN 1               1                   1 - Y
                        +        =                        N -            Y
               L  Y - 1    L µ-1   (1 - Y ) Y + (µ - 1) N       1 -  Y
                  LN      1   LY             1                          1 - Y
                     -           =                        (µ - 1) N +         Y
                   L     Y - 1 L   (1 - Y ) Y + (µ - 1) N              1 -  Y
so
                         LY   1      LN 1             1 - Y
                                   +        > 0  N >        Y
                          L  Y - 1    L µ-1          1 -  Y
and, since 1 -  Y > 0
                                        LN     1   LY
                                           -          >0
                                         L    Y - 1 L
which gives
                                    dL           1 - Y
                                       > 0  N >        Y
                                    dµ          1 -  Y



    We can also show that an increase in markup always increases relative labor share of N-type labor,
SLN                                                           SLY
 SL   and always reduces relative labor share of Y-type labor S L
                                                                  . Once again we will use loglinearized
equilibrium conditions. Normalize µ^ = 1. We have
                                                             1
                                                   1     1+    l
                                            sLY =    l+
                                                         Y - 1
                                                        1
                                               sL = 1 +    l
                                                        
                                                           1
                                                        1+   l
                                      sLY - sL =                 -l
                                                     Y - 1
and since
                                            LY  1             LN 1
                                             L  Y -1      +    L µ-1
                                     l=
                                               1   LN        1   LY
                                          1+        L   -    Y -1 L




                                                    68
                                                LY   1     LN 1
                                         1       L  Y -1 + L µ-1                                   1    1
               sLY - sL < 0  -              <                                                 1+
                                     1 -  Y       1 LN      1  LY                                   1 -  Y
                                              1+     L -  Y -1 L

which can be simplified to

                                                                             1
                       sLY - sL < 0  - (1 - Y ) Y <                  1+              µ -  Y N .
                                                                             

Since 1 - Y > 0 and  Y < 1 it is always satisfied. To show that relative labor share of N-type labor
increases notice that
                                                     1
                                            sLN =
                                                    µ-1
                                                            1
                                             sL =      1+       l
                                                            
                                                     1       1
                                       sLY - sL =       - 1+                     l
                                                    µ-1      
so
                                                                     LY  1                    LN 1
                                            1               1         L  Y -1            +     L µ-1
                      sLY - sL > 0             >       1+
                                           µ-1                      1+   1   LN
                                                                                         -    1   LY
                                                                              L               Y -1 L

which can be simplified to
                                                1                                    1
                                    1 -  Y +           > - (µ - 1) 1 +
                                                                                     
which is always satisfied.
     It is also possible to show that a weaker version of Theorem 2 holds in this economy, i.e:

                     dSLY            1                      1
                          < 0   > -                    1+       [(µ - 1) N + (1 - Y ) Y ]
                      dµ            N Y                     
                     dSLN
                          >0
                      dµ


C.5       Variety-specific DRS in production
Wholesale Sector Each variety j  [0, N ] in this economy is produced by a variety-specific represen-
tative wholesaler. Wholesalerj hires labor LY j in a competitive labor market at wage WY , which it uses
to produce variety intermediate good yj . The intermediate good Yj is then sold to retailers at price PW j .
The wholesaler thus chooses labor and output to maximize profits W j :



                                      W j := max PW j Yj - WY j LY j
                                               LY ,Y

                                           subject to
                                         yj = ZY L Y
                                                  Yj



Retail Sector A unit measure continuum of identical retailers each hire labor LN in a competitive
labor market at wage WN , which they use to manage product lines. We refer to the labor used in the retail
sector as N -type labor, overhead labor, or expansionary uses of labor. Each product line j generates gross


                                                       69
profits j , which the retailer's expansion department takes as given when deciding on the number of lines
to operate. The retailer thus chooses labor and product lines to maximize net profits R :
                                                        N
                                      R := max              j dj - WN LN
                                                    0
                                           subject to
                                       N = ZN LN
                                                N




    The retailer's pricing department for product line j purchases yj units of good from the representative
wholesaler j , which it costlessly differentiates and sells to consumers at a markup µ  1 over marginal cost
PW j . Hence the price charged for product line j is

                                                 pj = µPW j                                             (22)


Factor shares We focus on symmetric equilibria in which pj = p j and yj = y j . Market clearing
for intermediate goods then implies that

                                              j = 
                                             W j = W
                                             LY j = LY
                                             PWj = PW
                                               C = Ny
                                               L = N LY + LN

The shares of total income accruing to Y -type labor and N -type are defined as
                                            WN LN           WY N LY
                                   SN :=          and SY :=         ,
                                             pY               pY
and the overall labor share is defined as SL = SN + SY . The overall profit share in the economy is given
by the sum of profit shares in the wholesale and retail sectors, S = SR + SW , where
                                               N W             R
                                      SW :=         and SR :=      .
                                               pN y           pN y
To obtain expressions for factor shares notice that first order conditions in the wholesale and retail sector
are
                                                             y
                                           WY = PW Y
                                                            LY
                                                    N
                                           WN = N      y (p - PW )
                                                    LN
which in equilibrium (using equation 22) can be rewritten as

                                           WY N LY       1
                                                     = Y
                                            p (N y )     µ
                                             WN LN           1
                                                     = N 1 -         .
                                              pN y           µ

This shows that expressions for labor share remain unchanged. Lemma 1 still holds. Since the formulas for
factor shares do not change Theorems 1 and 2 do not need any modification.


                                                        70
Cyclicality of markups We assume no love of variety. The representative household solves
                                                                     1
                                                               L1+ 
                                           max log C -             1
                                           C,L                 1+ 
                                                subject to
                                              pC = W L + W + R

where W , R are profits from wholesale and retail. First order conditions are as before. Equilibrium
conditions are
                                                 1    1   y
                                          CL  =         Y
                                                      µ LY
                                                 1        1   Ny
                                          CL         = 1-   N
                                                          µ   LN
                                                 C = Ny
                                                 L = N LY + LN .

We follow the same approach as in Appendix ?? and loglinearize equilibrium conditions.
                                              LN      N LY
                                        l=       lN +      (N lN + lY )
                                               L       L
                                       1
                                         l = -lY - µ
                                                   ^ -  N lN
                                       
                                       1             1
                                         l = -lN +       µ
                                                         ^
                                                   µ-1
and we solve for total labor
                                               1           N - Y
                                         l=          1                 µ
                                                                       ^
                                              1+     
                                                         Y + N (µ - 1)
and labor in each sector
                                                1            1
                                  lY = - (1 - N ) l - 1 + N                               µ
                                                                                          ^
                                                            µ-1
                                          1    1
                                  lN   =     ^- l
                                             µ
                                         µ-1   
Aggregate output in this economy is given by

                c = N lN + Y lY
                           1 - Y        1                                     1            N - Y
                  =   N          - Y + N (1 - Y ) - Y                                1                   µ
                                                                                                         ^
                            µ-1                                              1+      
                                                                                         Y + N (µ - 1)

For example, when Y  0
                                                                     1
                                                  1                  
                                        c = N               1+           1       µ
                                                                                 ^
                                                 µ-1             1+      

so consumption increases after an increase in the markup. On the other hand, when N  0
                                                                 1
                                                                 
                                          c = -Y          1+         1       µ
                                                                             ^
                                                               1+    




                                                          71
                                                                                      C
and the opposite happens. Importantly, it is not the case that the sign of            µ   is the same as the sign of
SL
 µ . When N = Y = 

                                                     1-
                                           c=            -1 µ
                                                            ^
                                                     µ-1

and it can be positive or negative, depending on the parameters, while

                                                    sL = 0.


C.6      Integrated wholesale and retail sectors as single firms
In this section we study a version of the model in which retailers have to produce goods themselves. We
assume variety-specific production function

                                                  yj = ZY L Y
                                                           Yj

Cost minimization problem in each product line (or variety) is

                                          T Cj := min WY LY j
                                                     yj, LY j

                                                 subject to
                                                yj = ZY L Y
                                                         Yj

which results in expression for marginal cost
                                                                1
                                                                    -1
                                          1           yj        Y
                                            WY                           ZY
                                          Y           ZY

We assume price setting behavior is such that
                                                                        1
                                                                            -1
                                              1                yj       Y
                                     pj = µ ×   WY                               ZY
                                              Y                ZY

Profits per product line are
                                            j = pj yj - W LY j
so
                                                                        1
                                          j = pj yj 1 - Y                   .
                                                                        µ
The retailer chooses labor and product lines to maximize net profits R taking profits per product line as
given
                                                          N
                                     R := max                 j dj - WN LN
                                            LN ,N     0
                                         subject to
                                       N = ZN LN
                                                N




In a symmetric equilibrium the first order condition can be rewritten as

                                        WN                          1       Ny
                                           = N            1 - Y
                                         p                          µ       LN

                                                       72
so
                                             WN LN                     1
                                     SN :=         = N       1 - Y         .
                                              pN y                     µ
We also have
                                                    WY LY     1
                                            SY :=         = Y
                                                     pN y     µ
and labor share in this economy is
                                                 1                 1
                                        SL = Y     + N     1 - Y
                                                 µ                 µ
and is higher than labor share in economy in Section 2 as long as Y < 1. In this economy N -type workers
get part of profits resulting from decreasing returns to scale in production. Since
                                           SL
                                            1 = Y (1 - N ) > 0
                                           µ

labor share in this economy always falls when markups increase.



D       Details of Data and Additional Estimation Results

D.1       Detailed Data Description
Labor share

     · Baseline Gomme and Rupert: The measure excludes the household and government sectors and
       uses NIPA tables 1.12 and 1.7.5 and corresponds to the second alternative measure of the labor share
       proposed in Gomme and Rupert (2004). They define unambiguous labor income as compensation of
       employees, and unambiguous capital income (as corporate profits, rental income, net interest income,
       and depreciation. The remaining (ambiguous) components are then proprietors' income plus indirect
       taxes net of subsidies (NIPA Table 1.12). These are apportioned to capital and labor in the same
       proportion as the unambiguous components. Here CEt is compensation of employees (line 2 in NIPA
       table 1.12), RIt rental income (line 12 in NIPA table 1.12), CPt corporate profits before tax (line 13
       in NIPA table 1.12), N It net interest income (line 18 in NIPA table 1.12) and t depreciation (line
       5 in table 1.7.5 ) .
                                                           CEt
                                        LSt =
                                               CEt + RIt + CPt + N It + t
     · BLS Nonfarm Business: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfarm Business Sector: Labor Share
       (FRED id: PRS85006173)
     · BLS Nonfinancial: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfinancial Corporations Sector: Labor
       Share (FRED id: PRS88003173)
     · Cooley and Prescott: Follows Cooley and Prescott (1995). The labor share of income is defined
       as one minus capital income divided by output. Cooley and Prescott assume that the proportion of
       ambiguous capital income ACIt to ambiguous income AIt is the same as the proportion of unam-
       biguous capital income to unambiguous income. Ambiguous income, AIt is the sum of proprietors
       income (line 9, NIPA table 1.12), taxes on production less subsidies (lines 19 and 20, NIPA Table
       1.12), business current transfer payments (line 21, NIPA Table 1.12) . Unambiguous income U It
       consists of compensation of employees (line 2 in NIPA table 1.12) and unambiguous capital income
       U CIt which in turn consists of rental income (line 12, NIPA Table 1.12), net interests (line 13, Table


                                                     73
    1.12), corporate profits (line 18, NIPA Table 1.12) and current surplus of government enterprises
    (line 25, NIPA Table 1.12). Formally

                                          U   U CIt + t
                                        CSt =
                                                  U It
                                                 U
                                       ACIt = CSt AIt
                                                  U CIt + t + ACIt
                                        LSt = 1 -
                                                        GN Pt
    where t is depreciation (line 5 in table 1.7.5 )
  · Fernald: It is taken from Fernald (2014). It is utilization adjusted quarterly series.


Markup
  · Data from 1947 Q1 to 2019 Q2 from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. We use the following series:
       ­ WPSFD49207, Producer Price Index by Commodity for Final Demand: Finished Goods,
         Seasonally Adjusted
       ­ WPSID61, Producer Price Index by Commodity for Intermediate Demand by Commodity
         Type: Processed Goods for Intermediate Demand Seasonally Adjusted


Occupational income shares
  · We use data from the monthly Outgoing Rotation Groups of the Current Population Survey (CPS-
    ORG) to construct quarterly series for occupational income shares sj . We restrict attention to
    employed individuals aged 16 and over not living in group quarters, and measure labor income with
    the IPUMS variable `earnweek'. This variable reports the amount (in dollars) a given individual
    earned from their job each week before deductions.
  · We compute quarterly labor income by summing weekly labor income for individuals in each of
    9 broad occupation categories, which we construct from the 389 OCC1990 occupation codes in a
    following way:
       ­ Managerial occupations: OCC1990 codes 3 - 37
       ­ Professional specialty occupations: OCC1990 codes 43 - 200
       ­ High-tech occupations: OCC1990 codes 203 - 235
       ­ Sales occupations: OCC1990 codes 243 - 283
       ­ Administrative support and clerical occupations: OCC1990 codes 303 - 389
       ­ Service occupations OCC1990 codes 405 - 469
       ­ Farming, forestry, and fishing occupations, construction and extractive occupations: OCC1990
         codes 473-498, 558 - 599 and 614 - 617
       ­ Precision production occupations and repair: OCC1990 codes 503 - 549 and 628 - 699
       ­ Machine operators, assemblers, inspectors, transportation and material moving occupations:
         OCC1990 codes1990 703 - 799 and 803 - 889
  · We remove all observations with OCC1990 codes that do not belong to any of the above 9 broad
    categories, for example observations with missing OCC1990 codes or military occupations. We then
    divide the sum of labor income of individuals in each broad category by the sum of labor income of
    all individuals in any given quarter to obtain sj .

                                                  74
  · Because there was a change in occupational codes used in CPS-ORG in 2002 we make the following
    adjustment: we calculate a difference between sj in 2002Q4 and sj in 2003Q1 and then we adjust
    sj in 2003Q1 and later by adding this difference. This assumes that all changes in sj between 2002
    and 2003 were due to the change in occupational codes.
  · We then use X-12-ARIMA to do seasonal adjustment of sj and renormalize sj so that their sum in
    each quarter is always equal to 1.


Occupational total hours and median hourly wages

  · We use data from the 1980 Census and 2015 American Community Survey (ACS) to calculate
    occupational total hours and median hourly wages. We restrict attention to employed individuals
    aged 18 to 65 and not living in group quarters, and measure labor income with the IPUMS variable
    `incwage'. This variable reports the amount (in dollars) eports each respondent's total pre-tax wage
    and salary income - that is, money received as an employee - for the previous 12 months. Sources
    of income in `incwage' include wages, salaries, commissions, cash bonuses, tips, and other money
    income received from an employer. Payments-in-kind or reimbursements for business expenses are
    not included.
  · We keep only individuals with positive and known wage income and hours and positive weights
  · To calculate the number of hours per year that the respondent usually worked we use variables
    'uhrswork' and 'wkswork2'. 'uhrswork' reports the number of hours per week that the respondent
    usually worked, if the person worked during the previous 12 months. 'wkswork2' reports the number
    of weeks that the respondent worked for profit, pay, or as an unpaid family worker during the previous
    12 months. Because 'wkswork2' is reported in intervals (1-13 weeks, 14-26 weeks, and so on), instead
    of the precise number of weeks, we associate each value of 'wkswork2' with the midpoint of the
    corresponding interval (for example if 'wkswork2'=1 we treat it as 7 weeks). We multiply 'uhrswork'
    by our measure of weeks based on 'wkswork2'. Hourly wages are then computed by dividing `incwage'
    by the number of hours per year.
  · We calculate occupational total hours by summing yearly hours for individuals in each of 9 broad
    occupation categories.


D.2    Stage 1 Additional Tables and Figures

D.3    Stage 2 Additional Tables and Figures




                                                  75
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)
                                   Baseline        BLS          BLS          Cooley-         Fernald
                                   Gomme-        Non-farm    Non-financial   Prescott
                                   Rupert        Business     Corporate

Y                                   0.934         0.953          0.940            0.930       0.934
                                    0.005         0.005          0.007            0.006       0.008
N                                   0.730         0.637          0.700            0.750       0.731
                                    0.024         0.027          0.035            0.029       0.037

                SN,L
Implied value of SL
                                     19%           17%            19%             19%            18%
P-val for test N = Y (1 - Y )        0.00          0.00           0.00            0.00           0.00

Assumed mean markup, µ               1.2           1.2           1.200             1.2         1.2
Assumed overall profit share, S     10%           10%            10%              10%         10%
Capital share parameter,            0.320         0.354          0.351            0.290       0.297


          Table 4: First stage estimation results: alternate labor share series




                                     (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)
                                   Baseline      Baxter-    Christiano-   Linear     Quadratic
                                   Hodrick-       King      Fitzgerald    Trend       Trend
                                   Prescott

Y                                   0.934         0.934       0.937       0.928           0.922
                                    0.005         0.005       0.004       0.004           0.003
N                                   0.730         0.731       0.716       0.758           0.789
                                    0.024         0.023       0.020       0.018           0.016

                SN,L
Implied value of SL
                                     19%          19%          18%         19%            20%
P-val for test N = Y (1 - Y )        0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00           0.00

Assumed mean markup, µ               1.2           1.2         1.2         1.2             1.2
Assumed overall profit share, S     10%           10%         10%         10%             10%
Capital share parameter,            0.320         0.320       0.319       0.322           0.324


       Table 5: First stage estimation results: alternate methods of de-trending



                                            76
De-trended Occupational Labor Income Share




                                                                                                                    De-trended Occupational Labor Income Share
                                     .015




                                                                                                                                                         .015
                               .01




                                                                                                                                                   .01
                       .005




                                                                                                                                           .005
                0




                                                                                                                                    0
 -.01 -.005




                                                                                                                     -.01 -.005




                                             1.14     1.16           1.18         1.2              1.22      1.24                                                .64           .65              .66                .67         .68
                                                                     Detrended Markup                                                                                                 Detrended Labor Share

                                                    Managerial, High-tech, Admin, Service                                                                              Managerial, High-tech, Admin, Service
                                                    Construction, Extractive, Production, Repair, Farming                                                              Construction, Extractive, Production, Repair, Farming
                                                    Professional Specialty, Sales                                                                                      Professional Specialty, Sales


                                                    (a) Reduced form scatter plot                                                                                 (b) Raw scatter plot, without instrument

                                                         Figure 6: Cyclical components of occupational income shares




                                                                                                            77
               2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Managerial




                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Prof Specialty




                                                                                                                          Mean nr_cog_pers 2000 weights
Mean nr_cog_anal 2000 weights




                                                                               Prof Specialty




                                                                                                                                                  .5
                         1




                                                                                                Managerial
                                                                                                             High-tech




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sales
                                                                                                                                                                               Prod., Repair
             0




                                                    Prod., Repair
                                                                                                                                                                        Constr., Extract., Farm
                                             Constr., Extract., Farm Sales                                                                                                                                                              High-tech




                                                                                                                                 -.5
                                                                                                  Admin                                                                                                                       Service

                                     Machinists, Transp.                                                                                                                                                                     Admin
  -1




                                                                                                   Service
                                                                                                                                                                Machinists, Transp.




                                                                                                                         -1              -1.5
               -2




                                12         14              16           18         20            22          24                                           12          14              16           18         20            22          24
                                                                    N-type share (%)                                                                                                           N-type share (%)


                                      (a) Non-routine, cognitive, analytical                                                                                   (b) Non-routine, cognitive, inter-personal




                                                                                                                                         2
               1




                                                                               Prof Specialty
                                                                                                                         Mean nr_man_phys 2000 weights
Mean nr_man_pers 2000 weights




                                                                                                Managerial
                                                                                                                                                 1                      Constr.,
                                                                                                                                                                Machinists,      Extract., Farm
                                                                                                                                                                            Transp.
                                                                       Sales                                                                                                   Prod., Repair

                                                                                                   Service
                  0




                                                                                                  Admin                                                                                                                       Service
                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                             High-tech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        High-tech
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sales
                                                    Prod., Repair                                                                                                                                                            Admin
                                             Constr., Extract., Farm                                                                                                                                      Prof Specialty
    -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Managerial
                                                                                                                           -1




                                     Machinists, Transp.
               -2




                                                                                                                                         -2




                                12         14              16           18         20            22          24                                           12          14              16           18         20            22          24
                                                                    N-type share (%)                                                                                                           N-type share (%)


                                     (c) Non-routine, inter-personal, manual                                                                                       (d) Non-routine, physical, manual
               1.5




                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                  Admin                                                         Machinists, Transp.
                                                                                                             High-tech
               1




                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                          Mean r_man 2000 weights
 Mean r_cog 2000 weights




                                                                                                                                                                        Constr., Extract., Farm
                                                                                                                                                                              Prod., Repair
                 .5




                                     Machinists, Transp.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Service   High-tech
                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Admin
         0




                                                    Prod., Repair                                                                                                                                 Sales
                                                                       Sales
                                                                                                Managerial
                                                                                                  Service                                                                                                 Prof Specialty
                                                                               Prof Specialty
-.5




                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Managerial

                                             Constr., Extract., Farm
               -1




                                                                                                                                         -2




                                12         14              16           18         20            22          24                                           12          14              16           18         20            22          24
                                                                    N-type share (%)                                                                                                           N-type share (%)


                                                    (e) Routine, cognitive                                                                                                       (f) Routine, manual

Figure 7: Correlation of N -content of occupations with other occupation characteristics
                                           78
