                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOUSING DISCRIMINATION AND THE TOXICS EXPOSURE GAP IN THE UNITED STATES:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE RENTAL MARKET

                                           Peter Christensen
                                       Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri
                                          Christopher Timmins

                                          Working Paper 26805
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w26805


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2020

 We thank David Albouy, Spencer Banzhaf, Pat Bayer, Johnathan Colmer, Rebecca Diamond, Nick
 Kuminoff, Juan Carlos Serrato, Daniel Sullivan, Reed Walker, Randy Walsh, and seminar participants
 at NBER Energy and Environmental Economics, The Workshop on Environmental Economics and
 Data Science, Triangle Resources and Environmental Economics (TREE) Seminar, UC Berkeley,
 UC Santa Cruz, UC San Diego, UC Santa Barbara Occasional Workshop in Environmental Economics,
 UNLV, University of Miami, University of Virginia, and Wharton School for excellent comments.
 We thank Davis Berlind, Christopher Kim, Daniel Rychel, Tom Phillips and student assistants in the
 University of Illinois Big Data and Environmental Economics and Policy (BDEEP) Group and the
 Duke Environmental Justice Lab for research assistance. We acknowledge generous support from
 the Russell Sage Foundation, National Science Foundation, and the National Center for Supercomputing
 Applications. The experiment was registered on the AEA RCT Registry as trial 3366 (Christensen
 et al., 2018) and the human subjects protocol for this research design was approved by the University
 of Illinois Institutional Review Board (IRB #18381) on 12/07/2017. All data and code will be available
 prior to publication using DOI 10.5281/zenodo.3492234. All errors are our own. The views expressed
 herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Peter Christensen, Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri, and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved.
 Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Discrimination and the Toxics Exposure Gap in the United States: Evidence from
the Rental Market
Peter Christensen, Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 26805
February 2020, Revised April 2020
JEL No. Q51,Q53,R31

                                              ABSTRACT

Local pollution exposures disproportionately impact minority households, but the root causes remain
unclear. This study conducts a correspondence experiment on a major online housing platform to test
whether housing discrimination constrains minority access to housing options in markets with significant
sources of airborne chemical toxics. We find that renters with African American or Hispanic/LatinX
names are 41% less likely than renters with White names to receive responses for properties in low-exposure
locations. We find no evidence of discriminatory constraints in high-exposure locations, indicating
that discrimination increases relative access to housing choices at elevated exposure risk.


Peter Christensen                                    Christopher Timmins
Agriculture and Consumer Economics                   Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign           Duke University
431 Mumford Hall                                     209 Social Sciences Building
Urbana, IL 61801                                     P.O. Box 90097
pchrist@illinois.edu                                 Durham, NC 27708-0097
                                                     and NBER
Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri                           christopher.timmins@duke.edu
University of Illinois
Department of Economics
srmntbr2@illinois.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3366
1     Introduction

Over the past three decades, a range of studies have demonstrated that minority house-
holds in the United States are disproportionately exposed to harmful pollutants (Rosofsky
et al., 2018, Clark et al., 2017, Ard, 2015, Shapiro, 2005, Ash and Fetter, 2004). This `race
gap' in pollution exposures is found both in cross-sectional data and also in neighborhood
demographic changes following shifts in pollution concentrations (Mohai and Saha, 2015,
Cushing et al., 2015, Mohai et al., 2009). Other work has revealed relationships between
pollution exposures and persistent inequity in lifetime cancer risk (Collins et al., 2015,
Morello-Frosch and Jesdale, 2006, Morello-Frosch et al., 2001) and chronic respiratory
conditions such as asthma (Alexander and Currie, 2017, Currie, 2009). Studies of long-
run impacts on in utero populations demonstrate that emissions exposures from nearby
toxic plants or traffic congestion in close proximity to a home residence have critical
effects on infant health and birth-weight (Currie et al., 2015, Currie and Walker, 2011,
Currie and Schmieder, 2009, Currie and Neidell, 2005). This body of research suggests
that differences in residential location choices in US housing markets result in a persistent
racial gap in exposure to chemical toxics and related health outcomes. However, it has
been challenging to identify root causes.
    A key question involves whether housing market discrimination actively constrains
choices available to minority households in low-exposure neighborhoods. Researchers
have hypothesized that housing discrimination may be an important factor in explaining
the exposure gap in the United States and there is evidence that real estate agents are
more likely to show that are properties closer proximity to Superfund sites and toxic
releases to minority homebuyers (Christensen and Timmins, 2018, Crowder and Downey,
2010). However, no prior study has provided an empirical test in the online rental hous-
ing market, where renters interact directly with property managers and discriminatory
behavior could eliminate access to certain properties entirely. This is challenging in
observational data, as it requires disentangling discriminatory constraints from dispari-
ties in income (Banzhaf et al., 2019, Aliprantis et al., 2019, Logan, 2011), differences in
information about exposure risk (Hausman and Stolper, 2019, Currie, 2011) and hous-

                                             2
ing/neighborhood preferences that also affect residential sorting behavior (Depro et al.,
2015, Banzhaf and Walsh, 2013). The discrimination mechanism differs fundamentally
from the other factors in that it involves illegal behavior that imposes ex-ante constraints
on the choices of minority renters, potentially distorting sorting behavior even when
households are perfectly informed about the risk of exposures. Examining the effect
of housing discrimination on ex-ante choice constraints is important for analyzing the
race-gap in pollution exposures and for studying the channels through which housing dis-
crimination may create barriers to human capital accumulation that contribute to racial
inequality in the United States (Akbar et al., 2019, Graham, 2018, Chetty et al., 2018,
Christensen and Timmins, 2018).
    This paper uses a correspondence study conducted on a major online rental housing
search platform to provide the first experimental evidence on the effect of discriminatory
constraints on access to housing choices in rental markets with major pollution sources.1
We define a representative sample of local rental housing markets using the set of US ZIP
codes that contain major sources of toxic emissions (using the Toxic Release Inventory).
In this sample of markets, the share of African American renters living in high-exposure
locations is 92% higher than the share living in low-exposure locations. Among His-
panic/LatinX renters, the share living in high-exposure locations is 90% higher. By
contrast, the share of White renters living in high-exposure locations is just 32% higher
than the White share living in low-exposure locations. We then use the within-property
randomization to test whether discrimination constrains the housing choices available to
minority households at high-exposure locations relative to comparable listings at low-
exposure locations that are available at the same time within the same market. We find
that discriminatory behavior reduces the likelihood of response to an inquiry made by
a minority renter by 41% in low-exposure locations ­ minority names receive only 59%
as many responses as White names in these zones. However, we find no evidence of dis-
criminatory constraints operating in the high-exposure zones of the same markets. Our

1
 While online housing markets do not reflect all options available in the markets that we study, online
housing platforms have increasingly become the locus of housing search and constitute an important
channel for discriminatory behavior Apartments.com (2015).The referenced survey reports that 72% of
housing searches were initiated on online platforms in 2015.

                                                  3
tests reveal that constraints in low-exposure neighborhoods are considerably stronger for
African American renters, especially for African American men.
   We then examine how the discrimination-exposure relationship varies by neighbor-
hood racial composition, rental price, and among properties that are matched using the
housing/neighborhood characteristics that are visible to prospective renters on the search
platform. We find that the relationship holds across neighborhoods with high/low shares
of minority households, across segments of the rental price distribution, and within sets
of highly comparable properties. By constraining the housing choices of minority renters
in low-exposure neighborhoods, discriminatory constraints in markets with major toxic
facilities result in a ceteris paribus welfare effect for minority households that value clean
air. Among renters that are informed about pollution exposures and are willing to pay
to avoid them during a search, these constraints will increase the cost of that avoidance
behavior. Among minority renters who may not be informed or who may not structure
their search to specifically avoid high-exposure neighborhoods, discriminatory constraints
reduce the probability of sorting into low-exposure locations relative to high-exposure lo-
cations, thereby contributing to the race gap in exposures and related health outcomes.
   Beyond the exposure gap, this paper contributes to a growing literature that uses
correspondence and other experimental methods to study discriminatory behavior in la-
bor and housing markets, responding to recent calls for increased focus on the adverse
impacts of discriminatory constraints (Bertrand and Duflo, 2017, Guryan and Charles,
2013). New work by Kline and Walters (2020) illustrates the importance of heterogeneity
in discriminatory behavior in the labor market. In the housing market, relatively little
is known about the characteristics of neighborhoods where minority households face sys-
tematically stronger constraints (Phillips, 2017, Ewens et al., 2014, Hanson and Hawley,
2011). Our findings demonstrate that estimates of average effects can mask heterogeneity
along dimensions that drive search and sorting processes and are therefore important for
determining the adverse impacts of discriminatory behavior. Heterogeneous responses
are potentially consistent with multiple models of discriminatory behavior, including
racial animus originally proposed by Becker (1957), statistical discrimination as in Arrow


                                              4
(1972), or more recent attention-based mechanisms advanced by Bartos et al. (2016).
    This paper proceeds as follows. The following section provides background on the
experimental design and sample.              Section 3 discusses results on the discrimination-
exposure relationship by toxic concentration and by distance to TRI facility. Section
4 examines heterogeneity in the discrimination-exposure relationship by price and hous-
ing/neighborhood characteristics. Section 5 concludes.



2      Study Area and Correspondence Design

We define a sampling frame that includes all ZIP codes surrounding major point sources of
airborne chemical toxics, which are defined using facilities reporting emissions through the
EPA's Toxic Release Inventory (TRI). This design yields a sample that is representative
of localized housing markets that are characterized by substantial within-market variation
in pollution exposures. Panel A of Figure 1 maps the set of US ZIP codes that contain a
nearby high emitting facility.2 The final study area uses a sample of 2,918 listings from
19 ZIP codes drawn at random from the set of high emissions markets.
    Within each of the ZIP codes that we sample, we compile the full set of property
listings on the day of data collection to simulate the choices available in a search. The
sampling design ensures that estimates reflect differences across the full set of housing
options advertised to prospective renters at the time of an experimental trial, simulating
the set of options available to a prospective renter that is searching on the platform
at that time. Immediately following the compilation of the relevant listings in a given
market, a name is randomly drawn and assigned from each of three racial groups.
    Two recent experiments study the racial perceptions of names used in correspon-
dence research by quantifying the congruence between the occurrence of distinct African
American, Hispanic/LatinX, and White names and the rate of identification (cognitive
association with each group) among survey respondents in the United States (Gaddis,


2
 A nearby facility is defined as a facility within one mile of the ZIP code boundary. High emitting
facilities are defined as those with annual emissions (`stack and fugitive air releases') that fall above the
80th percentile of annual emissions.

                                                     5
2017a,b).3 Using the results from Gaddis (2017a,b), we constructed 18 pairs of first and
last names that have the highest probability of identification as belonging to each race
group. The resulting set of fictitious renter identities consists of 6 distinct first-last name
pairs for each of the three groups. A question that has emerged in prior correspondence
studies using racialized names is the possibility that any given name may signal race
as well as other unobserved characteristics such as income (Guryan and Charles, 2013,
Fryer Jr and Levitt, 2004). To test this empirically, we stratify the sample of first names
using statistical distribution of maternal educational attainment (low, medium, and high)
and gender (male and female) reported in Gaddis (2017a,b). The resulting name groups
consists of three male and three female names, one drawn from each of three levels of
maternal educational attainment (high/medium/low).
    Each rental apartment receives a sequence of three separate inquiries directly through
the online platform in the course of an experimental trial. The sequence of inquiries from
the different race groups is randomly assigned. Inquiries for the same listing are never
sent from the same identity or from two different identities on the same day.4 Responses
to inquiries are coded using two criteria that determine whether or not a housing choice
is made available: (1) a response is received within 7 days of the associated inquiry and
(2) the response indicates that the property is available for rent.5 Discriminatory con-
straints are expressed in terms of relative response rates, which measure within-property
differences in access to a given listing relative to an inquiry sent from a White name
(the comparison group). We use the terms relative response rates, response rates, and
likelihood of response interchangeably to refer to this measure throughout the paper.
    Within each ZIP code, the concentration of airborne toxics is measured using the
level of ambient concentrations in 810 square meter grid cells in the US Environmental
Protection Agency's Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators (RSEI) Model. We use


3
  See Appendix Section A1.1 for detail on name selection and the identification rates for each of the
names in this study.
4
  Balance tests are reported in Table A4.
5
  52% of responses are received within the first 8 hours of an inquiry, 74% are received within 24 hours
and 98% are received within 5 days. The 7-day cutoff is used to restrict responses that may be received
weeks or months after an inquiry and are not counted as choices in the study. We refer interested readers
to Figure A5 for the distribution of inquiry response time in the sample.

                                                   6
the RSEI measure of toxic concentration to define the level of exposure at each of the
properties in the sample of available listings ­ the terms concentration and exposure
are used interchangeably to refer to the RSEI measure at residential locations. Panel
B of Figure 1 maps the locations of emissions sources, RSEI concentrations, and the
approximate locations of properties using 2 of the ZIP codes in the sample.6
    Recent work has highlighted the importance of wind direction on pollution exposure
and health outcomes (Deryugina et al., 2019). We use RSEI as our preferred measure on
concentrations as it accounts for differential releases, meteorological conditions such as
wind speed and direction, decay rates, and other key characteristics of emissions that can
affect exposures (EPA, 2018).7 While potentially more informative than distance-based
measures of toxics exposures, data on TRI releases are subject to potential reporting bias
­ firms may under-report their emissions if they perceive a relatively low risk of legal
penalties for failure to comply with EPCRA reporting protocols.8 We provide results
using both the RSEI and distance-based measures. An empirical comparison of the two
measures (Figure A4) shows that properties fall in the highest quartile of RSEI tend to
be within 1 mile of a facility. Estimates of discriminatory constraints are also consistent,
although those using the distance-based measure are somewhat less precise.
    Figure 2 provides a descriptive analysis of the race gap in exposures in the sample
using data on the renter populations data from the 2016 American Community Survey
(ACS). The top panel summarizes the within-ZIP share of renters living in the highest
quartile (and interquartile range) of exposures, relative to the lowest quartile. The bottom
panel plots the fraction of the population shares for each group living in each quantile of
the RSEI distribution for each ZIP code. Two facts emerge from the ACS data: (1) the
relative shares of minority households living in the highest quartile of exposures is much

6
  Maps of all ZIP codes provided in Figure A3.
7
  The EPA's Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators (RSEI) model uses three primary data sets: Chem-
ical toxicity data, TRI release and transfer quantities, and the location of facilities. RSEI uses the
American Meteorological Society/EPA Regulatory Model (AERMOD). The model incorporates infor-
mation about facilities (location, stack height, etc.), meteorology (wind, wind direction, and ambient
temperature), and chemical specific decay rates to calculate toxic concentrations in a given grid.
8
  From the EPA's TRI website: "EPA investigates cases of EPCRA non-compliance and may issue civil
penalties, including monetary fines, and may also require correction of the violation. EPCRA Section
313 compliance resources include inspectors and attorneys in each of EPA's 10 regional offices and at
EPA headquarters" (EPA, 2020a)

                                                  7
higher for African Americans and Hispanix/LatinX residents than for the population of
White renters. Whereas the share of African American and Hispanic/LatinX renters
living in high-exposure locations are both more than 90% higher than their shares in low-
exposure locations, the share of White renters living in high-exposure locations is just
32% higher than its share at low-exposure locations. (2) Households in all race groups
sort across the full support of the exposure distribution in their ZIP code.



3      Housing Discrimination and Toxics Exposures

We model the decision of a landlord listing property i choosing to respond to an inquirer
j using a linear random utility model:




                           uij = Racej + Xj + Zi +             ij   j = 0, 1, 2                             (1)


Each landlord faces 3 choices/inquiries ­ one from a White identity, one from an African
American, and one from a Hispanic/LatinX. We assume that                   ij   are iid errors that follow
a type I extreme value distribution, which implies that              ijn   =    ij   -   in   follows a logistic
distribution j = n.9 Empirically, we use a conditional logit model where Racej indicates
the race group associated with the identity; the base group is the White identity. Xj is
a vector of inquirer-specific control variables: gender, education level and the order in
which the inquiry was sent.10 Zi denotes listing specific attributes, including: pollution
exposure, rent, square footage, number of bedrooms, block-group racial composition.11
     The primary set of tests defines pollution exposures using ambient concentrations from
the RSEI model and concentrations are divided into 3 bins: k = 0 - 25%, 25 - 75%, 75 -
100%. A second set of tests defines exposures according to distance from active TRI
facilities (k =< 1 mile, > 1 mile), which have been shown to directly affect the health


9
   See Appendix A1.3 for more details.
10
   Point estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of controls though precision increases slightly. See
 Table A6 for comparison across specifications.
11
   See Table A5 for a complete list of listing specific attributes.

                                                    8
outcomes of the in utero population.12


Discrimination by RSEI Concentration

Figure 3 plots estimates of within-property response rates at different levels of pollution
exposure, where exposures are defined using the RSEI measure of toxic concentrations,
with properties divided into the lowest quartile, the interquartile range, and in the highest
quartile of ambient emissions concentrations within a ZIP code. The plots measure
differential constraints within the full set of properties simultaneously listed for rent in
markets containing a major emissions source.
     Panel A plots estimates of discriminatory constraints facing Minority identities as a
whole. We estimate a 59% relative response rate to inquiries for properties located in
the lowest quartile of the within-ZIP toxics concentration, indicating that inquiries from
Minority identities are 41% less likely to yield choices for Minority renters at low levels of
exposure. The strength of choice constraints declines as toxic exposure increases within
a ZIP code. The relative response rate is 71% in the interquartile range of exposures.
Among properties located in the highest quartile of toxics exposures, we find no statistical
difference in the rate of response to Minority identities. The difference between relative
response rates in the lowest quartile and in the highest quartile is statistically significant
at p < .01. These results imply that Minority renters receive 1 response per 4.3 inquires
in low-exposure zones, compared to 2.6 for White renters. In high-exposure zones, they
receive a response with 2.7 inquiries (2.5 for White renters).13 Taken together, these
findings imply that Minority households face ex-ante constraints that increase their access
to housing choices in high-exposure locations relative to low-exposure locations.
     Panel B plots estimates independently for African American and Hispanic/LatinX
identities. While both groups face discriminatory constraints at low-exposure locations,
12
   RSEI concentrations are strongly but not perfectly correlated with ambient concentrations studied in
 the tests reported in Figure 3. Figure A4 plots the distribution of properties in each RSEI percentile
 by distance to TRI plants for the full sample. Figure A3 maps the relationship for each individual ZIP
 code.
13
   Inquiries per response are calculated first by taking the inverse of the mean response for whites in the
 0-25 percentile, e.g. 1/0.39 = 2.55, to obtain the "number of inquires per response for whites". Then we
 divide it by the odds ratio of each racial category, e.g. 2.55/0.59 = 4.3. See Appendix Section A2 for
 more details.

                                                     9
the relative response rates are substantially lower for African American identities (45%)
than for Hispanic/LatinX identities (78%). Discriminatory constraints are smaller for
both groups in the interquartile range of exposure risk. At the highest levels of exposure
risk within a ZIP code, response rates to African American identities are equivalent to
the White names. At high-exposure locations, Hispanic/LatinX identities are 34% more
likely than a White identity to receive a response. The difference between relative re-
sponse rates in the lowest quartile and in the highest quartile is statistically significant
at p < .01. These results imply that at low-exposure locations, African American can
expect to receive one response per 5.7 inquires. Hispanic/LatinX renters can expect one
response per 3.3 inquiries. White renters can expect one response per 2.5 inquiries. In
high-exposure locations, African Americans also face higher search costs (one response
per 2.9 inquiries vs one response per 2.8 inquiries for White renters).14 Taken together,
these findings illustrate that African Americans face lower returns to their search efforts
at all locations and also bear a higher incremental cost of search in low-exposure neigh-
borhoods. African Americans must send 2.8 more inquires to secure an expected response
for properties located in low-exposure locations relative to the response rate that they
can expect in high-exposure locations.15
     Panel C provides evidence of stronger discriminatory constraints facing male Mi-
nority identities, especially among properties at low-exposure locations. We estimate
relative response rates of 46% for Minority male identities versus 79% among Minority
female identities. We conduct additional tests to further decompose and explore these
effects.16 We find the strongest discriminatory constraints in inquiries sent from African
American male identities, where relative response rates are 28% in low-exposure loca-
tions. We test for heterogeneity by income within race using first names associated with
high/medium/low levels of maternal educational attainment. These tests provide sugges-
tive evidence of somewhat stronger constraints facing minorities with names that signal
a low SES background, though we do not detect statistical differences in the strength

14
   See Appendix Section A2 for a discussion of this transformation and all calculations.
15
   We thank an anonymous referee for pointing out this novel interpretation of results from correspondence
 studies.
16
   We refer interested readers to Tables A12, and A11

                                                    10
of constraints facing low/medium/high Minority identities in low-exposure zones. When
facing discriminatory constraints, renters may also make multiple inquiries about a prop-
erty to increase the likelihood of gaining access. We simulate this process by running
two rounds using the same names. All tests indicate a stronger discriminatory response
in follow-up inquiries. Whereas response rates for first inquiries are 58% from Minority
identities, 41% from African American identities, and 86% from Hispanic/LatinX identi-
ties, response rates to second inquiries are 38% from Minority, 51% from Hispanic, and
27% from African American identities.17


Discrimination by Distance to Emissions Source

Prior work provides direct evidence that in utero exposures resulting from residential
location choices surrounding TRI facilities have important effects on gestation and birth-
weight and that ambient pollution decays rapidly as a function of distance to the nearest
plant, such that damages are concentrated within 1 mile (Currie et al., 2015, Currie and
Schmieder, 2009).
       Figure 4 reports evidence on discriminatory constraints using distance to the nearest
TRI facility. The results mirror the findings on concentrations. We find no statistical
difference in relative response rates among properties located within the 1 mile radius,
indicating that Minority renters do not face discriminatory barriers to access at loca-
tions that are linked to a 3-5% increase in the probability of low birth-weight (Currie
et al., 2015). Among properties located beyond 1 mile from a TRI facility, we find a 66%
response rate to inquiries made from Minority identities. The tests again reveal substan-
tially stronger constraints facing African American identities (52%) when compared to
Hispanic/LatinX identities (83%). In high-exposure zones, we detect no evidence of sta-
tistical differences facing African American identities and a 15% higher relative response
rates for inquiries made from Hispanic/LatinX identities. These estimates provide evi-
dence that discriminatory constraints reduce housing choices at safe distances from TRI
facilities and, through that mechanism, may contribute to adverse gestational outcomes

17
     Results provided in Table A8.

                                              11
in Minority households. The difference between relative response rates near vs. far from
facilities are statistically significant for all minorities at p < .1 and for Hispanic/LatinX
identities at p < .01. The difference is not significant for African American identities.



4      Heterogeneity in Discriminatory Constraints

Given the within-property randomization, the estimates in the prior section provide ev-
idence on the discrimination-exposure relationship among all available properties in our
sample of markets and indicates that discriminatory constraints limit the access of Mi-
nority renters to housing in low-exposure zones. In this section, we dig deeper into this
relationship by examining how it varies with other housing and neighborhood attributes.
Not surprisingly, properties in low/high-exposure locations vary along several dimensions.
The average price of a rental property in the highest quartile of within-ZIP toxics expo-
sure is $278 lower than those in the lowest quartile. High-exposure properties are more
likely to be apartments in multi-family buildings and located in census block groups with
higher shares of African American households, lower shares of Hispanic/White house-
holds, higher poverty rates, and higher rates of college educated households.18 Results
reported in Figure 5 examine heterogeneity in discriminatory constraints by: A) neigh-
borhood racial composition, (B) rental price, and (C) the full set of matched housing and
neighborhood characteristics available on the rental search platform.
     Prior work demonstrates that discriminatory constraints tend to be stronger in neigh-
borhoods with a higher share of non-minority (White) households (Hanson and Hawley,
2011, Ewens et al., 2014, Christensen and Timmins, 2018). This is illustrated in Panel A,
which plots relative response rates for listings in census block groups with shares of mi-
nority households that fall above or below the median share in a ZIP code. The strongest
constraints facing minorities are observed in low-exposure zones with low shares of mi-
nority households. Relative response rates in the lowest quartile of concentrations are
40% in census block groups with below-median minority shares and 72% among census

18
 See Table A2 for descriptive statistics of complete set of characteristics for properties in the sample and
tests of differences by quartile of concentration.

                                                    12
block groups with above-median minority shares. In the interquartile range of exposures,
relative response rates are 71% among census block groups with below-median minor-
ity shares and 70% among census block groups with above-median minority shares. In
the upper quartile of exposures, relative response rates are 150% among census block
groups with above-median minority shares and 95% (not statistically significant) among
census block groups with below-median minority shares. The difference between relative
response rates in the lowest quartile and in the highest quartile in both of these samples
is statistically significant at p < .05.
     Plots in Panel B examine discriminatory constraints among listings that fall above or
below the median rental price within a ZIP code. These results indicate that minority
identities face the strongest constraints when requesting properties listed at high prices
in low-exposure zones. Minority response rates are 55% for high priced properties in low-
exposure locations in the sample. Relative response rates are highest among low priced
properties in high-exposure zones. In both quantiles of the price distribution, constraints
are stronger in low-exposure than in high-exposure locations. Differences between relative
response rates in the lowest quartile and in the highest quartile are significant at p < .01
in the low-rent sample and at p < .01 in the high-rent sample.
     Estimates in Panel C compare response rates among properties that are matched
on price as well as housing/neighborhood characteristics that are visible to renters on
the search platform.19 These tests examine relative response rates among comparable
properties that are simultaneously listed for rent and therefore reflect exact differences
in comparable choices available to prospective renters in these markets at the time of
the experiment. Response rates at each level of toxics exposure (quartile) are estimated
relative to the most comparable properties at the other levels. 966 unmatched properties
are dropped from this test, reducing the sample size to 1,275. Response rates in the
matched test (62%) are highly similar to those in the full sample test (59%) in the
lowest quartile of exposures, indicating that the relationship between choice constraints


19
 Housing characteristics include: rental price, bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage, and building type.
Neighborhood characteristics include: crime, nearby grocery stores, demographic composition of census
block group (share White, Black, Hispanic), poverty rate, unemployment rate, and share college educated.

                                                  13
and toxic concentrations is present when accounting for differences in other housing and
neighborhood characteristics. Estimates of response rates for the interquartile range of
concentrations are less precise, likely resulting from the sampling restriction. Differences
at the highest level of concentrations are somewhat smaller than, though not statistically
different from, the full sample test. The difference between relative response rates in
the lowest quartile and in the highest quartile of the matched sample are significant at
p < .01.



5     Conclusion

For over two decades, researchers have advanced a racial discrimination hypothesis to
explain the factors underlying the disparity in exposures to chemical toxics and other
harmful pollutants in the United States. However, no prior study has provided an empir-
ical test. This paper presents experimental evidence that racial discrimination constrains
the housing choices of minority households with respect to major polluting facilities in the
United States. We find that Hispanic/LatinX and African American renters face strong
discriminatory constraints when searching for housing that would limit their exposure to
emissions from major sources of chemical toxics in the US.
    When initiating a search in a market containing a major pollution source, discrimi-
natory behavior reduces the likelihood of response to minority renters with racially per-
ceptible names by 41% in low-exposure locations. Among African American renters, dis-
criminatory behavior reduces the likelihood of response by 55% and by 72% for African
American men. We find no evidence of discriminatory constraints operating in the high-
exposure zones of the same markets. The pattern holds in tests between properties that
are matched on comparable characteristics, in different segments of the rental price distri-
bution, and in neighborhoods with different shares of minority households. By reducing
the set of choices available in less polluted neighborhoods relative to more polluted ones,
choice constraints resulting from discriminatory behavior increase the cost of averting
prolonged exposures to chemical toxics and directly affect the welfare of households that



                                            14
value clean air.
   While the finding that discriminatory constraints are disproportionately stronger in
low-exposure zones is consistent across groups, our results indicate that discriminatory
constraints facing African American renters (especially men) impose higher opportu-
nity costs in all locations. Our tests reveal evidence of higher response rates for His-
panic/LatinX renters in high-exposure zones, indicating that discriminatory behavior
results in greater access to housing than to White renters in those zones. We find a par-
allel result for the full sample of minority identities in neighborhoods with high minority
shares or below-median rents. These results are consistent with statistical discrimination,
since property managers in these locations may view Hispanic/LatinX renters as most
likely to sign a lease or maximize returns from a response. They could also be driven by
racial animus, if property managers who favor these groups of renters disproportionately
operate in high-exposure locations.
   We emphasize the need for further study of the effects of discriminatory constraints
on the location choices of minority households and highlight four limitations of the cor-
respondence design to be addressed in future research. First, the present experimental
results are limited to listings that appear on a single rental housing platform. There is
evidence that digital platforms are used to initiate the majority of rental housing search
processes in the US, but the study does not account for sub-markets that are advertised
separately. Second, our estimates reflect the signal produced by a sample of names that
is designed to elicit racialized perceptions and allows for analysis of heterogeneity in the
effects by gender and maternal educational attainment. It is not representative of the
total population of renters in the United States. Third, correspondence research designs
do not capture discrimination in subsequent interactions that could further affect the
probability of a viable lease.
   Finally, the effects of constraints found in this study ultimately depend upon the
extent to which they bind on the decisions of minority households. While correspon-
dence designs provide important information on ex-ante constraints, they do not alone
provide information on the market outcomes of individuals that face discrimination. In


                                            15
ongoing research, we further examine interactions between discriminatory constraints
and incomes, neighborhood preferences, and additional factors that also contribute to
differential sorting behavior (Christensen and Timmins, 2020). In some settings, renters
may not search in neighborhoods where discriminatory constraints bind or may invest in
additional search to avoid adverse outcomes such as local pollution exposures. Data on
renter population distributions from the ACS provides evidence that minority households
sort across the full support of the distribution of pollution exposures in our study area
and tend to sort into neighborhoods with elevated exposures. This indicates that while
some minority households may structure their search or invest in additional search to
avoid high-exposure locations, others do not. These findings suggest that discriminatory
behavior increases the cost of avoiding harmful exposures and suggest that reducing ille-
gal discriminatory behavior could be important for reducing the racial gap in pollution
exposures in the US.




                                           16
References
Akbar, P. A., Li, S., Shertzer, A., and Walsh, R. P. (2019). Racial segregation in housing
 markets and the erosion of black wealth. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alexander, D. and Currie, J. (2017). Is it Who You Are or Where You Live? Residential
  Segregation and Racial Gaps in Childhood Asthma. Journal of Health Economics,
  55:186­200.
Aliprantis, D., Carroll, D., Young, E., et al. (2019). What explains neighborhood sorting
  by income and race? FRB of Cleveland WP 18-08R.
Apartments.com (2015). Online Search Behavior and Trends of Apartment Renters: A
 Joint Study by Apartments.com and Google. https://bit.ly/32eSzKc.
Ard, K. (2015). Trends in Exposure to Industrial Air Toxins for Different Racial and
  Socioeconomic Groups: A Spatial and Temporal Examination of Environmental In-
  equality in the US from 1995 to 2004. Social Science Research, 53:375­390.
Arrow, K. J. (1972). Some mathematical models of race discrimination in the labor
  market. In Pascal, A., editor, Racial Discrimination in Economic Life, pages 187­204.
  Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books.
Ash, M. and Fetter, T. R. (2004). Who Lives on the Wrong Side of the Environmental
  Tracks? Evidence from the EPA's Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators Model.
  Social Science Quarterly, 85(2):441­462.
Banzhaf, H. S. and Walsh, R. P. (2013). Segregation and tiebout sorting: The link be-
  tween place-based investments and neighborhood tipping. Journal of Urban Economics,
  74:83­98.
Banzhaf, S., Ma, L., and Timmins, C. (2019). Environmental Justice: The Economics of
  Race, Place, and Pollution. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1):185­208.
Barto s, V., Bauer, M., Chytilov´
                                a, J., and Mat ejka, F. (2016). Attention discrimina-
  tion: Theory and field experiments with monitoring information acquisition. American
  Economic Review, 106(6):1437­75.
Becker, G. S. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination: an Economic View of Racial
  Discrimination. University of Chicago.
Bertrand, M. and Duflo, E. (2017). Field Experiments on Discrimination. In Handbook
  of Economic Field Experiments, volume 1, pages 309­393. Elsevier.
Cameron, A. C. and Miller, D. L. (2015). A practitioner's guide to cluster-robust infer-
  ence. Journal of human resources, 50(2):317­372.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Jones, M. R., and Porter, S. R. (2018). Race and Economic
 Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective. National Bureau
 of Economic Research, Working Paper No. w24441.
Christensen, P., Sarmiento-Barbieri, I., and Timmins, C. (2018). The Impact of Hous-
 ing Discrimination on the Pollution Exposure Gap in the United States. AEA RCT
 Registry.

                                           17
Christensen, P. and Timmins, C. (2018). Sorting or Steering: Experimental Evidence on
 the Economic Effects of Housing Discrimination. NBER Working Paper No. w24826.

Christensen, P. and Timmins, C. (2020). Does Racial Bias Distort Neighborhood Choice?
 the Impacts of Discrimination on Renter Welfare and Revealed Preference in the Hous-
 ing Market. Working Paper.

Clark, L. P., Millet, D. B., and Marshall, J. D. (2017). Changes in transportation-related
  air pollution exposures by race-ethnicity and socioeconomic status: outdoor nitrogen
  dioxide in the united states in 2000 and 2010. Environmental Health Perspectives,
  125(9).

Collins, T. W., Grineski, S. E., and Chakraborty, J. (2015). Household-level disparities
  in cancer risks from vehicular air pollution in miami. Environmental Research Letters,
  10(9):095008.

Crabtree, C. and Chykina, V. (2018). Last name selection in audit studies. Sociological
  Science, 5:21­28.

Crowder, K. and Downey, L. (2010). Interneighborhood migration, race, and environ-
  mental hazards: Modeling microlevel processes of environmental inequality. American
  Journal of Sociology, 115(4):1110­1149.

Currie, J. (2009). Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Socioeconomic status, poor health in
 childhood, and human capital development. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1):87­
 122.

Currie, J. (2011). Inequality at Birth: Some causes and consequences. American Eco-
 nomic Review, 101(3):1­22.

Currie, J., Davis, L., Greenstone, M., and Walker, R. (2015). Environmental Health
 Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings.
 American Economic Review, 105(2):678­709.

Currie, J. and Neidell, M. (2005). Air Pollution and Infant Health: What can we
 learn from California's recent experience? The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 120(3):1003­1030.

Currie, J. and Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Fetal Exposures to Toxic Releases and Infant
 Health. American Economic Review, 99(2):177­83.

Currie, J. and Walker, R. (2011). Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
 E-ZPass. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1):65­90.

Cushing, L., Morello-Frosch, R., Wander, M., and Pastor, M. (2015). The haves, the
 have-nots, and the health of everyone: The Relationship Between Social Inequality
 and Environmental Quality. Annual Review of Public Health, 36:193­209.

Depro, B., Timmins, C., and O'Neil, M. (2015). White Flight and Coming to the Nui-
  sance: Can Residential Mobility Explain Environmental Injustice? Journal of the
  Association of Environmental and resource Economists, 2(3):439­468.



                                           18
Deryugina, T., Heutel, G., Miller, N. H., Molitor, D., and Reif, J. (2019). The mortality
  and medical costs of air pollution: Evidence from changes in wind direction. American
  Economic Review, 109(12):4178­4219.

EPA (2018). Epa's risk-screening environmental indicators (rsei) methodology rsei version
  2.3.7. Washington, DC.

EPA (2020a).          Tri compliance and enforcement.            https://www.epa.gov/
  toxics-release-inventory-tri-program/tri-compliance-and-enforcement.

EPA (2020b).          Understanding     rsei    results.     https://www.epa.gov/rsei/
  understanding-rsei-results#concs.

Ewens, M., Tomlin, B., and Wang, L. C. (2014). Statistical Discrimination or Prejudice?
 A Large Sample Field Experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1):119­134.

Fryer Jr, R. G. and Levitt, S. D. (2004). The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively
  Black Names. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3):767­805.

Gaddis, S. M. (2017a). How Black are Lakisha and Jamal? Racial perceptions from
 names used in correspondence audit studies. Sociological Science, 4:469­489.

Gaddis, S. M. (2017b). Racial/Ethnic Perceptions from Hispanic Names: Selecting Names
 to Test for Discrimination. Socius, 3:1­11.

Graham, B. S. (2018). Identifying and Estimating Neighborhood Effects. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 56(2):450­500.

Guryan, J. and Charles, K. K. (2013). Taste-Based or Statistical Discrimination: The
 Economics of Discrimination Returns to Its Roots. The Economic Journal, 123(572).

Hanson, A. and Hawley, Z. (2011). Do Landlords Discriminate in the Rental Housing
  Market? Evidence from an Internet Field Experiment in US Cities. Journal of Urban
  Economics, 70(2-3):99­114.

Hausman, C. and Stolper, S. (2019). Information and inequity: An Application to Envi-
  ronmental Quality. Working Paper.

Kline, P. and Santos, A. (2012). A score based approach to wild bootstrap inference.
  Journal of Econometric Methods, 1(1):23­41.

Kline, P. M. and Walters, C. R. (2020). Reasonable doubt: Experimental detection of
  job-level employment discrimination.

Logan, J. R. (2011). Separate and Unequal: The Neighborhood Gap for Blacks, Hispanics
  and Asians in Metropolitan America. Project US2010 Report, pages 1­22.

Mohai, P., 660-1809, ., and Roberts, J. T. (2009). Environmental Justice. Annual Review
 of Environment and Resources, 34:405­430.

Mohai, P. and Saha, R. (2015). Which came first, people or pollution? assessing the
 disparate siting and post-siting demographic change hypotheses of environmental in-
 justice. Environmental Research Letters, 10(11):115008.


                                           19
Morello-Frosch, R. and Jesdale, B. M. (2006). Separate and unequal: residential segrega-
 tion and estimated cancer risks associated with ambient air toxics in us metropolitan
 areas. Environmental health perspectives, 114(3):386.

Morello-Frosch, R., Pastor, M., and Sadd, J. (2001). Environmental justice and southern
 california's "riskscape" the distribution of air toxics exposures and health risks among
 diverse communities. Urban Affairs Review, 36(4):551­578.

Phillips, D. C. (2016). Do Comparisons of Fictional Applicants Measure Discrimination
  When Search Externalities are Present? Evidence from existing experiments. The
  Economic Journal.

Phillips, D. C. (2017). Landlords Avoid Tenants who Pay with Vouchers. Economics
  Letters, 151:48­52.

Rosofsky, A., Levy, J. I., Zanobetti, A., Janulewicz, P., and Fabian, M. P. (2018). Tem-
  poral trends in air pollution exposure inequality in massachusetts. Environmental
  Research, 161:76­86.

Shapiro, M. D. (2005). Equity and Information: Information Regulation, Environmental
  Justice, and Risks from Toxic Chemicals. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management:
  The Journal of the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, 24(2):373­
  398.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT
 press.




                                           20
Tables and Figures

Figure 1. ZIP Codes Within One Mile of a TRI Facility and Two Sample ZIP Code Maps




                               ZIP Codes Within One Mile of a TRI Facility




                      Sample ZIP A                                                Sample ZIP B

Note: Figure maps the 111 ZIP codes that are above the 80th percentile of TRI stack air releases, which are listed by
name in Table A1. The lower panel maps two sample ZIP codes that are included in the experimental sample. Grid cells
are shaded according to quartiles of RSEI toxic concentration. The blue rhomboids denote the location of TRI facilities.
Circular markers illustrate property listings where the experiment was conducted, with red markers illustrating the
sample of listings within one mile of a toxic plant and green markers denoting listings outside 1 mile. Refer to Figure A3
for full set of maps of ZIP codes in the experimental sample.




                                                           21
            Figure 2. Observed Exposure Gap and Renter Population Distribution




Note: Top panel plots differences in renter population shares in the highest quartile and interquartile range of toxic
concentration exposures relative to lowest quartile (omitted category) for each racial group. Points represent coefficients
with lines show 90% CI from the following regression: yij = 0 + 25-75 RSEI25-75 + 75-100 RSEI75-100 + j + ij ,
where yij is the inverse hyperbolic sine of renter population in block i from ZIP j . RSEI25-75 is an indicator that takes
the value one if the block is in the interquartile range and RSEI75-100 if in the highest quartile of exposures. j is a ZIP
code specific fixed effect. Histograms in the bottom 3 panels illustrates raw renter population shares by within-ZIP toxic
concentration exposure percentile. Vertical lines delineate bin definitions used in both panels. Data for renters in block
group comes from the 2016 ACS.




                                                           22
            Figure 3. Relative Response Rates by Within-ZIP Toxic Concentration
                                                 Panel A: Minority




                            Panel B: African American vs Hispanic/LatinX




                   (a) African American                                      (b) Hispanic/LatinX

                                            Panel C: Male vs Female




                            (c) Male                                                (d) Female

Note: Figure plots odds ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a within-property
conditional logit assuming a random utility model described in Eq. (1). Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code
level using a score wild bootstrap proposed by Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters. 90%
confidence intervals are plotted in grey. Refer to Table A6 and A12 for full set of point estimates and significance tests at
10%, 5% and 1% levels. All estimates are robust to inclusion/omission of controls. Rao score tests reject the equality of
coefficients between the lowest and highest quartiles in Panels A, B, and C. Panel A: (pval = 0.0002); Panel B:
(pval = 0.0001 and pval = 0.0015); Panel C: (pval = 0.0017 and pval = 0.0075). Rao score tests were performed using the
Stata boottest command to correct for the small number of clusters (Cameron and Miller, 2015).




                                                            23
            Figure 4. Relative Response Rates by Proximity to Closest TRI Plant
                                                 Panel A: Minority




                            Panel B: African American vs Hispanic/LatinX




                      (a) African American                                      (b) Hispanic/LatinX


Note: Figure plots odds ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a within-property
conditional logit assuming a random utility model described in Eq. (1). Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code
level using a score wild bootstrap proposed by Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters. 90%
confidence intervals are plotted in grey. Refer to Table A6 and A12 for full set of point estimates and significance tests at
10%, 5% and 1% levels. All estimates are robust to inclusion/omission of controls. Panel A shows odd ratio for minorities
relative to whites at different proximity bins from TRI plant: within one mile and more than a mile. A Rao score test of
equality between odds ratio rejects the null at the 10% level (pval = 0.0731). Panel B separates between African
American and Hispanic/LatinX, the Rao score test does not reject the equality of coefficients between proximity bins for
African Americans (pval = 0.2156), but does reject it for Hispanic/LatinX (pval = 0.0047). Rao score tests were
performed using the Stata boottest command to correct for the small number of clusters (Cameron and Miller, 2015).




                                                            24
           Figure 5. Relative Response Rates by Within-ZIP Toxic Concentration
                   Panel A: Demographic Composition, Above vs Below Minority Shares




              (A.1) Above Median Minority Share                       (A.2) Below Median Minority Share


                                     Panel B: Above vs Below Median Rent




                   (B.1) Above Median Rent                                 (B.2) Below Median Rent


                                         Panel C: Full vs Matched Sample




                       (C.1) Full Sample                                    (C.2) Matched Sample


Note: Figure plots odds ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a within-property
conditional logit assuming a random utility model described in Eq. (1). Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code
level using a score wild bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters 90%
confidence intervals are plotted in grey. All estimates are robust to inclusion/omission of controls. Panel A reports odd
ratios for minorities relative to whites at different levels of within ZIP RSEI measure of toxic concentrations and by
neighborhood racial composition. A Rao score test of equality of coefficients in the lowest and highest quartile of toxic
concentration rejects the null for listings in above median minority share neighborhoods (pval = 0.04) and below median
minority share neighborhoods (pval = 0.0001). Panel B divides listings that fall above or below the median rental price
within a ZIP code. The Rao score test rejects the equality of coefficients between the lowest and highest quartiles of
exposure in both groups (pval = 0.008 and pval = 0.08). Panel C compares results between our full set shown in Figure 3
panel A and with properties that are matched on price as well as housing/neighborhood characteristics that are visible to
renters on the search platform. The Rao score test rejects the equality between the odds of the lowest quartile and
highest quartile in the matched sample (pval = 0.0019). Rao score tests were performed using the Stata boottest
command to correct for the small number of clusters (Cameron and Miller, 2015).




                                                          25
Appendix

A1        Experimental Design: Sample of Housing Mar-
          kets and Rental Properties
The study focuses on exposures to toxic emissions reported in the Toxic Release Inventory
(TRI), which identifies the exact location of major point sources in housing markets
throughout the United States. Based on prior research reported in Currie et al. (2015),
we define a potential study area that consists of all ZIP codes that contain at least one
high-emitting TRI facility, defined using stack air emissions above the 80th percentile,
located within one mile of a residential neighborhood. We use the 80th percentile of
facilities to guarantee sufficient variation in toxic concentrations within a ZIP code and
note that our findings are therefore representative of markets with major point sources
of chemical toxics. Table A1 lists the 111 ZIP codes that contain a high-emitting facility
and at least 150 rental housing listings at the time of sample construction in September
2018.
                     Table A1. Zip Codes within One Mile of a Toxic Plant
   Zip code               City, State      Zip code             City, State     Zip code              City, State
      35215          Birmingham, AL           60641             Chicago, IL        12866     Saratoga Springs, NY
      85281                Tempe, AZ          60617             Chicago, IL        10012           New York, NY
      85705                Tucson, AZ         60657             Chicago, IL        10009           New York, NY
      92118             Coronado, CA          60617             Chicago, IL        10028           New York, NY
      92672         San Clemente, CA          60616             Chicago, IL        10010           New York, NY
      92101            San Diego, CA          60623             Chicago, IL        10016           New York, NY
      92037               La Jolla, CA        61820          Champaign, IL         11206            Brooklyn, NY
      90802           Long Beach, CA          60618             Chicago, IL        10021           New York, NY
      80210                Denver, CO         60615             Chicago, IL        11238            Brooklyn, NY
      80211                Denver, CO         60613             Chicago, IL        43201           Columbus, OH
      20002           Washington, DC          60624             Chicago, IL        44107           Lakewood, OH
      20001           Washington, DC          60647             Chicago, IL        73505              Lawton, OK
      20009           Washington, DC          60651             Chicago, IL        19146         Philadelphia, PA
      33021            Hollywood, FL          60619             Chicago, IL        19147         Philadelphia, PA
      33025            Hollywood, FL          47906      West Lafayette, IN        19128         Philadelphia, PA
      33312       Fort Lauderdale, FL         70118        New Orleans, LA         19148         Philadelphia, PA
      33404      West Palm Beach, FL          70115        New Orleans, LA         19145         Philadelphia, PA
      33410      West Palm Beach, FL          21224          Baltimore, MD         29403           Charleston, SC
      32169     New Smyrna Beach, FL          21201          Baltimore, MD         37040           Clarksville, TN
      33418      West Palm Beach, FL          21230          Baltimore, MD         37042           Clarksville, TN
      33602                Tampa, FL          21229          Baltimore, MD         37042           Clarksville, TN
      33178                 Miami, FL         49503      Grand Rapids, MI          76549              Killeen, TX
      33179                 Miami, FL         63118        Saint Louis, MO         78666          San Marcos, TX
      34243               Sarasota, FL        63118        Saint Louis, MO         79938              El Paso, TX
      33019            Hollywood, FL          58103               Fargo, ND        79936              El Paso, TX
      33018                Hialeah, FL        88101              Clovis, NM        77007             Houston, TX
      33301       Fort Lauderdale, FL         10002          New York, NY          76543              Killeen, TX
      33480           Palm Beach, FL          11211           Brooklyn, NY         78130       New Braunfels, TX
      33033            Homestead, FL          11101    Long Island City, NY        77479          Sugar Land, TX
      33407      West Palm Beach, FL          11217           Brooklyn, NY         77450                Katy , TX
      33316       Fort Lauderdale, FL         11222           Brooklyn, NY         77054             Houston, TX
      33020            Hollywood, FL          10022          New York, NY          77479          Sugar Land, TX
      30906              Augusta, GA          11201           Brooklyn, NY         54751          Menomonie, WI
      30309               Atlanta, GA         11205           Brooklyn, NY         54901             Oshkosh, WI
      52240              Iowa City, IA        10065          New York, NY          53202           Milwaukee, WI
      60614                Chicago, IL        10003          New York, NY          53212           Milwaukee, WI
      60608                Chicago, IL        10314       Staten Island, NY        26505        Morgantown, WV
  Note: Sample of zip codes with reported emissions that fall above the 80th percentile of the TRI, which constitute
  potential zip codes in the study.


   Figure 1 maps the ZIP codes with high emitting facilities. We select a random sample

                                                  Appendix­1
of ZIP codes from this set and compile the full set of property listings in each ZIP. We
exclude ZIP codes that do not have at least 30% of listings within and at least 30% of
listings beyond 1 mile of a facility, which is necessary to ensure the statistical power
of tests for discriminatory response by exposure zone/level. ZIP codes were sampled at
random until the total sample of listings matched the number that was suggested by
ex-ante power calculations (2400-2700 listings). The full experimental sample includes
2,918 listings distributed across 19 ZIP codes. Of the total sample, 3 ZIP code trials
were dropped as a result of small samples of listings when the trial was run (less than 30
listings) and 2 were dropped as a result of concern about rate limiting practices on the
online platform during the associated trials. Rate limiting can affect experimental results
by reducing the likelihood that property managers receive an inquiry and artificially
lowering average response rates. We report estimates from the full sample of listings in
Figures A1 and A2. Point estimates are consistent with the primary results, although
the estimates are somewhat less precise. After removing the rate-limited trials from the
dataset, the resulting sample includes 2,241 listings distributed across 14 ZIP codes.


          Figure A1. Relative Response Rates by Within-ZIP Toxic Concentration
                            Full Set of Experimental ZIP Codes
                                                Panel A: Minority




                            Panel B: African American vs Hispanic/LatinX




                      (a) African American                                 (b) Hispanic/LatinX

Note: The sample adds 3 ZIP code trials that where dropped as a result of small samples of listings when the trial was
run (less than 30 listings) and 2 were dropped as a result of concern about rate limiting practices. The figure plots odds
ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a within-property conditional logit assuming a
random utility model described in Eq. (1). Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code level using a score wild
bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters. 90% confidence intervals are
plotted in grey. All estimates are robust to inclusion/omission of controls.




                                                     Appendix­2
           Figure A2. Relative Response Rates by Proximity to Closest TRI Plant
                            Full Set of Experimental ZIP Codes
                                                Panel A: Minority




                            Panel B: African American vs Hispanic/LatinX




                      (a) African American                                 (b) Hispanic/LatinX

Note: The sample adds 3 ZIP code trials that where dropped as a result of small samples of listings when the trial was
run (less than 30 listings) and 2 were dropped as a result of concern about rate limiting practices. The figure plots odds
ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a within-property conditional logit assuming a
random utility model described in Eq. (1). Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code level using a score wild
bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters. All estimates are robust to
inclusion/omission of controls.


    We define the level of exposure for each of the properties within the resulting sam-
ple based on their ambient concentrations of toxic pollutants using the Risk Screening
Environmental Indicators (RSEI) measure developed by the US Environmental Protec-
tion Agency. Facilities report stack and fugitive air releases, direct water releases, and
transfers to publicly-owned treatment works to the TRI in pounds per year. Aggregate
concentrations in the RSEI model include the fate and transport of all chemical releases
in the TRI and apply an inhalation toxicity weight. Direct water releases and transfers to
publicly-owned treatment works (POTWs) use the higher of the oral slope factor toxicity
weight or the reference dose toxicity weight for the chemical. Air releases and off-site
transfers to incineration use the higher of the inhalation unit risk toxicity weight or the
reference concentration toxicity weight. Figure A3 maps the locations of properties with
respect to high-emitting facilities and gridded measures of concentrations from the RSEI
model.




                                                     Appendix­3
                                  Figure A3. ZIP Codes in Experiment




Note: Figure shows ZIP codes where the experiment was conducted. Shades of purple denote the quartiles of RSEI toxic
concentration. The blue rhomboids denote the location of TRI plants. Circular markers illustrate property listings where
the experiment was conducted, with red markers illustrating the sample of listings within one mile of a toxic plant and
green markers denoting listings outside 1 mile.


                                                    Appendix­4
                              Figure A3.(cont.) ZIP Codes in Experiment




Note: Figure shows ZIP codes where the experiment was conducted. Shades of purple denote the quartiles of RSEI toxic
concentration. The blue rhomboids denote the location of TRI plants. Circular markers illustrate property listings where
the experiment was conducted, with red markers illustrating the sample of listings within one mile of a toxic plant and
green markers denoting listings outside 1 mile.


    We use a measure of concentrations from the RSEI model that correspond to TRI
emissions in 2016, which is the most recent available data. The experimental was con-
ducted during 2018-2019. In order to evaluate the time-consistency of RSEI estimates, we
analyze the correlation between observations in the percentile of exposure in our study
area using the RSEI measure of concentrations during the 3-year period from 2014 to
2016. We find a correlation of over 90% across the 3-year period.
    We study the relationship between housing discrimination in high/low-exposure zones
using the definition of a high-exposure area (within a mile of the toxic plant) that is
consistent with prior evidence of gestational and birth-weight effects resulting from in
utero exposures (Currie et al., 2015). Figure A4 plots the distribution of properties that
are located within vs. outside 1 mile of a TRI facility for each quantile of within-ZIP toxics
concentrations (RSEI). It is clear that the majority of properties in the upper quartile
of concentrations are located within 1 mile of a facility and the majority of properties
in the lowest quartile are located beyond 1 mile. The distribution of properties in the
interquartile range of RSEI concentrations are relatively evenly located within/beyond 1
mile. The figure also illustrates that proximity is not a perfect measure of exposure in
the sample, as there are some properties located within 1 mile that have low levels of
exposure and vice versa.




                                                    Appendix­5
     Figure A4. Listings Within-ZIP RSEI Toxic Concentration and Proximity to closest
                                          TRI




Note: Figure plots the number of listings by distance to TRI plant and percentiles of within-ZIP toxic concentrations in
the sample. Dotted vertical line denotes the one mile threshold used to estimate differences.


    Table A2 details the characteristics of properties at different levels of concentrations
as well as reporting tests for within-ZIP differences in property/neighborhood character-
istics. On average, toxic concentrations for properties in the highest quartile are 2,786
points higher than those in the lowest quartile. The RSEI cancer scores for these prop-
erties are 2.7 points higher and the non-cancer scores are 4.2 points higher.20 We also
find significant differences in the rental prices and housing/neighborhood characteristics
of properties in the different quartiles. Properties in the highest quartile are 10% less
likely to be a single-family residence and more likely to be an apartment in a multi-family
building. The rental prices of properties at higher concentrations are $278/month lower
than properties at lower exposures. On average, they tend to have 0.13 fewer bedrooms.
They also tend to be located in neighborhoods with fewer grocery stores, lower shares
of Hispanic and White residents, but higher shares of African American residents. On
average, they have higher poverty rates and higher shares of college educated residents.




20
 Toxic concentration is the sum of the chemical concentrations in a grid cell weighted by inhalation toxi-
city. Toxic concentrations are modeled using AERMOD, which incorporates information about facilities
(location, stack height, etc.), meteorology (wind, wind direction, and ambient temperature), chemical
concentration and specific decay rates. Inhalation toxicity weights are "a proportional system of nu-
merical weights that reflect the toxicities of chemicals relative to one another. The toxicity weights of
chemicals increase as the toxicological potential to cause chronic human health effects increases."(EPA,
2018) Toxic concentrations are particularly useful for "comparing levels of potential impact between
geographic areas"(EPA, 2020b). Cancer and Non Cancer scores are unitless measures provided in RSEI.
These measure separately the chemical's toxicity for carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic effects. These also
include the size and location of the exposed population. Toxic concentrations, unlike cancer and cancer
scores, excludes population from the calculations, which allows identifying sparsely populated areas with
high toxic concentrations.

                                                    Appendix­6
                  Table A2. Property and Neighborhood Descriptive Statistics

                                                     Percentiles of Within-Zip Toxic Concentration
                                         0th-25th       25th-75th      75th-100th     Within-Zip Differences
                                            (1)             (2)            (3)         (2)-(1)     (3)-(1)
        Toxic Concentration (1000)         11.903          19.730        30.604      0.495***      0.569***
                                          (11.987)        (23.091)      (46.262)      (0.495)       (0.569)
        Cancer Score                        5.759           7.871        10.361      0.227***      0.260***
                                           (9.591)        (11.310)      (15.157)      (0.227)       (0.260)
        Non Cancer Score                    3.231           5.791         6.273      0.263***      0.303***
                                          (10.368)        (13.041)      (12.170)      (0.263)       (0.303)
        Rent (1000)                         2.235           1.703         1.840      0.038***      0.044***
                                           (2.436)         (1.335)       (1.549)      (0.038)       (0.044)
        Single Family Home                  0.213           0.171         0.114      0.011***      0.012***
                                           (0.410)         (0.376)       (0.318)      (0.011)       (0.012)
        Apartment                           0.128           0.131         0.152        0.010        0.011**
                                           (0.335)         (0.338)       (0.359)      (0.010)       (0.011)
        Multi Family                        0.490           0.523         0.577        0.013*      0.015***
                                           (0.500)         (0.500)       (0.494)      (0.013)       (0.015)
        Other Bldg. Type                    0.168           0.175         0.157      0.009***        0.010
                                           (0.374)         (0.380)       (0.364)      (0.009)       (0.010)
        Bedrooms                            2.435           2.267         2.331      0.029***      0.033***
                                           (1.129)         (0.981)       (0.934)      (0.029)       (0.033)
        Bathrooms                           1.540           1.425         1.485      0.018***        0.021
                                           (0.764)         (0.630)       (0.640)      (0.018)       (0.021)
        Sqft.                             716.327         749.188       694.330       21.817        25.083
                                         (730.209)       (759.089)     (756.266)     (21.817)      (25.083)
        Assault                           220.546         183.757       253.292      4.140***        4.756
                                         (319.979)       (272.190)     (387.808)      (4.140)       (4.756)
        Groceries                          31.926          25.144        28.438       0.366**      0.420***
                                          (44.011)        (22.791)      (35.535)      (0.366)       (0.420)
        Share of Hispanics                  0.101           0.131         0.089      0.005***      0.005***
                                           (0.163)         (0.208)       (0.130)      (0.005)       (0.005)
        Share of African American           0.208           0.233         0.299      0.007***      0.008***
                                           (0.271)         (0.286)       (0.337)      (0.007)       (0.008)
        Share of Whites                     0.687           0.643         0.612      0.006***      0.007***
                                           (0.274)         (0.270)       (0.316)      (0.006)       (0.007)
        Poverty Rate                        0.238           0.291         0.274      0.005***      0.005***
                                           (0.206)         (0.219)       (0.228)      (0.005)       (0.005)
        Unemployment Rate                   0.084           0.087         0.093        0.002         0.002
                                           (0.079)         (0.083)       (0.099)      (0.002)       (0.002)
        Share of College Educated           0.286           0.264         0.281      0.004***      0.004***
                                           (0.155)         (0.149)       (0.182)      (0.004)       (0.004)

        Observations                       1,800          3,342          1,581
        Listings                            600           1,114           527

         Notes: Table shows mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of property and neighborhood
        characteristics for the experimental data for listings by percentile of within-zip toxic concentration.
        Share of Hispanic, African American, White, poverty rate, unemployment rate, and share of college
        educated are measured at the block group level and come from the ACS 2015.



A1.1      Correspondence Research Design
In a correspondence experiment, a researcher elicits racialized perceptions in a trial by
constructing fictitious identities and experimentally varying a single trait (Bertrand and
Duflo, 2017). The majority of correspondence research has focused on the use of racially
distinct names as the trait used to elicit discriminatory behavior. While there are limita-
tions associated with the use of any one particular trait, the consistent use of this design
has enabled researchers to learn about racial perceptions of names across studies as well
as in the general population. Correspondence studies select names that are likely to elicit
behavior, such that the resulting actions can be clearly attributed to racialized percep-
tions. These names that are not necessarily representative of names in the population at
large. Multiple randomized experiments have focused exclusively on the alignment be-


                                                     Appendix­7
tween perceived associations with an ethnic/racial group and self-identified racial identity
(Crabtree and Chykina, 2018, Gaddis, 2017a,b).
    A concern that arises in both audit and correspondence studies is the potential for
those being audited to check the online profile of the tester or fictitious applicant. Nearly
all correspondence studies rely on the assumption that online search tools will not affect
the interpretation of results. The extent to which this assumption holds may vary across
different settings. We highlight the following features of the present setting in this regard:
(1) Our correspondence design focuses on the first contact in a housing search, where the
returns to learning about a respondent are low. We might expect online research to occur
in later stages of contact.
(2) Our study utilizes names that are sampled from the highest percentiles of the distri-
bution of each of three racial groups. By construction, these very common names will
be linked to many possible online identities. For example, if a property manager were to
conduct a google search of one of our fictitious identities, they would retrieve results like:
this example. It is likely that a large fraction of the renter population also has a weak
online presence. We assume that the likelihood that property managers will be affected
by (the absence of) identifiable online information is low.

Name Selection
First names are taken from the work of Gaddis (2017a,b), which experimentally tests for
congruence between the statistical distribution in birth records and the probability of
external classification by survey respondents. Gaddis describes the selection procedure:

      "I selected names for this study using New York state birth record data for
      all births from 1994 to 2012 obtained from the New York State Department
      of Health to examine population-level race and SES characteristics. These
      data separately list the total number of births by (1) name and mother's race
      and (2) name and mother's education. This data structure allowed me, for
      example, to choose two names similar in terms of mother's race but different
      in terms of mother's education-in other words, a black lower-SES name and
      a black middle- to upper-SES name. Two examples used in this study are
      DaQuan and Jabari; 91.8 percent of children named DaQuan and 92.1 percent
      of children named Jabari are born to black mothers. These names are equal
      in blackness but vary by mother's education; only 12.8 percent of mothers
      who name their child DaQuan have some college or more education, whereas
      56.8 percent of mothers who name their child Jabari have some college or
      more education. Additionally, when possible, I selected names that were used
      in previous or ongoing audit studies from different disciplines (e.g., Bertrand
      and Mullainathan 2004; Gaddis 2015; Milkman et al. 2012)."

    Gaddis finds congruence rates of 75%, 75.5%, and 87.3%, respectively, for African
American, Hispanic, and White first names. When last names are included, Gaddis finds
that congruence rates increase to 82.5%, 97.3%, and 92.4% for African American, His-
panic, and White first-last name pairs, respectively. Gaddis also shows that congruence
rates for all groups decline when first names are (mis)matched with last names from a
different group. Based on this evidence, we select first-last name pairs that are shown
to have a high probability of eliciting racially congruent perceptions. Panel A of Table
A3 reports the identification rates from Gaddis (2017a,b) for the specific subset of first

                                        Appendix­8
names that we use in the present study. In every case, congruence rates increase with
the inclusion of a correctly matched last name. Panel B reports the set of last names
used in our study and examined in Gaddis (2017a,b), which were generated using the
distribution from the 2010 Census. See notes in Table A3 for the exact set of first-last
name pairs in the study.
    The birth record data used in Gaddis (2017a) cover the years 1994 to 2012, making
them relevant for renters under age 25 as of the time of our study. Gaddis (2017a) explains
the choice to use the full set of NY birth data in his study, rather than constrain the
dataset to an age range that is more likely to have entered the rental housing market or
labor market (i.e. 18-25). Gaddis (2017a) does not provide an analysis of differences in the
frequency of occurrence of names in early years (i.e. 1994-2001) and later years (i.e. 2002-
2012) of birth records. Given that this study is designed to guide correspondence research,
we assume that differences are not substantial. Gaddis (2017a) also discusses potential
heterogeneity in names used across regions: "Although racial and SES-based naming
practices may vary somewhat across regions, the question of importance is whether racial
perceptions from names vary across regions. In supplemental analyses, I test whether
respondents from New York vary from respondents in the rest of the United States. I
find no substantive differences in these analyses, suggesting that the use of New York
data likely has no significant bearing on the results (footnote 4, pp. 484-485)."

A1.2       Randomization Protocol and Response Coding
The research design simulates a housing search using all available listings in a ZIP code
at a given time and is therefore reflective of the true set of options available in the given
online market. By generating within-property estimates of response for each racial group,
we can more directly examine the effect of discriminatory constraints on each choice set
in the sample.
    Immediately following the compilation of the relevant listings in a given market, a
name is randomly drawn and assigned from each of three racial groups. Each rental
apartment therefore receives a sequence of three separate inquiries in the course of an
experimental trial (one from each group). The sequence of inquiries from the different
race groups is randomized and inquiries for the same listing are never sent from two race
groups on the same day. Responses from property managers are transmitted via email
(gmail address associated with each name), phone messages (individual phone numbers
associated with each name), and text messages. The content of phone, text, and email
responses from property managers are recorded by a team of human coders to ensure the
quality of the data. They are coded using two criteria that determine whether or not a
response indicates that a housing choice is made available to a prospective renter: (1) a
response is received within 7 days of the associated inquiry and (2) the response indicates
that the property is available for rent.21




21
 Further details on inquiry response time are provided in Figure A5. 52% of responses are received
within the first 8 hours of an inquiry, 74% are received within 24 hours and 98% are received within 5
days.

                                            Appendix­9
      Table A3. Identification Rates for First Names and Last Name Frequencies

                            Panel A. Identification Rates from Gaddis (2017a,b) (%)
      Race                  First                  No                Last Name             Quartile
                            Name               Last Name              Included         mother's education
      African American      Nia                    41                    65                    High
      African American      Jalen                  63                    71                    High
      African American      Ebony                  91                    95                    Med
      African American      Lamar                  88                    94                    Med
      African American      Shanice                93                    92                    Low
      African American      DaQuan                 91                    96                    Low
      Hispanic/LatinX       Isabella               48                    98                    High
      Hispanic/LatinX       Jorge                  86                    98                    High
      Hispanic/LatinX       Mariana                78                    99                    Med
      Hispanic/LatinX       Pedro                  98                    99                    Med
      Hispanic/LatinX       Jimena                 49                    97                    Low
      Hispanic/LatinX       Luis                   83                    99                    Low
      White                 Aubrey                 90                    93                    High
      White                 Caleb                  77                    84                    High
      White                 Erica                  82                    93                    Med
      White                 Charlie                86                    91                    Med
      White                 Leslie                 72                    93                    Low
      White                 Ronnie                 71                    89                    Low
                       Panel B. Last Names Frequency of Occurrence in 2010 Census (%)
      Race                 Last Name     African American     Hispanic/LatinX                 White
      African American      Harris                42.4                   2.3                   51.4
      African American      Jackson               53.0                   2.5                   39.9
      African American      James                 38.9                   3.1                   51.6
      African American      Williams              47.7                   2.5                   45.8
      African American      Thomas                38.8                   2.5                   52.6
      African American      Robinson              44.9                   2.6                   48.7
      Hispanic/LatinX       Lopez                  0.6                  92.9                    4.9
      Hispanic/LatinX       Rodriguez              0.5                  93.8                    4.8
      Hispanic/LatinX       Morales                0.6                  93.2                    4.6
      Hispanic/LatinX       Sanchez                0.5                  93.0                    5.0
      Hispanic/LatinX       Ramirez                0.3                  94.5                    3.9
      Hispanic/LatinX       Torres                0.6                   92.2                    5.4
      White                 Murphy                11.5                   2.3                   83.1
      White                 Peterson              10.1                   2.4                   84.4
      White                 Cox                   12.1                   2.3                   82.6
      White                 Myers                 10.5                   2.1                   84.5
      White                 Wood                  5.6                   2.4                    88.7
      White                 Miller                10.8                  2.2                    84.1

      Notes: In the paper we use the following first-last pairs; Nia Harris, Jalen Jackson, Ebony James, Lamar
      Williams, Shanice Thomas, DaQuan Robinson, Isabella Lopez, Jorge Rodriguez, Mariana Morales, Pedro
      Sanchez, Jimena Ramirez, Luis Torres, Aubrey Murphy, Caleb Peterson, Erica Cox, Charlie Myers, Leslie
      Wood, Ronnie Miller.


   Figure A5 plots the distribution of inquiry response time in the sample: 52% of
responses are received within the first 8 hours of an inquiry, 74% are received within 24
hours and 98% are received within 5 days. The 7-day cutoff is used to restrict responses
that may be received weeks or months after an inquiry and are not counted as choices in
the study. Discriminatory constraints are expressed in terms of relative response rates,
which measure the within-property difference in access to a housing choice. Relative
response rates are estimated relative to an inquiry made to the same property from a
White identity.




                                                Appendix­10
                          Figure A5. Days between Inquiry and Response




Note: Figure plots times elapsed between inquiries and responses in the sample using the timestamp given at the moment
that an inquiry is sent and the timestamp given on the phone, email, or text response.



A1.3        Estimating Housing Discrimination
We estimate housing discrimination using a within listing conditional logit model. The
conditional logit model emerges from modeling the decisions of landors using a linear
random utility expression with iid errors that follow a type I extreme value distribution.
We assume that the utility of a landlord listing property i choosing to respond to a renter
j is:


                             uij = Racej + Xj + Zi +                  ij   j = 0, 1, 2                            (2)

where the variables are those defined in Section 3. Denoting yi = argmax(ui1 , . . . , uiJ )
the choice of landlord listing property i that maximizes utility and assuming that ij
are iid type I extreme value implies that ijn = ij - in follows a logistic distribution
j = n. Then the probability of response for the ith property in the kth percentile of
toxic concentration choosing to respond to an identity of race j is given by22


                                               exp(k Racej × 1[i  bk ] + Xj )
                        P (yij = 1) =         J
                                                                                                                  (3)
                                              h=0   exp(k Raceh × 1[i  bk ] + Xh )

Note that any listing-invariant characteristics (Zi ) drop out.23 . Parameters k and  can
22
   A limitation of the conditional logit is that it assumes IIA. That is we assume that the relative probability
 between, say African Americans and Whites, depend only on the attributes of those two alternatives
 and not on the third alternative, i.e. Hispanic/LatinX. We test the IIA assumption using a Hausman
 test (Wooldridge, 2010); results show no differences between a full model and one focused on a subset of
 alternatives, suggesting that IIA is likely to hold. p-values for a full set of alternatives, identities, and
 only the subset that includes the White and the African American identities is .94. For the subset that
 includes only the White and the Hispanic/LatinX identities, the value is 0.18).
23
   Note that this also implies that landlords choosing to respond to all identities, or none, drop out of the

                                                  Appendix­11
be estimated by maximum likelihood. Our interest is with k , and we report the odds
ratio of relative responses for Minority (treatment), relative to an inquiry made to the
same listing (i) from a White identity for each within-zip code toxic concentration bin
(b). So from (3), the relative odds of choosing a Minority over a White identity is


                   P r(yi,M inority = 1)   exp(k M inority × 1[i  bk ] + Xj )
                                         =                                                             (4)
                    P r(yi,W hite = 1)      exp(k W hite × 1[i  bk ] + Xj )

We normalize the utility of choosing the White identity to zero.

                                    P r(yi,M inority = 1)
                                                          = exp(k )                                    (5)
                                     P r(yi,W hite = 1)

exp(k ) then is the odds ratio, the odds that a Minority identity receives a response
relative to a White identity from a listing i in exposure area k .

                             Table A4. Overall Discrimination Rates

                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                                Response
                                                          (1)                 (2)
                        Minority                       0.7673**
                                                    (0.6387,0.9217)
                        African American                                   0.6016***
                                                                        (0.4607,0.7855)
                        Hispanic                                             0.9748
                                                                        (0.8423,1.1282)
                        Mean Response (White)             0.39                0.39
                        Gender                            Yes                 Yes
                        Education Level                   Yes                 Yes
                        Inquiry Order                     Yes                 Yes
                        Observations                     6,723               6,723
                        Listings                         2,241               2,241
                        % w. diff. response               0.41                0.41

                         Notes: Table reports odds ratios from a within-property condi-
                        tional logit. Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code level
                        using a score wild bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012)
                        to account for the small number of clusters. 90% confidence in-
                        tervals reported in parentheses.*P < 10% level, **P < 5% level,
                        ***P < 1% level.


    Table A4 reports the average response rate for inquiries made from a Hispanic or
African American identity. Column 1 reports a relative response rate of 77% for the
full set of minority identities in the sample, indicating that an inquiry made for the
average listed property is 23% less likely to yield a housing choice when sent from a
minority identity. The estimates in column 2 show that discriminatory constraints for
the average home vary substantially between African American and Hispanic/LatinX
renter identities. While inquiries made from African American identities are 60% less
likely to yield a choice, there is no statistical difference in response to Hispanic/LatinX
identities on average.



likelihood. These are 60% of the listings ­ i.e. 41% of listings have differential response as is indicated
in the Appendix tables

                                               Appendix­12
                                    Table A5. Balance Statistics

                                               Dependent variable: Response
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)
                Panel A: Inquiry Order
                                      First        Second       Third

              African American       -0.0683         0.0343     0.0340
                                    (0.0307)       (0.0248)    (0.0293)
              Hispanic/LatinX        -0.0316        -0.0313     0.0630
                                    (0.0161)       (0.0311)    (0.0292)


                Panel B: Evidence of Differential Choices by Weekday

                                      Mon            Tue        Wed            Thurs       Fri

              African American       -0.0583        0.0222       0.0316        -0.0801    0.0561
                                    (0.0527)       (0.0651)    (0.0381)       (0.0554)   (0.0671)
              Hispanic/LatinX        -0.0550        0.0149      -0.0071        -0.0677    0.0734
                                    (0.0439)       (0.0614)    (0.0585)       (0.0764)   (0.0523)


                Panel C: Gender and Mother's Education Level
                                              Gender                    Mother's Education
                                      Male         Female        Low        Medium         High

              African American       -0.0448        0.0448      -0.0753        -0.0973   0.1529**
                                    (0.0599)       (0.0599)    (0.0477)       (0.0640)   (0.0616)
              Hispanic/LatinX        -0.0896        0.0896      0.0518         0.0605     -0.1046
                                    (0.0603)       (0.0603)    (0.0716)       (0.0515)   (0.1034)

              Observations           6,723          6,723       6,723          6,723      6,723
              Listings               2,241          2,241       2,241          2,241      2,241

               Notes: Table reports balance statistics for the experimental data set. It shows the
              coefficients of logistic regression on different outcomes. In Panel A, the dependent
              variable takes 1 or 0 depending the order in which the inquiry was sent out, i.e. in
              Column (1) takes 1 if the inquiry was sent first and 0 otherwise. In Panel B, takes
              1 or 0 depending the weekday the inquiry was sent. Panel C, does the same for
              male and females, and levels of maternal education. Standard errors are clustered
              at the ZIP code level using a score wild bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012)
              to account for the small number of clusters. *P < 10% level, **P < 5% level,
              ***P < 1% level.


    Table A5 reports balance statistics for our experimental dataset. We note that some
differences in name pairs or timing can occur if a listing is taken offline during a trial. We
do not find any evidence of differences in the sequence of inquiries or the day of week, or
the frequency of names associated with a given race-gender pair. We detect a small dif-
ference in the frequency of inquiries associated with different levels of maternal education
­ African American names associated with higher maternal education are slightly more
common in our trials and Hispanic/LatinX names with high levels of maternal education
are slightly less common in our trials. These variables are used as controls in our tests.
Columns 1-4 of Table A6 report results with successive sets of controls, which indicate
that there is no difference in estimates that include or omit the maternal education or
other controls.




                                                 Appendix­13
            Table A6. Estimates of Discriminatory Constraint on Housing Choice:
                                     Varying Controls

                                                                           Dependent variable: Response
                                                            (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)

 Panel A: Quartiles of RSEI Toxic Concentration
 Panel A.1.: Minority

 Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration               0.5830***         0.5860***          0.5804***         0.5939***
                                                      (0.4597,0.7395)   (0.4607,0.7454)    (0.4516,0.7458)   (0.4510,0.7820)
 Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration               0.7033**          0.7124**           0.7114**          0.7059**
                                                      (0.5464,0.9052)   (0.5601,0.9061)    (0.5617,0.9010)   (0.5541,0.8994)
 Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration               1.1857            1.1850             1.1872            1.1542
                                                      (0.9182,1.5310)   (0.9323,1.5063)    (0.9398,1.4997)   (0.9014,1.4781)
 Panel A.2.: By Race

 Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration           0.4560***         0.4519***          0.4419***         0.4456***
                                                      (0.3378,0.6154)   (0.3345,0.6106)    (0.3248,0.6012)   (0.3209,0.6187)
 Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration           0.5299**          0.5411**          0.5386***         0.5380***
                                                      (0.3628,0.7739)   (0.3758,0.7792)    (0.3782,0.7670)   (0.3802,0.7614)
 Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration           1.0265            1.0273             1.0230            0.9912
                                                      (0.7436,1.4172)   (0.7545,1.3987)    (0.7584,1.3799)   (0.7392,1.3292)
 Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration        0.7399**          0.7515**           0.7487**           0.7771*
                                                      (0.5946,0.9206)   (0.6029,0.9368)    (0.5909,0.9487)   (0.6066,0.9957)
 Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration         0.9228            0.9252             0.9251            0.9240
                                                      (0.7971,1.0683)   (0.8036,1.0652)    (0.7994,1.0705)   (0.7833,1.0901)
 Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration       1.3728*           1.3694*            1.3792*            1.3416
                                                      (1.0224,1.8432)   (1.0323,1.8166)    (1.0411,1.8270)   (0.9831,1.8309)

 Panel B: Proximity to TRI Plant
 Panel B.1.: Minority

 TRI plant less than 1 mile × Minority                     0.8940            0.9056             0.9053            0.8877
                                                      (0.6981,1.1449)   (0.7153,1.1465)    (0.7149,1.1464)   (0.6897,1.1426)
 TRI plant more than 1 mile × Minority                   0.6576***         0.6581***          0.6554***         0.6618***
                                                      (0.5235,0.8260)   (0.5293,0.8181)    (0.5245,0.8189)   (0.5275,0.8302)
 Panel B.2.: By Race

 TRI plant less than 1 mile × African American             0.6999            0.7140             0.7099            0.6910
                                                      (0.4727,1.0362)   (0.4851,1.0508)    (0.4821,1.0453)   (0.4626,1.0322)
 TRI plant more than 1 mile × African American           0.5236***         0.5213***          0.5159***         0.5215***
                                                      (0.3770,0.7273)   (0.3785,0.7180)    (0.3755,0.7089)   (0.3800,0.7157)
 TRI plant less than 1 mile × Hispanic/LatinX              1.1435            1.1477             1.1515            1.1512
                                                      (0.9641,1.3564)   (0.9749,1.3511)    (0.9724,1.3637)   (0.9589,1.3821)
 TRI plant more than 1 mile × Hispanic/LatinX             0.8184**          0.8214**          0.8208**           0.8271**
                                                      (0.7050,0.9501)   (0.7171,0.9409)    (0.7079,0.9517)   (0.7085,0.9655)
 Mean Response (White)                                      0.39              0.39               0.39              0.39
 Gender                                                                        Yes                Yes               Yes
 Education Level                                                                                  Yes               Yes
 Inquiry Order                                                                                                      Yes
 Observations                                             6,723             6,723               6,723              6,723
 Listings                                                 2,241             2,241               2,241              2,241
 % w. diff. response                                       0.41             0.41                 0.41               0.41

  Notes: Table reports odd ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using from a within-property
 conditional logit model with successive inclusion of controls. Panel A reports results based on the percentile of within-
 zip toxic concentration. Panel A.1. shows odd ratio of minority names relative to white names. Panel A.2. separates
 minority names into African American and Hispanic/LatinX names. Panel B report results based on distance to closest
 TRI plant. Panel B.1 reports odd ratio of minority names relative to White. Panel B.2. separates minority into African
 American and Hispanic/LatinX names. Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code level using a score wild bootstrap
 proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters. 90% confidence Intervals reported in
 parentheses.*P < 10% level, **P < 5% level, ***P < 1% level.


    Prior correspondence studies have found evidence of a within-trial impact when mul-
tiple inquiries are sent in matched correspondence designs in competitive labor markets
(Phillips, 2016). Table A7 compares results using data from 1st inquiries, 2nd inquiries,
or 3rd inquiries, rather than matched inquiries. While the power of these tests is limited,
these estimates indicate that the average within-trial effect may be smaller on minority
renters that make first inquiries.




                                                      Appendix­14
           Table A7. Estimates of Discriminatory Constraint on Housing Choice:
                                      Inquiry Order

                                                                           Dependent variable: Response
                                                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)
                                                                1st Inquiry          2nd Inquiry         3rd Inquiry
   Panel A: Quartiles of RSEI Toxic Concentration
   Panel A.1.: Minority

   Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration                     0.7431**             0.7212***            0.7849*
                                                              (0.6026,0.9163)      (0.6011,0.8654)     (0.6297,0.9783)
   Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration                      0.8877               0.9238              0.8666
                                                              (0.7495,1.0515)      (0.7903,1.0798)     (0.7322,1.0258)
   Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration                     1.1433               0.8300              0.8475
                                                              (0.9002,1.4521)      (0.6831,1.0083)     (0.6594,1.0893)
   Panel A.2.: By Race

   Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration                 0.5926***            0.6870***            0.6696**
                                                              (0.4446,0.7899)      (0.5624,0.8392)     (0.5025,0.8923)
   Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration                  0.7707              0.7811**            0.7406**
                                                              (0.5765,1.0304)      (0.6579,0.9273)     (0.6001,0.9139)
   Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration                 1.0022              0.7050**             0.8502
                                                              (0.7643,1.3141)      (0.5483,0.9066)     (0.5909,1.2232)
   Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration                0.9366               0.7691*             0.8973
                                                              (0.7339,1.1951)      (0.5963,0.9920)     (0.7158,1.1249)
   Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration               1.0086                1.1003             1.0150
                                                              (0.8330,1.2213)      (0.8948,1.3530)     (0.8532,1.2075)
   Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration              1.3063                0.9690             0.8464
                                                              (0.9468,1.8024)      (0.7371,1.2740)     (0.6120,1.1707)

   Panel B: Proximity to TRI Plant
   Panel B.1.: Minority

   TRI plant less than 1 mile × Minority                           1.0135              0.8883               0.9274
                                                              (0.8447,1.2162)      (0.7723,1.0217)     (0.7926,1.0851)
   TRI plant more than 1 mile × Minority                          0.8069**            0.8001**             0.7603**
                                                              (0.6965,0.9348)      (0.6818,0.9389)     (0.6330,0.9131)
   Panel B.2.: By Race

   TRI plant less than 1 mile × African American                   0.8784             0.7467**              0.8236
                                                              (0.7171,1.0759)      (0.6181,0.9020)     (0.6582,1.0307)
   TRI plant more than 1 mile × African American                 0.6761***            0.7240**            0.6707***
                                                              (0.5373,0.8509)      (0.5902,0.8882)     (0.5522,0.8146)
   TRI plant less than 1 mile × Hispanic/LatinX                    1.1586              1.0516               1.0501
                                                              (0.8897,1.5087)      (0.8629,1.2816)     (0.8814,1.2510)
   TRI plant more than 1 mile × Hispanic/LatinX                    0.9587              0.8985               0.8552
                                                              (0.8413,1.0926)      (0.7523,1.0731)     (0.6972,1.0491)
   Gender                                                           Yes                  Yes                 Yes
   Education Level                                                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes
   Observations                                                     2241                2241                 2241

    Notes: Table reports odd ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a logistic regressions
   with columns referring to the order in which inquiries were sent out. Panel A reports results based on the percentile
   of within-zip toxic concentration. Panel A.1. reports odd ratios of minority names relative to White names. Panel
   A.2. separates minority names into African American and Hispanic/LatinX names. Panel B reports results based
   on distance to closest TRI plant. Panel B.1 reports odd ratio of minority names relative to White, and Panel
   B.2. separates minority into African American and Hispanic/LatinX names. Standard errors are clustered at the
   ZIP code level using a score wild bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of
   clusters. 90% confidence intervals reported in parentheses.*P < 10% level, **P < 5% level, ***P < 1% level.


    When facing discriminatory constraints, renters may make multiple inquiries on a
property to increase the likelihood of gaining access. It is not clear whether a renter who
sends additional inquiries will face different constraints in subsequent rounds. We test this
in a sub-sample of the markets in the study, where we simulate this process by running
two rounds using the same names. Table A8 reports relative response rates from tests


                                                    Appendix­15
using the first and second round of inquiries on the same properties. All tests indicate a
stronger discriminatory response in follow-up inquiries. Whereas relative response rates
for first inquiries are 58% from minority identities, 41% from African American identities,
and 86% from Hispanic/LatinX identities, relative response rates to second inquiries are
38% from minority, 51% from Hispanic, and 27% from African American identities.


                          Table A8. Overall Discrimination Rates
                              Properties with Two Inquiries

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                                                   Response
                                                              (1)                 (2)
                 Minority First Inquiry                     0.5805
                                                       (0.3047,1.1059)
                 Minority Second Inquiry                  0.3804***
                                                       (0.2955,0.4897)
                 African American First Inquiry                                0.4052*
                                                                           (0.2008,0.8175)
                 African American Second Inquiry                              0.2723***
                                                                           (0.1784,0.4157)
                 Hispanic/LatinX First Inquiry                                  0.8587
                                                                           (0.3894,1.8936)
                 Hispanic/LatinX Second Inquiry                               0.5129***
                                                                           (0.3991,0.6590)
                 Mean Response (White)                       0.45                0.45
                 Gender                                      Yes                 Yes
                 Education Level                             Yes                 Yes
                 Inquiry Order                               Yes                 Yes
                 Observations                               1,572               1,572
                 Listings                                    524                 524
                 % w. diff. response                         0.38                0.38

                  Notes: Table reports odd ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio
                 are estimated using from a within-property conditional logit model includ-
                 ing controls for gender, education and order the inquiry was sent. Standard
                 errors are clustered at the ZIP code level using a score wild bootstrap pro-
                 posed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters.
                 90% confidence intervals reported in parentheses.*P < 10% level, **P < 5%
                 level, ***P < 1% level.


    Table A9 plots relative response rates within the subset of listings after removing
responses from computer-generated response systems (16% of the sample). Computer-
generated responses are unlikely to exhibit discriminatory behavior in this market, though
we note that later interactions with property managers for the same homes may present
discriminatory constraints. Baseline estimates in the paper include both human- and
computer-generated responses, which together characterize the level of discriminatory
constraint facing prospective renters. The estimates in Table A9 estimates indicate that
relative response rates from human-generated responses are somewhat lower than estimate
from the full sample ­ 50% in the lowest quartile, 60% in the interquartile range, and not
different from the response to White identities in the highest quartile of concentrations.




                                             Appendix­16
           Table A9. Estimates of Discriminatory Constraint on Housing Choice
                 Heterogeneity by Response Origin: Human or Computer

                                                                           Dependent variable: Response
                                                                 Full Sample        Human-Generated Responses
                                                                     (1)                         (2)
     Panel A.: Minority

     Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration                    0.5939***                   0.5005***
                                                               (0.4510,0.7820)             (0.3652,0.6860)
     Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration                   0.7059**                    0.6036***
                                                               (0.5541,0.8994)             (0.4568,0.7975)
     Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration                    1.1542                      1.0513
                                                               (0.9014,1.4781)             (0.7643,1.4461)
     Panel B: By Race

     Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration                0.4456***                   0.3898***
                                                               (0.3209,0.6187)             (0.2587,0.5873)
     Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration               0.5380***                   0.4804***
                                                               (0.3802,0.7614)             (0.3201,0.7210)
     Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration                0.9912                      0.8205
                                                               (0.7392,1.3292)             (0.5641,1.1934)
     Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration              0.7771*                    0.6274***
                                                               (0.6066,0.9957)             (0.4905,0.8023)
     Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration              0.9240                     0.7505**
                                                               (0.7833,1.0901)             (0.6206,0.9077)
     Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration             1.3416                      1.3388
                                                               (0.9831,1.8309)             (0.9251,1.9374)
     Mean Response (White)                                           0.39                         0.34
     Gender                                                           Yes                         Yes
     Education Level                                                  Yes                         Yes
     Inquiry Order                                                    Yes                         Yes
     Observations                                                   6,723                        5,637
     Listings                                                        2,241                       1,879
     % w. diff. response                                             0.41                         0.38

      Notes: Notes: Table reports odd ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a
     within-property conditional logit regression for the full sample and excluding computer-generated responses.
     Column (1) reports results for the full sample. Column (2) excludes 362 listings that responded with computer-
     automated responses. Panel A shows odds ratio of minority names relative to White names. Panel B separates
     minority names into African American and Hispanic/LatinX names. Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP
     code level using a score wild bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of
     clusters. 90% confidence intervals reported in parentheses.*P < 10% level, **P < 5% level, ***P < 1% level.




A2         Returns to Effort in Housing Search Across Zones
Our main focus throughout the paper is measuring the differential constraints that minori-
ties face when searching for homes at different levels of pollution exposure. We measure
constraints using estimates of differences in within-property response rates. These re-
sults have implications for returns to effort in search in different exposure zones, which
become clear when we transform odds ratios into inquires per response. We compute the
inverse of the mean response for Whites and divide it by the odds ratio of each racial
category. For example, the cost for Minorities in the 0th-25th would be 2.55/0.59 = 4.3,
where 1/0.39 = 2.55, is the "number of inquires per response for Whites" and 0.59 is the
likelihood of response for Minorities from Figure 3.
    Table A10 reports the returns to effort in housing search at different percentiles of
within-zip toxic concentration and by distance to TRI plant. Minorities face higher
search costs relative to Whites except in high-exposure locations, where Hispanic/LatinX
renters receive the highest yield per inquiry (1 response per 2.11 inquiries). At low
exposure locations, African Americans receive one expected response for 5.7 inquires.

                                                   Appendix­17
Hispanic/LatinX renters can expect one response per 3.3 inquiries. White renters can
expect one response per 2.5 inquiries. African Americans face lower returns to their
efforts everywhere, but also they bear a higher incremental cost of search in low exposure
neighborhoods. The estimates in Table A10 indicate that African American renters must
send 2.8 more inquires to receive an expected response in low-exposure locations than to
receive an expected response in high-exposure locations. Hispanic/LatinX renters need
to send 1.2 more inquiries per expected response in low-exposure locations than in high-
exposure locations. These patterns are similar, albeit less stark, when using proximity to
a facility as the measure of exposure.

             Table A10. Returns to Effort in Housing Search Across Zones

                                                       Inquiries Per Response
                                         (1)              (2)           (3)                   (4)

                                               Percentiles of Within-Zip                 Differences
                                                 Toxic Concentration
                                     0th-25th          25th-75th       75th-100th          (1)-(3)
          White                        2.55               2.41            2.83              -0.28
          Minority                     4.30               3.41            2.45               1.85
          African American             5.73               4.47            2.86               2.87
          Hispanic/LatinX              3.29               2.60            2.11               1.18
                                            Distance to
                                            TRI Plant
                                   more 1 mile        less 1 mile                          (1)-(2)
          White                       2.55                2.53                              0.02
          Minority                    3.85                2.85                              1.00
          African American            4.88                3.66                              1.22
          Hispanic/LatinX             3.07                2.19                              0.88

           Notes: Inquiries per response are calculated first by taking the inverse of the mean response
          for Whites in the 0-25 percentile, e.g. 1/0.39 = 2.55, to obtain the "number of inquires
          per response for Whites". Then we divide it by the odds ratio of each racial category, e.g.
          2.55/0.59 = 4.3.




A3      Heterogeneity by Maternal Education
Table A11 reports estimates by maternal education using information on first names
from hospital birth records. Point estimates from these tests provide suggestive evidence
of stronger discriminatory constraints facing minority renters with names that are as-
sociated with low maternal educational attainment. For listings in the lowest quartile
of concentrations, relative response rates to inquiries from African American names are
28% when associated with low maternal educational attainment, 47% when associated
with medium maternal educational attainment, and 60% when associated with high ma-
ternal educational attainment. We find similar patterns for Hispanic/LatinX identities,
although we do not detect statistical differences in relative response rates between the
groups.




                                                 Appendix­18
Table A11. Estimates of Discriminatory Constraint on Housing Choice
               Heterogeneity by Maternal Education

                                                                  Dependent variable: Response
                                                                     (1)                (2)
 Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                   0.5240**
                                                               (0.3275,0.8384)
 Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                  0.6020**
                                                               (0.4257,0.8512)
 Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                  1.3000
                                                               (0.9294,1.8183)
 Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium                0.5514**
                                                               (0.3732,0.8148)
 Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium               0.6227*
                                                               (0.4110,0.9436)
 Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium               0.9094
                                                               (0.5665,1.4599)
 Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                   0.7472
                                                               (0.5502,1.0147)
 Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                  0.9275
                                                               (0.7259,1.1851)
 Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                 1.3712
                                                               (0.9966,1.8865)
 Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                                  0.3225**
                                                                                  (0.1638,0.6348)
 Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                                 0.3931**
                                                                                  (0.2152,0.7181)
 Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                                  1.3821
                                                                                  (0.8368,2.2825)
 Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium                               0.4414**
                                                                                  (0.2609,0.7467)
 Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium                              0.4672**
                                                                                  (0.2572,0.8484)
 Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium                               0.6321
                                                                                  (0.3511,1.1378)
 Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                                  0.6314*
                                                                                  (0.4301,0.9269)
 Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                                  0.8232
                                                                                  (0.6135,1.1047)
 Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                                1.2721
                                                                                  (0.7756,2.0864)
 Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                                 0.7981
                                                                                  (0.4721,1.3492)
 Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                                0.8324
                                                                                  (0.6026,1.1499)
 Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Low                               1.2223
                                                                                  (0.8231,1.8151)
 Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium                            0.6600**
                                                                                  (0.4938,0.8821)
 Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium                            0.8755
                                                                                  (0.6536,1.1728)
 Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Medium                           1.2661
                                                                                  (0.7199,2.2267)
 Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                                0.9398
                                                                                  (0.6470,1.3651)
 Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                               1.0789
                                                                                  (0.7152,1.6275)
 Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × High                             1.5021*
                                                                                  (1.0688,2.1111)
 Mean Response (White)                                              0.39                  0.39
 Gender                                                             Yes                   Yes
 Inquiry Order                                                      Yes                   Yes
 Observations                                                      6,723                 6,723
 Listings                                                          2,241                 2,241
 % w. diff. response                                                0.41                  0.41

  Notes: Table reports odd ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated
 using a within-property conditional logit by percentile of within-zip toxic concentration and
 for different levels of maternal education. Column (1) reports the odd ratio for minority names
 relative to white names. Column (2) separates minority names into African American and
 Hispanic/LatinX names. Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code level using a score
 wild bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters.
 90% confidence intervals reported in parentheses.*P < 10% level, **P < 5% level, ***P < 1%
 level.




                                         Appendix­19
   Table A12. Estimates of Discriminatory Constraint on Housing Choice
                        Heterogeneity by Gender

                                                                       Dependent variable: Response
                                                                            (1)                (2)
Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                       0.7873*
                                                                     (0.6444,0.9619)
Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                       0.8707
                                                                     (0.6906,1.0979)
Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                      1.3668
                                                                     (0.9891,1.8887)
Minority 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                        0.4628***
                                                                     (0.3127,0.6848)
Minority 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                       0.5508***
                                                                     (0.3949,0.7683)
Minority 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                        0.9711
                                                                     (0.7091,1.3300)
Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                                       0.7005**
                                                                                         (0.5642,0.8695)
Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                                       0.8366
                                                                                         (0.6096,1.1481)
Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                                       1.3792
                                                                                         (0.9134,2.0825)
Af. American 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                                        0.2788***
                                                                                         (0.1704,0.4563)
Af. American 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                                       0.3448***
                                                                                         (0.2251,0.5281)
Af. American 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                                         0.7095
                                                                                         (0.4926,1.0221)
Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                                      0.9143
                                                                                         (0.6961,1.2009)
Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                                     0.9047
                                                                                         (0.7175,1.1408)
Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Female                                   1.3565
                                                                                         (0.8890,2.0699)
Hispanic/LatinX 0-25th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                                       0.6756*
                                                                                         (0.4784,0.9541)
Hispanic/LatinX 25-75th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                                      0.9525
                                                                                         (0.6837,1.3270)
Hispanic/LatinX 75-100th perc. Toxic Concentration × Male                                     1.3581
                                                                                         (0.8990,2.0517)
Mean Response (White)                                                      0.39                 0.39
Education Level                                                            Yes                  Yes
Inquiry Order                                                              Yes                  Yes
Observations                                                              6,723                6,723
Listings                                                                  2,241                2,241
% w. diff. response                                                        0.41                 0.41

 Notes: Table reports odd ratios relative to the White identity. Odds ratio are estimated using a within-
property conditional logit by percentile of within-zip toxic concentration and applicant gender. Column
(1) reports odds ratios for minority names relative to White names. Column (2) separates minority names
into African American and Hispanic/LatinX names. Standard errors are clustered at the ZIP code level
using a score wild bootstrap proposed Kline and Santos (2012) to account for the small number of clusters.
90% confidence intervals reported in parentheses.*P < 10% level, **P < 5% level, ***P < 1% level.




                                           Appendix­20
