                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   INTENDED AND UNINTENDED EFFECTS OF BANNING MENTHOL CIGARETTES

                                     Christopher Carpenter
                                        Hai V. Nguyen

                                      Working Paper 26811
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26811


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




Carpenter is E. Bronson Ingram Professor of Economics at Vanderbilt University, Research
Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and Research Fellow at IZA Institute for
the Study of Labor. Nguyen is Canada Research Chair in Health Policy Evaluation and Health
Care Sustainability at Memorial University of Newfoundland. We thank Robert Nugent from
Health Canada for sharing data on cigarette sales. We thank Rahi Abouk, Grant Gibson,
Catherine Maclean, Erik Nesson, Paul Niekamp, Mark Stehr, and seminar and conference
participants at Vanderbilt, Western Kentucky University and the 2019 Canadian Health
Economics Study Group for helpful comments. All interpretations, errors, and omissions are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christopher Carpenter and Hai V. Nguyen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes
Christopher Carpenter and Hai V. Nguyen
NBER Working Paper No. 26811
February 2020
JEL No. I1

                                         ABSTRACT

Bans on menthol cigarettes have been recommended by the World Health Organization, adopted
throughout the European Union, and proposed by the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), primarily due to concerns that menthol cigarettes enable youth smoking.
Yet there is almost no direct evidence on their effects using real-world policy variation. We
provide the first comprehensive evaluation of this policy by studying Canada where seven
provinces banned menthol cigarettes prior to a nationwide menthol ban in 2018. Using provincial
sales data, we show that menthol cigarette sales fell to zero immediately after menthol bans, with
no meaningful effect on non-menthol sales. Survey data confirm that provincial menthol bans
significantly reduced menthol cigarette smoking among both youths and adults. We also find
strong evidence of substitution, however: provincial menthol bans significantly increased non-
menthol cigarette smoking among youths, resulting in no overall net change in youth smoking
rates. We also document evidence of evasion: provincial menthol bans shifted smokers' cigarette
purchases away from grocery stores and gas stations to First Nations reserves (where the menthol
bans do not bind). Our results demonstrate the importance of accounting for substitution and
evasion responses in the design of stricter tobacco regulations.


Christopher Carpenter
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu

Hai V. Nguyen
School of Pharmacy
Memorial University of Newfoundland
Health Sciences Centre
St. John's, NL A1B 3V6
Canada
hvnguyen@mun.ca
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




1. Introduction

Economics research on the determinants and effects of cigarette smoking is

voluminous and has yielded critical insights for the design of public policy and

public health interventions (Cawley and Ruhm, 2011; Chaloupka and Warner,

2000). Cawley and Ruhm (2011) demonstrate that research in health economics has

been dominated by studies of smoking and tobacco control, consistent with its

disproportionate role in contributing to burden of avoidable diseases and mortality

(World Health Organization, 2019). Experimentation with tobacco control

regulations has also afforded economics research a wide array of policy

interventions to study, ranging from taxes and prices (Adda and Cornaglia, 2006;

DeCicca et al., 2002) to clean indoor air regulations (Adda and Cornaglia, 2010;

Carpenter, 2009), graphic warning labels (Borland et al., 2009; Gospodinov and

Irvine, 2004; Huang et al., 2014), advertising restrictions (Blecher, 2008; Kenkel et

al., 2017), punitive liability for exposing children to smoke in cars (Nguyen, 2013),

public health insurance coverage for smoking cessation treatment (Maclean et al.,

2018), and others. Economics research on these interventions has in many cases

contributed to their proliferation throughout the United States and worldwide.

        In this paper we provide new and novel evidence on one of the most

contested policy instruments in current debates about tobacco control that is being

adopted at a rapid pace throughout the world: bans on menthol flavors in combusted

cigarettes and other tobacco products. According to the World Health Organization,




                                              1
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




menthol `is a widely used flavoring agent characterized by a minty flavor and by

its well-known cooling effect' (World Health Organization, 2016). In addition to

changing the taste of tobacco products, menthol has been shown to change the

physiologic response to tobacco smoke by reducing the harshness and irritation of

smoking, providing reinforcing sensory stimulation, and changing the structure of

nicotine receptors (see Wickham 2015 for a review). These physiologic factors

make menthol smoking both easier to start and harder to quit. The first fact explains

the public health focus on youths; i.e., menthol cigarettes are a `starter product' for

youth smoking (Anderson, 2011; Belluz, 2018). The second fact is consistent with

research showing that menthol cigarettes decrease the likelihood of successful

smoking cessation (Anderson, 2011). These factors led the World Health

Organization in 2018 to explicitly recommend that countries ban menthol flavoring

in tobacco products.

        Notably, the United States has not yet adopted a menthol flavor ban. The

2009 Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act did include a ban on

all other flavors in cigarettes except menthol, highlighting its unique primacy. In

2011, a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advisory panel concluded that the

removal of menthol cigarettes from the US market would benefit public health

through reducing smoking initiation and promoting smoking cessation, particularly

among children. Tobacco companies, however, successfully challenged this




                                              2
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




conclusion in court, citing lack of evidence showing menthol cigarettes are more

harmful than non-menthol cigarettes (Reuters, 2014).1

        Although no menthol ban was adopted in the US after the 2011 FDA report,

many observers portended a change in US policy toward menthol cigarettes when

in November 2018 the then-Commissioner of the FDA Scott Gottlieb issued a

statement calling for a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that would include a ban on

menthol in combusted tobacco products (including cigarettes). To date, no federal

menthol ban has been adopted in the United States.2 Despite the lack of a federal

ban, a handful of large cities within the US have adopted bans or restrictions on

menthol cigarette sales: Chicago was the first to do so in July 2016 when it ruled

that stores near schools could not sell menthol cigarettes. More recently, San

Francisco adopted a city-wide ban on menthol cigarette sales in June 2018, and Los

Angeles adopted a similar county-wide ban in October 2019. New York City and

New York State are both considering menthol ban proposals as well. This level of

menthol-specific regulation in the US is quite limited relative to worldwide activity:

in Europe, bans on menthol tobacco products will take effect in 2020 (European

Commission, 2018), and similar bans have been adopted in Brazil, Ethiopia, and

Turkey.


1
  Several African American organizations such as the National Black Chamber of Commerce also
rejected the bans arguing that a menthol ban would unfairly target African American smokers who
disproportionately use menthol cigarettes (Chicago Tribune, 2010).
2
  Tobacco companies continue to voice their opposition and planned legal challenges to any bans
on menthol flavor (Edgecliffe-Johnson and Gray, 2018).




                                              3
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




           Despite the extensive adoption of menthol bans worldwide, we are aware of

no research in economics or other disciplines that has comprehensively evaluated

the effects of menthol bans on smoking outcomes using gold-standard quasi-

experimental methods. This absence of research is striking relative to the large body

of work on other policy instruments and the widespread belief held by governments

adopting these bans that the policies would reduce the population health burden of

cigarette smoking. The significant potential for menthol bans as tools for further

reducing cigarette smoking among vulnerable populations and their widespread

adoption across the world underscore the importance of credible research on their

effects.

           One of the main reasons for the lack of credible study on the effects of

menthol bans is that there has not been much real-world policy variation.3 In this

paper we overcome this fundamental challenge by studying the experience of

Canada. Several provinces (including the highly populated Alberta, Ontario, and

Quebec) banned menthol flavoring in combusted cigarettes at different times from

2015-2017, while three provinces (i.e., British Columbia, Saskatchewan, and

Manitoba) did not adopt provincial menthol bans. We examine data on sales of

menthol and non-menthol cigarettes by province and month, and we supplement

this evidence with survey data on youth and adult cigarette smoking.


3
  For example, in the US context, no locality, state, or other regulatory body has banned menthol
flavoring in combusted cigarettes, and indeed many large health surveys on smoking in the US do
not include questions about menthol cigarette use.




                                               4
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




        We report several key findings from this research. First, the provincial

cigarette sales data clearly indicate that provincial and federal menthol bans are

effective at eliminating menthol cigarette sales. These effects are visually apparent

in examinations of raw means and are supported in panel data evaluations. We also

observe evidence of stockpiling behavior ­ i.e., increased menthol cigarette sales

after announcement of bans but prior to enactment in Ontario, Quebec,

Newfoundland and Labrador, and Prince Edward Island, which we account for in

our analyses of survey data. Notably, we do not observe significant effects of

provincial menthol bans on sales of non-menthol cigarettes.

        Next, we turn to the survey data and show that our two-way fixed effects

models with controls for province and time period fixed effects, individual

demographics, economic conditions, and other province/time-varying smoking

policies return evidence on menthol cigarette smoking that is highly consistent with

the sales data: provincial menthol bans significantly reduced youth and adult

menthol cigarette smoking. These effects are larger for older youths and aboriginal

youths, both groups that had higher menthol smoking rates prior to provincial bans.

        Interestingly, we also document evidence of substitution by youths:

provincial bans are associated with statistically significant increases in the

likelihood that youths report non-menthol cigarette smoking. For adults, we do not

find evidence of substitution, but we do find evidence of evasion: provincial

menthol bans were associated with significant increases in the likelihood that adults




                                              5
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




reported purchasing cigarettes from a First Nations reserve (where menthol bans do

not bind) and significant reductions in the likelihood that adults reported purchasing

cigarettes from a gas station or grocery store not on a First Nations reserve. Finally,

when we examine overall smoking outcomes, we do not find that provincial

menthol bans had any significant effects on population rates of cigarette smoking

or quit behaviors for either youths or adults. This finding is consistent with the null

result on non-menthol cigarette sales described above.

        Taken together, our results provide the first comprehensive evidence on the

effects of banning menthol cigarettes. While we find clear evidence that the bans

reduced menthol cigarette sales and menthol cigarette use, we also find that the

bans are unlikely to be a panacea for reducing youth smoking rates because youths

substitute toward non-menthol cigarettes. Moreover, the overall effect on adult

smoking is somewhat blunted by evasion of menthol bans toward First Nations

reserve purchases. Taken together, our results demonstrate the importance of

accounting for substitution and evasion responses in the design of stricter tobacco

control regulations.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the

menthol bans and discusses mechanisms for the effects we study. Section 3

provides a literature review, and Section 4 describes the data and empirical

approach. Section 5 presents the results, and Section 6 offers a discussion and

concludes.




                                              6
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




2. Menthol Bans and Mechanisms

The policies we study here ban the use of menthol flavoring in combusted

cigarettes.4 Between May 2015 and July 2017, seven Canadian provinces enacted

these bans. As shown in Appendix Table 1, the dates of adopting the bans vary

across the provinces. Nova Scotia and Alberta adopted the policy in 2015, followed

by Quebec and New Brunswick in 2016 and subsequently, by Ontario, Prince

Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador in 2017. Three provinces

(Saskatchewan, British Columbia and Manitoba) did not ban menthol. In October

2017, the Canadian federal government imposed a similar ban nationwide.

         These menthol bans were part of a broader regulatory landscape directed at

flavors in tobacco products more generally. Specifically, the Canadian federal

government adopted a federal ban on non-menthol flavors in tobacco products in

2010.5 Similar actions on non-menthol flavors in tobacco products were taken in

the United States in 2009 with the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco




4
  The bans also applied to blunt wraps and some types of cigars. These include cigarillos (little cigars
weighing 1.4g or having a cigarette filter), cigars that have tipping paper, cigars that have a wrapper
that is not fitted in spiral form and cigars weighing more than 1.4g but less than 6g.
5
  The 2010 policy banned all flavors except menthol in cigarettes, small cigars and cigarillos below
a certain size threshold (less than or equal to 1.4 grams), and blunt wraps. In 2015 the flavor ban ­
again, excluding menthol ­ was extended to larger cigars (between 1.4 and 6 grams). Thus,
throughout our entire sample period for studying menthol cigarette use (2010-2016 for youths and
2015-2017 for adults), all non-menthol flavored cigarettes were banned. In the empirical work
below, the federal ban will be accounted for by including year fixed effects.




                                                   7
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




Control Act; thus, the policy variation in Canada is similar to what would be the

case if the United States banned menthol flavors.

        Our study examines the effects of provincial menthol bans on menthol and

non-menthol cigarette sales, self-reported menthol cigarette smoking, and a range

of other outcomes that might reflect substitution or evasion, including use of non-

menthol cigarettes and e-cigarettes as well as cigarette purchasing behavior in

different regulated and unregulated locations. We have in mind several mechanisms

through which the bans could affect these outcomes. First and most directly is the

pure availability mechanism: to the extent that the provincial menthol bans were

enforced, it should be much more difficult for individuals to obtain menthol

cigarettes to smoke after the bans are in place. It may not be totally impossible,

however, as individuals could stockpile menthol cigarettes prior to ban

implementation or smuggle menthol cigarettes across borders from other provinces

without bans (prior to the 2017 federal menthol ban) or from the United States

where menthol cigarettes remain widespread. Smokers might also purchase

menthol cigarettes from First Nations reserves that are generally exempt from

federal and provincial smoking regulations (Curtis, 2015). These actions may give

rise to illegal markets for menthol cigarettes (Edgecliffe-Johnson and Gray, 2018).

        The physiologic effects of menthol flavor might also be mechanisms for

effects of provincial menthol bans on smoking outcomes. For example, if the public

health concern is valid that menthol use increases experimentation with cigarettes




                                              8
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




by reducing the harshness and irritation of smoking, then we might expect menthol

bans to reduce lifetime experimentation with cigarette smoking. Moreover, if it is

also true that menthol flavoring in cigarettes reduces quit behavior by changing the

physiologic response of the body's nicotine receptors, then menthol bans may also

be expected to increase successful quitting and reduce overall smoking prevalence.

        Arguably more interesting than the absolute increase in the cost of menthol

cigarette smoking that is likely to follow from the sharp reduction in availability of

menthol cigarettes are a range of other behavioral responses due to the relative

increase in costs of using menthol cigarettes (versus non-menthol cigarettes)

induced by menthol bans. Specifically, menthol smokers may substitute to non-

menthol cigarettes in response to provincial menthol bans, depending on their

relative preference for (or addiction to) menthol cigarette smoking. There is also a

possibility that menthol bans induce substitution to e-cigarette use, to the extent

that menthol cigarette smokers can find menthol flavored e-cigarettes (not

subjected to the bans) and view the latter as a reasonable substitute to menthol

cigarettes.6




6
  Tobacco marketing might also be an important alternative mechanism (other than relative price
changes) through which menthol bans affect smoking outcomes. Specifically, research suggests that
tobacco companies have engaged in strategies that encourage people to switch to `smooth tasting'
non-menthol tobacco alternatives in response to menthol bans (Schwartz et al., 2018). We do not
observe proxies for this type of tobacco industry behavior by province and time, so we cannot
evaluate its importance here.




                                               9
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




3. Literature Review

While there is an enormous literature on the economics of cigarette smoking and

regulations designed to reduce smoking (see, for example, Chaloupka & Warner,

2000), there is far less research in economics that has examined menthol smoking

specifically. Kenkel, Mathios, & Wang (2017) study cigarette advertising in the

context of menthol cigarettes and find that advertisers target demographic groups

(e.g., African Americans in the United States) but that the advertising itself has little

effect at increasing market share.

         We are not aware of any studies in economics that have evaluated the effects

of menthol bans such as those assessed in this study.7 The public health and tobacco

control literatures do include studies that investigate planned responses of menthol

smokers to hypothetical menthol bans (D'Silva et al., 2015; O'Connor et al., 2012;

Pearson et al., 2012; Wackowski et al., 2014), though these studies suffer from the

well-documented challenge that actual behaviors can differ substantially from

planned behaviors (Chaiton et al., 2018; Machado and Sinha, 2007; Moan and Rise,

2006).


7
  One relevant study examined the effects of non-menthol flavor bans on adolescent tobacco use in
the United States using variation induced by the 2009 Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco
Control Act which banned non-menthol flavors in cigarettes. Courtemanche, Palmer, & Pesko
(2017) use data from the 1999-2013 National Youth Tobacco Surveys and find that the ban on
flavored cigarettes reduced the likelihood that middle and high school youths in the US were
cigarette smokers, though there was also an increase in use of menthol cigarettes, cigars, and pipes
which they interpret as evidence of substitution to unregulated substances. A major limitation of the
study, however, is the lack of a control group due to the federal nature of the intervention. Thus, the
authors are unable to rule out that other secular changes were responsible for the observed patterns
of tobacco use.




                                                  10
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




        Two public health studies have examined some of the same provincial

menthol bans in Canada that we study here; both study Ontario's January 2017 ban

(Chaiton et al., 2019, 2018). Chaiton et al. (2018) surveyed a small sample (N=325)

of menthol smokers and found a substantial reduction in menthol cigarette use in

the month following implementation of the menthol ban. This study did not include

any unaffected control group, however, so it cannot rule out that shared secular

shocks ­ and not the provincial menthol ban ­ were responsible for the observed

changes in use. Chaiton et al. (2019) used interrupted time series methods to

analyze wholesale sales data during the period of October 2012-September 2017

and used British Columbia (which did not adopt a menthol ban) as a control group.

They found significant reductions in menthol cigarette sales and total cigarettes

sales in Ontario after the ban while there was no significant reduction in British

Columbia.

        Our study improves on the one plausibly quasi-experimental study of

menthol bans (Chaiton et al. 2019) in several key ways. First, we use more

comprehensive sales data for all provinces over a longer period. Second, we

complement the sales data with survey data that allow us to credibly differentiate

the effects of menthol bans on youths separately from the effects on adults (which

sales data cannot do). Given that most of the policy concern regarding menthol is

about youth initiation, this is a major contribution of our work. Another advantage

of survey data over sales data is that the former more directly measures actual use




                                             11
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




whereas the latter blends changes in use with changes in purchase location. Third,

we use gold-standard difference-in-differences methods applied to nationwide data

by comparing changes over time in outcomes for ban-adopting provinces

coincident with menthol ban implementation to the associated changes over time in

outcomes for control provinces that did not adopt menthol bans. This more

comprehensive scope increases the generalizability of our findings. Finally, we

consider a wider range of outcomes than in prior work, including not only overall

smoking participation and menthol smoking but also substitution to non-menthol

cigarettes and to e-cigarettes, as well as evasion to unregulated locations.

        By considering a range of substitution and evasion responses, our study

relates to a body of research in economics demonstrating how smokers respond to

tobacco control regulations, including increased excise taxes, clean indoor air laws,

and minimum purchase ages. In particular, a number of studies have demonstrated

that stricter tobacco regulations can induce a range of compensating behaviors of

smokers. Adda and Cornaglia (2010), for example, find that smokers smoke

cigarettes more intensely when cigarette excise taxes increase, resulting in no net

change in total nicotine consumed. Evans and Farrelly (1998) find that smokers

substitute from light to regular cigarettes in response to higher taxes. Multiple

studies show that smokers move to higher quality cigarettes in response to taxes

that are invariant to quality (Chiou and Muehlegger 2014, Harding et al. 2012).

Several studies also find that higher excise taxes on cigarettes induce cross-border




                                             12
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




cigarette smuggling to evade taxes (Stehr, 2005), while other research examines

Native American reservations as an opportunity for cigarette tax evasion (DeCicca

et al., 2015). Carpenter et al. (2011) show that Canadian local clean indoor air laws

reduce non-smokers' exposure to cigarette smoke inside public buildings but

increase non-smokers' exposure to cigarette smoke just outside buildings. Thus,

our study contributes to a large literature on the intended and unintended

consequences of stricter tobacco control.



3. Data Description, and Empirical Strategy

3.1 Data Description

To understand the effects of provincial menthol bans, we obtained data on menthol

and non-menthol cigarette sales by province and month for 2012-2018 from Health

Canada. We supplement the provincial cigarette sales data with two independent

large surveys with information on menthol cigarette smoking and related outcomes:

the Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS) and the

Canadian Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CTADS) (formerly, the Canadian

Tobacco Use Monitoring Survey (CTUMS)). CSTADS interviews approximately

40,000 students in grades 6-12 (i.e., age 11-17) across Canada every two years,

providing timely and reliable national data on tobacco, alcohol and drug use and

other related issues of Canadian students. Recruitment of schools and school

districts for each survey cycle begins in June, with data collection starting in




                                             13
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




October-December and ending by May of next year. The average student response

rate is 66% (Burkhalter et al., 2018). Meanwhile, CTADS (and its predecessor,

CTUMS) is a general population survey of tobacco, alcohol and drug use among

Canadians aged 15 years and older. While CTUMS interviewed nearly 20,000

individuals annually between 1999 and 2012, CTADS surveys 15,000 persons

biennially from 2013 with an average response rate of 70%. Both CSTADS and

CTADS are designed to be representative at the province level.

           Both CSTADS and CTADS contain questions on cigarette smoking,

including whether the respondent reported smoking 100 cigarettes in their lifetime,

as well as whether they smoked cigarettes within the past 30 days.8 Past month

smokers are also asked about whether they have ever tried to quit smoking. Both

CSTADS and CTADS also ask respondents about menthol cigarette use, though

the specific questions that allow us to distinguish past 30 day menthol cigarette use

from non-menthol use were only asked in CTADS in 2015 and 2017. For youths in

the CSTADS we have data on menthol and non-menthol cigarette use back to 2010.

Adults in the CTADS were also asked about whether they have ever tried smoking

a menthol cigarette, and past 30 day smokers in the CTADS were also asked

whether their usual brand is menthol. To measure other substitution patterns, both

CSTADS and CTADS ask respondents about e-cigarette use in the past 30 days,




8
    See Appendix Tables 2 and 3 for detailed question wording and years each question was asked.




                                                 14
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




though neither specifically asks about menthol-flavored e-cigarette use. Finally,

CTADS (but not CSTADS) includes questions about whether within the past six

months the respondent purchased cigarettes from a First Nations reserve (where

menthol bans do not bind), as well as whether the respondent purchased cigarettes

from a gas station or grocery store not on a First Nations reserve.

        Each of the surveys we use has its own strengths and weaknesses. CSTADS

has a much larger sample size but lacks detailed information on survey timing. In

contrast, CTADS has a more modest sample size but includes information on month

of interview that we can use to more accurately assign exposure to menthol bans.

CTADS also has a wider range of questions about menthol cigarette smoking and

location of recent cigarette purchases. For the directly targeted outcome of menthol

cigarette smoking, the sample period is longer in CSTADS (2010-2017) than in

CTADS (2015-2017), though we note that for outcomes related to any past 30 day

smoking we can go back to 2003 in the CTADS data.

        For the analysis based on the CTADS, we exclude the period of October ­

December 2017 as we want to evaluate the provincial bans separately from the

federal ban which came into force in October 2017 (and the three months of the last

quarter of 2017 are not long enough to credibly estimate effects of the federal ban

on outcomes). For CSTADS analyses we also exclude the 2016/17 cycle for

Ontario. While this cycle was started in Ontario (November 2016) before its policy

introduction (January 2017), it is not possible to assign Ontario respondents into




                                             15
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




pre- or post-policy periods due to lack of information on specific survey dates in

CSTADS.9 We explore robustness to this choice below and show that our core

results are robust to excluding Ontario entirely.

3.2 Empirical Strategy

We estimate two-way fixed effects models of the following form for the sales data:

           (1) Ypt = +1(PROVINCIAL MENTHOL BAN)pt + 2Zpt + 3Pp + 4Tt + pt


where Ypt are the cigarette sales outcomes in province p at time t. PROVINCIAL

MENTHOL BAN is an indicator variable indicating whether the province has a ban

in effect. Zpt is a vector of time-varying provincial variables that includes the

provincial unemployment rate, real cigarette price, and an indicator for whether the

province has a minimum age restriction for purchasing e-cigarettes.10 Pp is a vector

of province dummies to control for time-invariant differences across provinces. Tt

include year indicators (to control for time-specific factors that affect both the

treatment and control provinces equally such as federal tobacco policies or secular

anti-smoking sentiment) and month indicators (to control for seasonal effects).

         For the survey data, we estimate similar models at the individual level:

      (2) Yipt = +1(PROVINCIAL MENTHOL BAN)pt + 2Xipt + 3Zpt + 4Pp + 5Tt + ipt




9
  In Ontario, CSTADS cycle 2016/17 runs from November 2016 to May 2017. Given that the
smoking outcomes under consideration are based on past 30-day use, nearly half of the cycle (i.e.,
3 months out of 7 months) can be considered as the pre-policy period.
10
   Other regulations on cigarettes over our time period ­ including bans on other non-menthol flavors
in cigarettes ­ were primarily federal in nature and thus will be absorbed by the year fixed effects.




                                                 16
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




where Yipt are the various outcomes for individual i in province p at time t and where

other variables are defined as above.11 Xipt is a vector of individual demographic

characteristics. For analyses using the CSTADS, X includes respondents' grade

(dummy variables for each grade, with grade 6 as the reference grade), sex (dummy

variable for male; female is the excluded category), and aboriginal status. For

analyses using the CTADS, X includes age, sex (dummy variable for male; female

is the excluded category), marital status (a dummy variable for either married or

widowed or divorced or separated; never married is the excluded category),

household size (continuous variable with 5 levels), and an indicator for residing in

an urban area (except for analysis using CTADS 2003-2017 as urban is only

available from 2004).

        The key identifying assumption underlying these models is that the trends

in the outcomes in both the treatment and control provinces would have evolved

similarly in the absence of the provincial menthol ban. We estimate equations (1)

and (2) using OLS/linear probability models for ease of interpreting the marginal

effects (Ai and Norton, 2003; Norton and Dowd, 2018). For statistical inference in



11
  The CTADS has information on survey month, which allows us to match with the policy dates.
For the CSTADS, although data on specific months of the interviews in each province are not
available, we can infer from the dates of survey (starting in October-December and finished by May
of the next year) that among the 7 provinces with bans, 4 provinces (Nova Scotia, New Brunswick,
Alberta, and Quebec) adopted the bans between the 2014/15 and 2016/17 cycles. Ontario
implemented the ban two months after the 2016/17 cycle started. These 5 provinces are considered
as treated provinces (although Ontario is included only for the period up to 2010-2015 in the main
analyses). Meanwhile, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland implemented the bans after the
2016/17 cycle and thus are treated as control provinces throughout the study period.




                                               17
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




our context of small number of clusters 12, we use a recently developed method

(Carter, Schnepel, and Steigerwald, 2017) that uses the t-distribution with G*-1

degrees of freedom where G* is effective number of clusters. Below, we show that

our results are robust to using the wild cluster bootstrap method (Cameron,

Gelbach, & Miller, 2008). All models use sample weights.



4. Results

4.1 Descriptive Statistics, Sales Data

Figure 1 presents monthly sales of menthol cigarettes, by province. Figure 2

presents the same information for non-menthol cigarette sales.13 Vertical dashed

lines represent provincial menthol bans; vertical solid lines represent the federal

menthol ban. Several patterns are clear from Figure 1 for provincial menthol sales.

First, bans are clearly effective at eliminating menthol cigarette sales. For the

provinces that adopted bans, provincial menthol sales fall to zero immediately after

provincial ban implementation. For the provinces that did not adopt provincial bans,

menthol sales fall to zero immediately after the federal ban. Second, there is

evidence of stockpiling behavior coincident with announcement but prior to

implementation of bans. This is true for provincial bans in Ontario, Quebec,

Newfoundland and Labrador, and Prince Edward Island. It is also visible for the


12
   There are 10 clusters (i.e., 10 provinces). For the survey data, 7 clusters (in CTADS) and 5 clusters
(in CSTADS) are treated.
13
   Appendix Table 4 presents descriptive statistics for the sales data.




                                                  18
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




provinces that did not adopt provincial bans prior to the implementation of the

federal ban. This stockpiling behavior has implications for our analyses of survey

data, as it is possible that individuals continue to smoke menthol cigarettes after

ban adoption because they have access to menthol cigarettes that were purchased

prior to bans being enforced.14 Finally, there is not much evidence of a substitution

response in Figure 2 for non-menthol cigarette sales by province. That is, we do not

see evidence of a persistent increase in non-menthol sales after provincial menthol

bans are adopted.

4.2 Effects of Menthol Bans, Sales Data

Table 1 presents regression estimates from equation (1) corresponding to the

provincial sales data shown in Figures 1 and 2. The results in Table 1 confirm what

is visually apparent in Figure 1, namely, that provincial menthol bans significantly

reduced menthol cigarette sales. Relative to the baseline mean in treatment

provinces, the bans eliminated menthol cigarette sales. Moreover, there is no

statistically significant association between provincial menthol bans and sales of

non-menthol cigarettes: the point estimate is very small relative to the average non-

menthol cigarette sales in treatment provinces in 2012, and it is not statistically

significant.




14
 There are a handful of province-month observations where menthol cigarette sales are negative.
None of our results are sensitive to recoding those observations to be zero.




                                              19
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




        In Figure 3 we present the event study estimates corresponding to the

models in Table 1 where instead of controlling for the provincial ban directly we

report coefficients on event time indicators relative to the timing of adoption of the

menthol ban in each province. As suggested from Figure 1, the left panel of Figure

3 shows no evidence of systematic pre-trends prior to provincial menthol ban

adoption and an immediate and sustained reduction in menthol cigarette sales.

Moreover, the right panel of Figure 3 shows no meaningful effect of provincial

menthol bans on sales of non-menthol cigarettes within a province. Taken together,

the results in Figures 1-3 and Table 1 confirm that provincial menthol bans

immediately eliminated sales of menthol cigarettes within the provinces that

adopted bans, with no clear evidence of effects on non-menthol cigarette sales.

4.3 Descriptive Statistics, Survey Data

Figure 4 presents trends in past 30 day cigarette smoking, past 30 day menthol

cigarette use, and past 30 day non-menthol cigarette use for youths in treatment and

control provinces (i.e., provinces that did and did not adopt menthol bans between

2015 and 2017). For past 30 day cigarette smoking there is a reduction in smoking

observed for youths in both treatment and control provinces, with no obvious

difference in the most recent wave when bans went into effect. In contrast, the

menthol cigarette smoking rate appears to diverge by provincial treatment status

coincident with adoption of provincial menthol bans: youths in ban-adopting

provinces report less menthol cigarette use in the most recent period, while youths




                                             20
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




in non-adopting provinces report slightly more menthol cigarette use. Importantly,

the trends in menthol cigarette use prior to ban adoption are broadly similar. For

non-menthol use we see patterns that are somewhat mirroring those observed for

menthol cigarette use: in the most recent post-ban period, youths in ban-adopting

provinces report slightly more non-menthol cigarette use while youths in non-

adopting provinces continue their trend downward for that same outcome. The raw

trends in Figure 4 are thus suggestive of an effect of provincial menthol bans at

reducing menthol cigarette use and possibly increasing non-menthol cigarette use,

though more formal testing is needed.

         Figure 5 shows the associated trends for adults for those same outcomes.15

Note that for the past 30 day cigarette use the CTADS data permit us to go back to

2003, but we can only distinguish between menthol and non-menthol use in 2015

and 2017. For past 30 day cigarette use by adults in Figure 5 the pre-trends across

treatment and control provinces track each other very well until the period of

menthol ban adoption at which time smoking rates increase sharply in the non-

adopting provinces but only modestly in the ban-adopting provinces. For menthol


15
   Appendix Table 5 presents descriptive statistics for youths and adults from the CSTADS and
CTADS data in columns 1 and 2, respectively. For youths, about half the sample is male, the
majority of youths are in the higher grades, and less than five percent is Aboriginal. For adults, the
average age is 46.8 years, half the sample is male, 78.3 percent is married, and 81 percent reside in
urban areas. Regarding exposure to the bans, 16.3 percent of youths and 5.9 percent of adults are
observed in a province at a time when a menthol ban is in effect. Regarding smoking, 7.6 percent of
youths and 17.8 percent of adults report past month smoking. Menthol cigarette use is low on
average: 2.8 percent of youths and 1.6 percent of adults report past month menthol cigarette use.
Finally, about 11.5 percent of adults report having purchased cigarettes from a First Nations reserve
in the past six months.




                                                 21
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




cigarette use by adults in Figure 5 we see that menthol use actually increased

between 2015 and 2017 in control provinces but fell over that same time period in

treatment provinces. For non-menthol use we see that rates increased for adults in

both treatment and control provinces, but the increase was steeper for adults in the

control provinces. We also show trends in the likelihood of First Nations reserve

purchases for adults in Figure 5 (this outcome is not asked in CSTADS for youths).

As with past 30 day smoking, the longer-term pre-trends in this outcome track

closely for treatment and control provinces, but during the period of ban adoption

First Nations reserve purchases fall sharply in control provinces but do not fall in

treatment provinces.16

        In Table 2 we present descriptive evidence on heterogeneity in menthol

cigarette smoking preferences. For each demographic group (presented in the rows)

we show the population rate of past 30 day cigarette smoking in column 1, the

population rate of past 30 day menthol cigarette smoking in column 2, and the

menthol cigarette smoking rate among past 30 day smokers in column 3. Panel 1

shows these outcomes for youths aged 11-17 in the CSTADS versus adults aged

19+ in the CTADS. Panel 2 shows the patterns separately for aboriginal youths and

non-aboriginal youths; panel 3 shows patterns separately for male and female

youths; and panel 4 shows patterns separately for youths in grades 6-8 versus youths


16
  Below, we address concerns about offsetting behavior in the control provinces in the CTADS data
for past 30 day cigarette consumption and First Nations reserve purchases by showing that our core
results are robust to excluding non-adopting provinces one at a time.




                                               22
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




in grades 9-12. Panel 5 shows patterns separately for male and female adults; panel

6 shows patterns separately for rural and urban adults; and panel 7 shows patterns

separately for married and unmarried adults.

          The patterns in Table 2 replicate patterns from the US in several respects.

Most importantly, although population rates of youth smoking are lower than

population rates of adult smoking, conditional on smoking youths use menthol

cigarettes at a nearly three times higher rate than adults. We also observe that

menthol cigarette preferences are stronger among aboriginal youths compared to

non-aboriginal youths, though these differences are much smaller than the youth

versus adult comparison. Although young males have higher smoking rates than

young females, we do not observe strong differences in their menthol preferences

across gender. Older youths in grades 9-12 have higher smoking rates and stronger

menthol preferences than younger youths in grades 6-8.

          For adults, we find that overall rates of menthol use are low, though we do

find some differences in menthol preferences compared to the patterns for youths.

For example, we find that adult women have stronger menthol preferences than

those of adult men, and this difference is much larger than the associated pattern

for youths. Urban adults also have stronger menthol preferences than rural adults,

and unmarried adults have stronger menthol preferences than married adults, a

pattern that is likely to be driven primarily by age differences related to marital

status.




                                             23
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




4.4 Effects of Menthol Bans, Survey Data

In Table 3 we present difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of the

menthol bans on menthol cigarette smoking. We present results for youths aged 11-

17 from the CSTADS data in the top panel and for adults aged 19+ from the

CTADS data in the bottom panel of Table 3. We show results for the likelihood of

`Any Past 30 Day Menthol Cigarette Smoking' in column 1; for the likelihood of

`Ever Tried Smoking a Menthol Cigarette' in column 2; and for the likelihood that

the `Usual Brand of Cigarette is Menthol' (conditional on any past month smoking)

in column 3. The latter two outcomes were only asked in the CTADS.

         The results in Table 3 confirm the findings from Figure 1 and Table 1 and

provide strong evidence that Canada's provincial menthol bans were effective at

reducing menthol cigarette smoking. Specifically, we estimate that for youths aged

11-17 in the top panel of column 1 of Table 3, provincial menthol bans were

associated with a statistically significant 2.4 percentage point reduction in the

likelihood of any past 30 day menthol cigarette smoking. For adults in the bottom

panel of Table 3 we also estimate that provincial menthol bans were associated with

statistically significant reductions in menthol cigarette smoking on the order of 3.1

percentage points.17 Moreover, the results in the bottom panel of columns 2 and 3


17
  Note that the survey data do not indicate that the bans completely eliminated menthol smoking,
which is somewhat puzzling. There are several possibilities here, including: stockpiling behavior,
incomplete compliance and enforcement, and smuggling of illegal menthol cigarettes from other
provinces or areas such as First Nations reserves. Grant (2019) describes the problem of contraband
tobacco throughout Canada, noting that federal officials estimate that there are 50 illegal cigarette




                                                 24
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




of Table 3 also confirm that menthol bans significantly reduced the likelihood of

ever having tried a menthol cigarette and the likelihood that smokers report their

usual brand of cigarette is menthol. Taken together, the findings of Table 3 confirm

that menthol bans were enforced and induced meaningful reductions in menthol

cigarette use.18

         In Figure 6 we show CSTADS results from event study models where we

explicitly show how menthol cigarette use varies in ban-adopting (i.e., treatment)

versus non-adopting (i.e., control) provinces relative to the timing of ban

implementation. As CSTADS has 4 policy cycles for all outcomes, we re-estimate

the same regression model but replace the single policy indicator variable by 3

event time indicators corresponding to the 2010/11, 2012/13, and 2016/17 cycles

(with the cycle 2014/15 just before the ban as the reference). The coefficients on

the event time indicators shown in the top right panel of Figure 6 for youths indicate

no systematic differences in pre-policy trends between the control and treatment

groups in the pre-policy period. Moreover, the relative reduction in menthol

smoking appears immediately after ban adoption.19


factories and over 300 illegal smoke shops operating in the country. We revisit some of these
alternative channels below.
18
   Regression estimates for control variables are reported in Appendix Tables 6 and 7 for youths and
adults, respectively. Among youths, males and aboriginals are more likely to smoke menthol
cigarettes compared with females and non-aboriginals, respectively. As expected, higher grade
students are more likely to use any cigarettes, including menthol cigarettes. Higher age was
associated with lower cigarette use among adults. Adult males are more likely to use cigarettes than
adult females, and married adults are less likely to use cigarettes than unmarried adults.
19
   Given that we have just two CTADS waves of data for adults that include information on menthol
and non-menthol use, we cannot implement similar event study models for those outcomes. For




                                                25
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




         Appendix Table 8 investigates the robustness of the estimated reductions in

menthol smoking rates observed for youths and adults in Table 3. We reprint the

baseline estimate from Table 3 in column 1 of Appendix Table 8 for reference. In

column 2, we show that the main finding is not sensitive to excluding the other

province-time varying smoking controls (real cigarette price, minimum age for e-

cigarette access). In column 3 we show p-values from the Wild cluster bootstrap

procedure (Cameron et al. 2008) and find that the estimated reductions in menthol

cigarette smoking survive this adjustment. In columns 4-7 we show robustness to

individually excluding the large ban-adopting provinces: Ontario, Alberta, Quebec,

and the maritime provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward

Island, respectively. The results confirm that no single province is driving the

estimated reduction in menthol cigarette smoking associated with the provincial

menthol bans for either youths (top panel) or adults (bottom panel).20 Finally, in

column 8 of Appendix Table 8 we show results where we exclude any province that

adopted a menthol ban and that exhibited stockpiling behavior in Figure 1 (Ontario,

Quebec, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Prince Edward Island). Doing so does

not fundamentally alter our main conclusions on menthol cigarette smoking.


other CTADS outcomes where we observe smoking-related outcomes over a longer period we are
able to implement event study models, and those are presented in Figure 7.
20
   The range of estimates when excluding individual provinces may also reflect evasion
opportunities, as distance to the nearest province without a menthol ban is likely to be relevant. For
example, the most populated province without a menthol ban is British Columbia. Excluding Alberta
returned noticeably larger estimated effects of provincial menthol bans at reducing menthol use,
perhaps suggesting that Alberta residents found it easier to evade the bans by travelling to nearby
British Columbia to purchase menthol cigarettes.




                                                 26
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




        In results not reported but available upon request, we also investigated

robustness of our main findings to address a range of other concerns. For example,

similar to excluding ban-adopting provinces one at a time, we also examined

models where we dropped each control (i.e., non-adopting) province one at a time.

Our estimated reductions in menthol cigarette use were robust to these sample

restrictions for both youths and adults. We also estimated models using probit

regression instead of linear probability models, and we estimated models without

sample weights. Our results on menthol cigarette use were not sensitive to either of

these choices. Additionally, we estimated models of menthol cigarette smoking that

excluded controls for cigarette prices, which may be endogenous to outcomes, and

our results were not meaningfully affected for either youths or adults. Related to

this, we found no meaningful reduced form relationship between provincial

menthol bans and cigarette prices.21 Finally, we also examined whether forward

looking behavior of individuals in provinces that adopted bans relatively late could

have affected our estimates, as the federal ban was drafted in November 2016,

finalized in April 2017, and reported in the media. To address this possibility, we

estimated models excluding Ontario, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland and

Labrador, all of which adopted menthol bans in 2017. Excluding these three




21
  Our provincial cigarette price measure does not separately identify menthol cigarette prices from
non-menthol cigarette prices, however.




                                                27
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




provinces did not meaningfully affect the finding that menthol bans significantly

reduced menthol cigarette smoking among youths and adults.

         In Table 4 we explore heterogeneity in the effects of provincial menthol

bans at reducing menthol cigarette smoking. The broad format follows Table 2 in

that we make the same demographic comparisons between youths and adults in the

top panel, between aboriginal youth and non-aboriginal youth in the next panel, and

so forth. In column 1 we report the pre-ban rate of menthol use in the full population

for the group identified in each row, and in column 2 we report the estimated effect

of the menthol ban on past 30 day menthol cigarette use from the fully saturated

model with province and time fixed effects, other time-varying provincial controls,

and individual covariates.

         The patterns in Table 4 reveal that the effects of the provincial menthol bans

at reducing menthol cigarette use were widespread across demographic groups. We

find meaningful reductions in cigarette smoking for every subsample except

younger youths in grades 6-8 and rural adults. These patterns are consistent with

the idea that the menthol bans were mostly enforced as suggested by the very large

estimated reductions in menthol use relative to pre-reform levels.22

         In Table 5 we investigate the effects of provincial menthol bans on a variety

of responses that could reflect substitution and evasion behaviors, which most of


22
   Below, we further investigate the rural vs. urban distinction and find that the lack of estimated
effect on menthol cigarette smoking for rural adults may be due to their closer proximity to
alternative sources such as First Nations reserves.




                                                28
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




the prior public health literature has not studied. Specifically, we examine past 30

day use of non-menthol combusted cigarettes in column 1; past 30 day use of e-

cigarettes in column 2; an indicator for having purchased cigarettes from a First

Nations reserve in the past 6 months in column 3; and an indicator for having

purchased cigarettes from a store or gas station not on a First Nations reserve in the

past 6 months in column 4. The last two outcomes are only available for adults in

the CTADS. Notably, provincial menthol bans are not binding on First Nations

reserves, so it is plausible that adults may have responded to a provincial ban by

changing the location of purchase to this type of exempt entity. Similar evidence

from the United States suggests that cigarette purchases from Native American

reservations to avoid excise taxes are quite common (Carpenter and Mathes, 2016;

DeCicca et al., 2002; Harding et al., 2012).

        The results in Table 5 return strong evidence that individuals responded to

provincial menthol bans in a variety of ways that are consistent with substitution

and evasion. Specifically, the results in the top panel for youths indicate that

menthol bans were associated with statistically significant increases of 1.7

percentage points in the likelihood of past 30 day non-menthol cigarette smoking,

consistent with the idea that young menthol smokers switched from menthol

cigarettes to non-menthol cigarettes in response to the bans. The other possible

substitution that the public health literature has identified as a target of concern is

e-cigarettes, which we examine in column 2 of Table 5. We find no evidence that




                                             29
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




provincial menthol bans were associated with statistically or economically

meaningful increases in e-cigarette use; in fact, the point estimate is negative and

very large relative to pre-reform levels for youths in the top panel, consistent with

the idea that menthol cigarettes and e-cigarettes are complements as opposed to

substitutes in consumption.

        For adults, we find no evidence of substitution from menthol to non-

menthol cigarette smoking in the bottom panel of column 1 of Table 5; the point

estimate is sizable and negative. We similarly find no evidence that adults

substituted toward e-cigarettes in response to provincial menthol bans. The

coefficient on the provincial menthol ban dummy is negative and statistically

significant, providing evidence that menthol cigarettes and e-cigarettes are

complements and not substitutes in consumption for adults.23

        Finally, the bottom panel of columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 provide strong

evidence of another behavioral response to provincial menthol bans: evasion.

Specifically, we estimate that menthol bans were associated with statistically

significant increases in the likelihood a respondent reports that she purchased

cigarettes on or from a First Nations reserve in the past six months, an effect on the




23
  This finding is consistent with Abouk and Adams (2017) and Cotti et al. (2018) who find evidence
that e-cigarettes and combustible cigarettes are complements in consumption for youths in the MTF
study and adults in the Nielsen consumer panel, respectively. Those studies do not examine menthol
cigarettes specifically, however. In Appendix Table 9 we also show that there is no evidence that
provincial menthol bans meaningfully affected past year marijuana or alcohol use for either youths
or adults.




                                               30
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




order of 4.3 percentage points. This is very large relative to the pre-reform mean

and is most consistent with substitution behavior from regulated sources to

unregulated sources. The bottom panel of column 4 of Table 5 indicates that

purchases that were shifted toward First Nations reserves were shifted away from

gas stations and grocery stores not located on First Nations reserves. 24 Taken

together, the results in Table 5 indicate that behavioral responses in the form of

substitution to non-menthol cigarettes by youths and evasion toward First Nations

reserve purchases by adults likely blunted some of the overall intended impact of

provincial menthol bans.25

         Finally, in Table 6 we examine the effects of provincial menthol bans on

population smoking outcomes. Column 1 shows results for the `Ever Smoked 100

or More Cigarettes in Whole Life' outcome, column 2 shows results for the `Past


24
   We unfortunately do not observe detailed sub-province information on residential location of the
CTADS respondents, so we cannot directly test whether these effects are larger for individuals
located nearer to First Nations reserves. Moreover, First Nations reserves are found in every
province throughout Canada, so province-based sample restrictions are not particularly informative.
We have, however, run models separately for rural versus urban respondents in the CTADS under
the reasoning that the First Nations reserves are disproportionately found in rural areas, so rural
residents are plausibly closer to a reserve than are urban residents. These results are reported in
Appendix Table 10 and confirm that the evasion effects for purchases on First Nations reserves are
much larger for individuals in rural areas than for individuals in urban areas (an 8.7 versus a 3.2
percentage point increase in columns 2 and 3, respectively).
25
   Appendix Table 11 shows that the substitution and evasion outcomes for adults and youths,
respectively, are also largely robust along the same lines as the menthol use reductions shown in
Appendix Table 8. Of particular note in Appendix Table 11 is column 8, which shows that our
results on substitution for youths and evasion by adults are both robust to excluding ban-adopting
that exhibit stockpiling behavior. This is important because it helps rule out that the ban-related
increases in non-menthol cigarette smoking by youths are simply reporting artifacts, since for the
sample in column 8 of Appendix Table 11, there are not likely to be stockpiled menthol cigarettes
available. Figures 6 and 7 for youths and adults, respectively, confirm that event study models also
return evidence that menthol bans increased youths' use of non-menthol cigarettes and increased
adults' purchases of cigarettes from First Nations reserves.




                                                31
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




30 Day Smoker' outcome, and column 3 shows results for the `Ever Tried to Quit

Smoking' outcome (conditional on any past 30 day smoking). The results in Table

6 provide no evidence that menthol bans affected cigarette smoking participation

among youths in the top panel. All estimates are very small in magnitude and not

statistically significant. For adults in the bottom panel we estimate that provincial

menthol bans significantly reduced lifetime smoking, but this is not observed for

past month smoking or quit attempts. Taken together, the mostly null findings in

Table 6 provide little support for the idea that menthol bans would be an effective

means of reducing overall rates of cigarette smoking in the population, and this is

especially true for youths.



5. Discussion and Conclusion

This study is the first to our knowledge to estimate the intended and unintended

effects of large-scale bans on menthol flavors in cigarettes on a range of smoking

outcomes for youths and adults. Concerns that menthol flavoring enables youth

smoking and makes it harder for adults to quit have generated much policy interest

and public health literature on menthol bans, but research directly evaluating the

effects of such bans is scarce. We sought to fill this gap by studying the experience

of Canada where several provinces banned menthol cigarettes at different times

from 2015-2017.




                                             32
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




        Our findings that provincial menthol bans significantly reduced menthol

cigarette sales and self-reported menthol cigarette smoking among youths and

adults are broadly consistent with the results from both the public health studies

looking at planned responses and the one pre-post treatment-control design paper

(Chaiton et al. 2019). This finding is also in line with a prior government report

using sales data on menthol cigarettes in Canada (Health Canada, 2017), though we

provide a more comprehensive evaluation by using sales data from all provinces

spanning the entire period of provincial and federal ban adoptions.

        While the reductions on menthol cigarette use are largely `mechanical', our

other findings on overall cigarette use, quit attempts, and substitution and evasion

mechanisms are more novel and have not been systematically examined in prior

work. These outcomes also directly address the main reasons that public health

officials give for adopting menthol bans in the first place. In the words of former

FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb, "menthol-flavored products represent one of the

most common and pernicious routes by which kids initiate on combustible

cigarettes." Our results are not consistent with this broad claim for youths aged 11-

17: banning menthol did not reduce smoking initiation by these youths as measured

by the likelihood they smoked 100 cigarettes in their lifetime. We similarly did not

find evidence that menthol bans reduced smoking among adults. We also found that

the lack of systematic reductions in overall smoking rates is due to two factors:

first, youths substituted toward non-menthol cigarettes; and second, adults evaded




                                             33
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




the new regulation by shifting purchases toward First Nations reserves which are

exempt from compliance.

        Although ours are the first comprehensive quasi-experimental results on the

effects of menthol bans in a large developed country, we are of course aware of

possible external validity concerns. Europe has a broadly similar policy landscape

to Canada, having banned non-menthol flavors in 2013 and is expanding it to

menthol flavors in 2020. Moreover, Europe's menthol use rate is similar to

Canada's (7% vs. 5%, respectively) (Zatoski et al., 2018). While the demographic

makeup of Europe is more diverse than that of Canada, our findings are likely to be

broadly applicable in that setting. For the US, in contrast, there may be more serious

generalizability concerns, as the market share for menthol cigarettes is much larger

in the US (30%) than in Canada (5%). The smaller size of menthol cigarette market

in Canada might help explain the lack of illegal markets for menthol cigarettes in

Canada following the bans (which, in turn, could have contributed to the

effectiveness of the Canadian menthol bans at reducing menthol cigarette use).

Another difference with the US is the demographic concentration of menthol

cigarette use among African Americans in the US, which is not true in Canada.

        Our study is subject to some limitations. First, due to the timing of our data

relative to the provincial menthol ban variation, we are only able to study very

short-term effects. Thus, although our estimates are timely, it is certainly possible

that the medium or longer term effects might be different. Second, the pre-ban study




                                             34
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




periods are short for the menthol and non-menthol cigarette smoking outcomes for

adults, which limited our ability to address pre-trends in CTADS for those two

outcomes. Third, survey respondents may be more likely to report having stopped

smoking menthol cigarettes because of desirability bias. That we find evidence of

substitution to non-menthol cigarettes for youths and a shift toward First Nations

reserve purchases for adults in Table 5, however, suggests that the effects we

identify are likely real. Fourth, because the CSTADS data are completed at schools,

we cannot account for high school dropouts or other students who were absent on

the day of the survey, though it is unlikely that this type of missing data would be

systematically correlated with provincial menthol bans.

        We are also limited in making strong welfare conclusions about the effects

of menthol bans. Individuals who strongly prefer smoking menthol suffer utility

loss from the menthol ban but may potentially gain utility from improved health.

Unfortunately, the literature on the possibility of differential health effects of

menthol vs. non-menthol cigarettes is not completely settled, and it is also possible

that there are differential health effects of menthol cigarettes previously sold on the

open market and menthol cigarettes sold on First Nations reserves. Moreover, the

menthol bans may themselves result in changes in quality of menthol cigarettes

produced and sold on First Nations reserves or via contraband sources since they

now face much less competition. For these reasons, drawing strong welfare

conclusions about the effects of menthol bans is beyond the scope of this project.




                                             35
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




        Despite these limitations, our study represents to our knowledge the first

comprehensive quasi-experimental evidence on the effects of menthol bans and

clearly indicates a range of tradeoffs that have not been considered by prior work.

Future economics research and policymaker discussions on these increasingly

popular policy instruments should take account of these findings to design the most

effective approach for regulating menthol cigarette use specifically and population

smoking behaviors in general.




                                             36
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




REFERENCES

Abouk, R., Adams, S., 2017. Bans on electronic cigarette sales to minors and
        smoking among high school students. J Health Econ 54, 17­24.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.03.003
Adda, J., Cornaglia, F., 2010. The effect of bans and taxes on passive smoking.
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, 1­32.
Adda, J., Cornaglia, F., 2006. Taxes, cigarette consumption, and smoking intensity.
        American Economic Review 96, 1013­1028.
Ai, C., Norton, E.C., 2003. Interaction terms in logit and probit models. Economics
        Letters 80, 123­129. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1765(03)00032-6
Anderson, S.J., 2011. Menthol cigarettes and smoking cessation behaviour: a
        review of tobacco industry documents. Tob Control 20, ii49­ii56.
        https://doi.org/10.1136/tc.2010.041947
Belluz, J., 2018. The FDA cracks down on menthol cigarettes and flavored cigars
        [WWW Document]. Vox. URL https://www.vox.com/science-and-
        health/2018/11/14/18088468/juul-e-cigarette-menthol-fda-ban (accessed
        1.20.19).
Blecher, E., 2008. The impact of tobacco advertising bans on consumption in
        developing countries. Journal of health economics 27, 930­942.
Borland, R., Wilson, N., Fong, G.T., Hammond, D., Cummings, K.M., Yong, H.-
        H., Hosking, W., Hastings, G., Thrasher, J., McNeill, A., 2009. Impact of
        graphic and text warnings on cigarette packs: findings from four countries
        over      five      years.     Tobacco        Control      18,     358­364.
        https://doi.org/10.1136/tc.2008.028043
Burkhalter, R., Cumming, T., Rynard, V., Schonlau, M., Manske, S., 2018.
        Research Methods for the Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs
        Survey, 2010-2015. Waterloo, Ontario: Propel Centre for Population Health
        Impact, University of Waterloo.
Cameron, A.C., Gelbach, J.B., Miller, D.L., 2008. Bootstrap-Based Improvements
        for Inference with Clustered Errors. Rev Econ Stat 90, 414­427.
        https://doi.org/10.1162/rest.90.3.414
Carpenter, C., Postolek, S., Warman, C.R., 2011. Public-place smoking laws and
        exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) in public places. Am Econ
        J Econ Policy 3(3), 35­61.
Carpenter, C.S., 2009. The Effects of Local Workplace Smoking Laws on Smoking
        Restrictions and Exposure to Smoke at Work. J. Human Resources 44,
        1023­1046. https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.44.4.1023
Carpenter, C.S., Mathes, M.T., 2016. New Evidence on the Price Effects of
        Cigarette Tax Competition. Public Finance Review 44, 291­310.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1091142115605375




                                             37
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




Carter, A.V., Schnepel, K.T., Steigerwald, D.G., 2017. Asymptotic behavior of at-
        test robust to cluster heterogeneity. Rev Econ Stat 99, 698­709.
Cawley, J., Ruhm, C.J., 2011. Chapter 3 - The Economics of Risky Health
        Behaviors, in: Pauly, M.V., Mcguire, T.G., Barros, P.P. (Eds.), Handbook
        of Health Economics, Handbook of Health Economics. Elsevier, pp. 95­
        199. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53592-4.00003-7
Chaiton, M., Schwartz, R., Cohen, J.E., Soule, E., Eissenberg, T., 2018. Association
        of Ontario's Ban on Menthol Cigarettes With Smoking Behavior 1 Month
        After Implementation. JAMA Intern Med 178, 710­711.
        https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.8650
Chaiton, M., Schwartz, R., Shuldiner, J., Tremblay, G., Nugent, R., 2019.
        Evaluating a Real World Ban on Menthol Cigarettes: An Interrupted Time-
        Series Analysis of Sales. Nicotine & Tobacco Research.
Chaloupka, F.J., Warner, K.E., 2000. Chapter 29 The economics of smoking, in:
        Handbook of Health Economics. Elsevier, pp. 1539­1627.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0064(00)80042-6
Chicago Tribune, 2010. Blacks divided over possible menthol ban [WWW
        Document].                       chicagotribune.com.                   URL
        https://www.chicagotribune.com/living/ct-xpm-2010-11-23-ct-met-
        menthol-cigarettes-blacks-20101123-story.html (accessed 1.20.19).
Cotti, C., Nesson, E., Tefft, N., 2018. The relationship between cigarettes and
        electronic cigarettes: Evidence from household panel data. J Health Econ
        61, 205­219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.08.001
Courtemanche, C.J., Palmer, M.K., Pesko, M.F., 2017. Influence of the Flavored
        Cigarette Ban on Adolescent Tobacco Use. Am J Prev Med 52, e139­e146.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2016.11.019
Curtis, C., 2015. Group wants proposed menthol cigarette ban to apply to aboriginal
        tobacco         industry        |       Montreal        Gazette.       URL
        https://montrealgazette.com/news/group-wants-proposed-menthol-
        cigarette-ban-to-apply-to-aboriginal-tobacco-industry (accessed 7.25.19).
DeCicca, P., Kenkel, D., Liu, F., 2015. Reservation Prices: An Economic Analysis
        of Cigarette Purchases on Indian Reservations. NTJ 68, 93­118.
        https://doi.org/10.17310/ntj.2015.1.04
DeCicca, P., Kenkel, D., Mathios, A., 2002. Putting Out the Fires: Will Higher
        Taxes Reduce the Onset of Youth Smoking? Journal of Political Economy
        110, 144­169. https://doi.org/10.1086/324386
D'Silva, J., Amato, M.S., Boyle, R.G., 2015. Quitting and Switching: Menthol
        Smokers' Responses to a Menthol Ban [WWW Document].
        https://doi.org/info:doi/10.18001/TRS.1.1.6
Edgecliffe-Johnson, A., Gray, A., 2018. Big Tobacco prepares to fight proposed
        ban on menthol cigarettes [WWW Document]. Financial Times. URL




                                             38
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




       https://www.ft.com/content/56ac9180-ea02-11e8-885c-e64da4c0f981
       (accessed 1.20.19).
European Commission, 2018. Press release - "Tobacco consumption still a threat
       to our societies": Statement by Commissioner Andriukaitis on World No
       Tobacco Day [WWW Document]. URL http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
       release_STATEMENT-18-3976_en.htm (accessed 1.20.19).
Gospodinov, N., Irvine, I.J., 2004. Global health warnings on tobacco packaging:
       evidence from the Canadian experiment. Topics in Economic Analysis &
       Policy 4.
Grant, G., 2019. Ontario is finally ready to bust contraband tobacco. Here's how
       Quebec         did        it      |       Financial        Post.       URL
       https://business.financialpost.com/opinion/ontario-is-finally-ready-to-bust-
       contraband-tobacco-heres-how-quebec-did-it (accessed 10.10.19).
Harding, M., Leibtag, E., Lovenheim, M.F., 2012. The heterogeneous geographic
       and socioeconomic incidence of cigarette taxes: Evidence from Nielsen
       Homescan Data. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4, 169­98.
Health Canada, 2017. Tobacco Reporting Regulations Section 13 [WWW
       Document]. URL https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/SOR-
       2000-273/
Huang, J., Chaloupka, F.J., Fong, G.T., 2014. Cigarette graphic warning labels and
       smoking prevalence in Canada: a critical examination and reformulation of
       the FDA regulatory impact analysis. Tobacco Control 23, i7­i12.
Kenkel, D., Mathios, A., Wang, H., 2017. Advertising and Health: A Case Study
       of Menthol Cigarette Advertising and Cigarette Demand. American Journal
       of Health Economics 4, 263­286. https://doi.org/10.1162/ajhe_a_00097
Machado, F.S., Sinha, R.K., 2007. Smoking cessation: A model of planned vs.
       actual behavior for time-inconsistent consumers. Marketing Science 26,
       834­850.
Maclean, J.C., Pesko, M.F., Hill, S.C., 2018. The Effect of Insurance Expansions
       on Smoking Cessation Medication Prescriptions: Evidence from ACA
       Medicaid Expansions. NBER Working Paper.
Moan, I.S. ve, Rise, J., 2006. Predicting smoking reduction among adolescents
       using an extended version of the theory of planned behaviour. Psychology
       and Health 21, 717­738.
Nguyen, H.V., 2013. Do smoke-free car laws work? Evidence from a quasi-
       experiment. J Health Econ 32, 138­148.
Norton, E.C., Dowd, B.E., 2018. Log Odds and the Interpretation of Logit Models.
       Health Serv Res 53, 859­878. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.12712
O'Connor, R.J., Bansal-Travers, M., Carter, L.P., Cummings, K.M., 2012. What
       would menthol smokers do if menthol in cigarettes were banned?




                                             39
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




       Behavioral intentions and simulated demand. Addiction 107, 1330­1338.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.2012.03822.x
Pearson, J.L., Abrams, D.B., Niaura, R.S., Richardson, A., Vallone, D.M., 2012. A
       Ban on Menthol Cigarettes: Impact on Public Opinion and Smokers'
       Intention to Quit. Am J Public Health 102, e107­e114.
       https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2012.300804
Reuters, 2014. U.S. judge tosses FDA panel report on menthol cigarettes. Reuters.
Schwartz, R., Chaiton, M., Borland, T., Diemert, L., 2018. Tobacco industry tactics
       in preparing for menthol ban. Tobacco Control 27, 577­577.
       https://doi.org/10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2017-053910
Stehr, M., 2005. Cigarette tax avoidance and evasion. Journal of Health Economics
       24, 277­297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2004.08.005
Wackowski, O.A., Manderski, M.T.B., Delnevo, C.D., 2014. Young Adults'
       Behavioral Intentions Surrounding a Potential Menthol Cigarette Ban.
       Nicotine Tob Res 16, 876­880. https://doi.org/10.1093/ntr/ntu003
Wickham, R.J., 2015. How Menthol Alters Tobacco-Smoking Behavior: A
       Biological Perspective. Yale J Biol Med 88, 279­287.
World Health Organization, 2019. Tobacco [WWW Document]. URL
       https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tobacco          (accessed
       8.28.19).
World Health Organization, 2016. Banning Menthol in Tobacco Products -- WHO
       Study Group on Tobacco Product Regulation (TobReg) [WWW
       Document].                                                             URL
       https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/205928/9789241510332_
       eng.pdf;jsessionid=DA5562F19F31DBDFA39EDF0BCE34DA52?sequen
       ce=1
Zatoski, M., Herbe, A., Zatonski, W., Przewoniak, K., Janik-Koncewicz, K.,
       Mons, U., Fong, G.T., Demjen, T., Tountas, Y., Trofor, A.C., 2018.
       Characterising smokers of menthol and flavoured cigarettes, their attitudes
       towards tobacco regulation, and the anticipated impact of the Tobacco
       Products Directive on their smoking and quitting behaviours: The
       EUREST-PLUS ITC Europe Surveys. Tobacco Induced Diseases 16, A4.




                                             40
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




                                             Figure 1: Trends in Menthol Cigarette Sales, by Province
                                            The provincial bans are represented by the vertical dashed lines.
                                                The federal ban is represented by the vertical solid line.
    12




            14




                    16




                               17




                                                                              12




                                                                                       14




                                                                                                 16




                                                                                                               7




                                                                                                                        12




                                                                                                                                 14




                                                                                                                                          16




                                                                                                                                                      17




                                                                                                                                                                  12




                                                                                                                                                                         14




                                                                                                                                                                                16




                                                                                                                                                                                           7
                                       12




                                                14




                                                        16




                                                                   17




                                                                                                             01




                                                                                                                                                                                         01
 20




         20




                 20




                            20




                                                                            20




                                                                                     20




                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                     20




                                              20




                                                      20




                                                                 20




                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                         ct




                                                                                                         ct




                                                                                                                                                 ct




                                                                                                                                                                                     ct
                                                              ct
                         O




                                                                                                        O




                                                                                                                                                 O




                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                              O




                                                                                12




                                                                                         14




                                                                                                   16




                                                                                                                 17




                                                                                                                          12




                                                                                                                                   14




                                                                                                                                            16




                                                                                                                                                           17




                                                                                                                                                                  12




                                                                                                                                                                         14




                                                                                                                                                                                16




                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                       12




                                                 14




                                                         16




                                                                        7
    12




            14




                    16




                                17




                                                                     01




                                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                             20




                                                                                      20




                                                                                                20




                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                        20
                                     20




                                               20




                                                       20
 20




         20




                 20




                             20




                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                      ct
                                                                                                           ct




                                                                                                                                                     ct
                          ct




                                                                  ct




                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                         O




                                                                                                                                                 O
                         O




                                                              O




                                                                                              41
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




                                         Figure 2: Trends in Non-Menthol Cigarette Sales, by Province
                                          The provincial bans are represented by the vertical dashed lines.
                                              The federal ban is represented by the vertical solid line.




                                                                                                                12




                                                                                                                        14




                                                                                                                               16




                                                                                                                                          7




                                                                                                                                                 12




                                                                                                                                                        14




                                                                                                                                                               16




                                                                                                                                                                            7
                                                                            12




                                                                                    14




                                                                                             16




                                                                                                        17
   12




          14




                 16




                            17




                                    12




                                              14




                                                      16




                                                                 17




                                                                                                                                        01




                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                          20




                                                                                  20




                                                                                           20




                                                                                                      20
 20




        20




               20




                          20




                                  20




                                            20




                                                    20




                                                               20




                                                                                                                                        2




                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                     ct




                                                                                                                                                                     ct
                                                                                                   ct
                       ct




                                                            ct




                                                                                                                                    O




                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                   O
                       O




                                                            O




                                                                             12




                                                                                     14




                                                                                              16




                                                                                                         17
                                     12




                                               14




                                                       16




                                                                      7
   12




          14




                  16




                              7




                                                                                                                 12




                                                                                                                        14




                                                                                                                               16




                                                                                                                                          17




                                                                                                                                                12




                                                                                                                                                       14




                                                                                                                                                              16




                                                                                                                                                                          17
                                                                    01
                           01




                                   20




                                             20




                                                     20




                                                                           20




                                                                                   20




                                                                                            20




                                                                                                       20
 20




        20




                20




                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                    2
                           2




                                                                                                    ct
                                                                 ct
                        ct




                                                                                                                                     ct




                                                                                                                                                                     ct
                                                                O




                                                                                                   O
                       O




                                                                                                                                    O




                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                          42
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




   Figure 3: Event studies on Provincial Menthol Bans, Menthol and Non-
                               Menthol Sales




                                             43
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




 Figure 4: Yearly Trend in Outcomes, Treated vs. Control Provinces, Age 11
                            ­ 17 (CSTADS data)




Note: CSTADS 2010-2017. Treatment provinces are Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Alberta, Quebec and
Ontario and control provinces are Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and Labrador, Manitoba, British
Columbia, and Saskatchewan.




                                                44
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




Figure 5: Yearly Trend in Outcomes, Treated vs. Control Provinces, Age 19+
                              (CTADS data)




 Note: CTADS 2015-2017 for menthol cigarette and non-menthol cigarette outcomes, CTUMS/CTADS 2003-
 2017 for any cigarette use and CTUMS/CTADS 2010-2017 for purchase from First Nations Reserve outcome.
 Treatment provinces are Nova Scotia, Alberta, Quebec, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick and
 Newfoundland and Labrador, and control provinces are Manitoba, British Columbia and Saskatchewan.




                                                  45
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




           Figure 6: Event Study Estimates, Age 11-17 (CSTADS data)




 Note: CSTADS 2010-2017. X-axis represents CSTADS cycles. Shown are estimated effects from difference-
 in-differences regressions in which a single policy indicator variable is replaced by a series of event time
 indicators for CSTADS cycles before and after the ban implementation in each province. First CSTADS cycle
 pre-policy (2014/15) is the reference time period.




                                                    46
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




              Figure 7: Event Study Estimates, Age 19+ (CTADS data)




Note: CTUMS/CTADS 2003-2017 for any cigarettes and 2010-2017 for first nations reserve. X-axis represents
2-yearly intervals to date of ban implementation. Shown are estimated effects from difference-in-differences
regressions in which a single policy indicator variable is replaced by a series of event time indicators for 2-
yearly intervals before and after the ban implementation in each province. 2-years immediately preceding ban
implementation is the reference time period.




                                                      47
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




 Table 1: Provincial Menthol Bans Significantly Reduced Menthol Cigarette
    Sales and Had No Effect on Non-Menthol Cigarette Sales, 2012-2018
                                                      (1)                          (2)
                                                 Menthol sales              Non-menthol sales
                                                 (in millions)                (in millions)
 Mean of dependent variable in 2012:                 12.59                       295.08

 Provincial menthol ban                               -14.299**                   -3.323
                                                        (2.40)                    (5.863)

 Provincial e-cigarette minimum legal                   5.862                     -4.780
 age restriction
                                                       (1.34)                     (5.627)

 Provincial cigarette price                            -0.168                      0.114
                                                       (0.31)                     (0.548)

 Provincial unemployment rate                          -0.427                      1.803
                                                       (0.38)                     (2.618)

 R2                                                    0.67                         0.98
 N                                                     840                          840
Notes: Data are provincial menthol and non-menthol cigarette sales from 2012-2018 provided by
Health Canada. All models are estimated using OLS regressions and include province, year and
month fixed effects in addition to the covariates listed. Robust standard errors are clustered at the
province level. Significance levels are *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at
10%.




                                                 48
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




          Table 2: Heterogeneity in Menthol Preferences, Survey Data
                     CSTADS (youths) and CTADS (adults)
                                      (1)                     (2)                   (3)
                                Smoking rate          Menthol smoking       Menthol smoking
                              [prior to menthol      rate, unconditional   rate, conditional on
                                    bans]             [prior to menthol        any smoking
                                                            bans]           [prior to menthol
                                                                                   bans]

 Youths, 11-17                 0.075* (0.263)          0.027* (0.161)        0.308* (0.462)
 Adults, 19+                   0.182* (0.386)          0.016* (0.125)        0.115* (0.319)


 Non-aboriginal youths,        0.071* (0.256)          0.025* (0.155)        0.300* (0.458)
 11-17
 Aboriginal youths, 11-17      0.209* (0.406)          0.086* (0.280)        0.379* (0.485)


 Male youths, 11-17            0.083* (0.275)          0.031* (0.173)         0.311 (0.463)
 Female youths, 11-17          0.066* (0.248)          0.022* (0.146)         0.303 (0.460)


 Grades 6-8 youths             0.022* (0.147)          0.007* (0.085)        0.254* (0.436)
 Grades 9-12 youths            0.112* (0.316)          0.040* (0.197)        0.315* (0.465)


 Male adults, 19+              0.207* (0.405)          0.013* (0.114)        0.078* (0.268)
 Female adults, 19+            0.159* (0.365)          0.018* (0.134)        0.170* (0.376)


 Urban adults, 19+             0.176* (0.381)          0.017 (0.128)         0.128* (0.334)
 Rural adults, 19+             0.190* (0.393)          0.013 (0.112)         0.081* (0.273)


 Married adults, 19+           0.163* (0.369)          0.012* (0.109)        0.102* (0.303)
 Unmarried adults, 19+         0.253* (0.435)          0.030* (0.170)        0.148* (0.355)

Notes: Author calculations. * indicates the difference between the two groups is significant.
CSTADS 2010-2017 for age 11-17, CTUMS/CTADS 2003-2017 for age 19+ for smoking rate
(except for urban vs. rural adults 19+ based on CTUMS/CTADS 2004-2017) and CTADS 2015-
2017 for age 19+ for unconditional menthol smoking rate and menthol smoking rate conditional on
any smoking.




                                                49
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




 Table 3: Menthol Bans Reduced Menthol Cigarette Use Among Youths and
                             Adults, Survey Data
                 CSTADS 2010-2017 and CTADS 2015-2017
         Coefficient on Provincial Menthol Ban, Fully Saturated Model
                                      (1)                      (2)                      (3)
                               Smoked menthol         Ever tried smoking a        Usual brand of
                             cigarettes in past 30     menthol cigarette       cigarette is menthol
                                     days                                      (among past month
                                                                                    smokers)
 Youths 11-17,
 CSTADS
 Pre-reform mean                     0.027

 Provincial Menthol Ban           -0.024***                    --                       --
                                    (0.001)

 R-squared                          0.02
 N                                 178,387
 Adults 19+, CTADS
 Pre-reform mean                     0.016                   0.360                    0.059

 Provincial Menthol Ban            -0.031**                 -0.079**                -0.112***
                                    (0.033)                  (0.018)                  (0.001)

 R-squared                           0.01                     0.03                    0.05
 N                                  22,376                   22,378                   3,580
Notes: Each entry is the coefficient on Menthol Ban from a separate regression. CSTADS 2010-
2017 and CTADS 2003-2017. All models are estimated using OLS regressions and include province
fixed effects and indicators for survey cycles. Models using CSTADS control for individual level
factors: grade, sex (male; female is the excluded category), aboriginal status and province level
factors: unemployment rate, cigarette prices. Models using CTADS control for individual level
factors: age, sex (male; female is the excluded category), marital status
(married/widowed/divorced/separated, never married is the excluded category), household size,
urban, and province level factors: unemployment rate, real cigarette prices and an indicator for a
provincial minimum legal age for e-cigarette purchases. Standard errors are clustered at the province
level. P-values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of effective number of clusters.
Significance levels are *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.




                                                 50
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




               Table 4: Heterogeneity in the Effects of Menthol Bans
                       CSTADS (youths) and CTADS (adults)
                                              (1)                              (2)
                                    Pre-policy menthol use        Estimated effect of Provincial
                                      rate, unconditional           Menthol Ban on menthol
                                                                          cigarette use

 Youths, 11-17                               0.027                      -0.024 (0.001)***
 Adults, 19+                                 0.016                       -0.031 (0.033)**


 Non-aboriginal youths, 11-17                0.025                      -0.019 (0.002)***
 Aboriginal youths, 11-17                    0.086                      -0.078 (0.005)***


 Male youths, 11-17                          0.031                      -0.022 (0.000)***
 Female youths, 11-17                        0.022                      -0.025 (0.004)***


 Grades 6-8 youths                           0.007                        -0.002 (0.461)
 Grades 9-12 youths                          0.040                      -0.035 (0.000)***



 Male adults, 19+                            0.013                       -0.011 (0.074)*
 Female adults, 19+                          0.018                       -0.051 (0.050)*


 Urban adults, 19+                           0.017                      -0.039 (0.026)**
 Rural adults, 19+                           0.013                       -0.003 (0.720)


 Married adults, 19+                         0.012                       -0.031 (0.066)*
 Unmarried adults, 19+                       0.030                      -0.034 (0.016)**

Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. See notes to Table 3. P-
values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of effective number of clusters.




                                                 51
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




             Table 5: Substitution and Evasion Effects of Menthol Bans
                     CSTADS 2010-2017 and CTADS 2010-2017
             Coefficient on Provincial Menthol Ban, Fully Saturated Model
                                    (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)
                               Smoked non-         Used e-         Purchased         Purchased
                                 menthol         cigarettes in      cigarettes        cigarettes
                               cigarettes in     past 30 days      on/from a       from a store or
                               past 30 days                       First Nations    gas station not
                                                                 reserve in past      on a First
                                                                    6 months           Nations
                                                                                   reserve in past
                                                                                      6 months
 Youths 11-17, CSTADS
 Pre-reform mean                  0.053              0.051

 Provincial Menthol Ban          0.017***           -0.064             ---               ---
                                  (0.004)           (0.111)

 R-squared                        0.05               0.05
 N                               174,030            81,436
 Adults 19+, CTADS
 (CTADS Time period for          2015-17            2013-17         2010-17           2011-17
 the outcome:)

 Pre-reform mean                  0.122              0.019           0.120             0.863

 Provincial Menthol Ban           -0.017            -0.029**         0.043*          -0.076**
                                  (0.352)            (0.016)         (0.056)          (0.011)

 R-squared                         0.02              0.01             0.04              0.01
 N                                22,110            33,414           13,997            11,107
Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. See notes to Table 3. P-
values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of effective number of clusters.




                                               52
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




       Table 6: Menthol Bans Did Not Affect Overall Smoking Initiation,
                             Participation, or Quits
                  CSTADS 2010-2017 and CTADS 2003-2017
          Coefficient on Provincial Menthol Ban, Fully Saturated Model
                                               (1)               (2)                  (3)
 Outcome is                               Ever smoked        Any cigarette     Ever tried to quit
                                          100 or more       smoking in past    smoking (among
                                          cigarettes in        30 days           past 30 day
                                           whole life                             cigarette
                                                                                  smokers)
 Youths 11-17, CSTADS
 Pre-reform mean of the outcome               0.049              0.075               0.662

 Provincial Menthol Ban                      -0.001              0.002               0.018
                                             (0.806)            (0.803)             (0.417)

 R-squared                                   0.05                0.06                0.02
 N                                          180,391             180,387             11,058
 Adults 19+, CTADS
 Pre-reform mean of the outcome               0.463              0.182               0.840

 Provincial Menthol Ban                     -0.065**            -0.039               0.008
                                             (0.044)            (0.143)             (0.536)

 R-squared                                      0.05               0.03                0.01
 N                                           193,405             193,408             27,928
Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. See notes to Table 3. P-
values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of effective number of clusters.




                                               53
        Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




                                   Appendix Table 1: Timing of Provincial and Federal Menthol Bans
                                Date law introduced (first        Date law passed     Royal Assent      Date law came into effect
                                        reading)

Nova Scotia                          April 17, 2015               April 28, 2015      May 11, 2015           May 31, 2015
Alberta                                    ---                      May 2015               ---            September 30, 2015
New Brunswick                        May 29,2015                   June 5, 2015       June 5, 2015          January 1, 2016
Quebec                                May 5, 2015               November 26, 2015   November 26, 2015        May 26, 2016
Ontario                            November 24, 2014              May 26, 2015        May 28, 2015          January 1, 2017
Prince Edward Island                   June 2015                 September 2016      September 2016           May 1, 2017
Newfoundland & Labrador               June 2, 2016                 June 6, 2016       June 7, 2016            July 1, 2017
Manitoba                            No ban adopted               No ban adopted      No ban adopted         No ban adopted
Saskatchewan                        No ban adopted               No ban adopted      No ban adopted         No ban adopted
British Columbia                    No ban adopted               No ban adopted      No ban adopted         No ban adopted

Federal Ban                          April 29, 2016                June 1, 2017            ----             October 2, 2017
                                   (Notice to Interested
                                   Parties for proposed
                                       amendment)

                                   November 22, 2016
                                     (First reading)

                                        April 2017
                                (Order amended to include
                                         menthol)




                                                                          54
         Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




                               Appendix Table 2: Survey Questions and Years Available, CSTADS (youths)
Outcome                                               Survey years Variable construction
Ever smoked 100 or more cigarettes in lifetime          2010-2017        Based on survey question: "Have you ever smoked 100 or more whole cigarettes in
                                                                         your life? ­ Yes/No".

Any cigarette smoking in past 30 days                   2010-2017        Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent reported smoking one or more cigarettes
                                                                         on at least 1 day in the 30 days preceding the survey; 0 otherwise.

Ever tried to quit smoking                              2010-2017        Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent tried to quit at least once; 0 otherwise.

Past 30-day menthol cig use                             2010-2017        Based on survey question: "In the last 30 days, did you use ...(Menthol cigarette)?"

Past 30-day non-menthol cig use                         2010-2017        Respondents who smoked one or more cigarettes in 30 days preceding the survey
                                                                         excluding those who smoked menthol cigarettes in past 30 days.

Past 30-day e-cigarette use                             2014-2017        Based on survey question: "In the last 30 days, did you use any of the following? ...
                                                                         (E-cigarettes) ­ Yes/No"




                                                                             55
         Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




                                  Appendix Table 3: Survey Questions and Years Available, CTADS (adults)
Outcome                                                   Survey years Variable construction
Ever smoked 100 or more cigarettes in lifetime             2003-2017     Based on survey question: "Have you smoked at least 100 cigarettes in your life? ­
                                                                         Yes/No"

Any cigarette smoking in past 30 days                      2003-2017     Based on survey question: "In the past 30 days, did you smoke any cigarettes? ­
                                                                         Yes/No"

Ever tried to quit smoking                                 2006-2017     Based on survey question: "Have you ever tried to quit smoking? ­ Yes/No"

Past 30-day menthol cig use                                2015-2017     Based on survey question: "In the past 30 days have you smoked any menthol
                                                                         cigarettes? ­ Yes/No"

Past 30-day non-menthol cig use                            2015-2017     Respondents who smoked in the 30 days preceding the survey (as per Survey on
                                                                         Smoking in Canada definition) excluding those who smoked menthol cigarettes in past
                                                                         30 days (where available).

Past 30-day e-cigarette use                                2013-2017     Based on survey question: "In the past 30 days did you use an electronic cigarette,
                                                                         also known as an e-cigarette? ­ Yes/No"

Purchase from First Nations reserve                        2010-2017     Based on survey question: "In the past six months, did you buy cigarettes on/from a
                                                                         First Nations Reserve?- Yes/No".

Purchase from grocery store or gas station not on First    2010-2017     Binary variable equals 1 if the respondent reported buying cigarettes from a grocery
Nations reserve                                                          store or gas station not on a First Nations reserve in the past 6 months.




                                                                             56
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




                Appendix Table 4: Descriptive Statistics, Sales Data
                                  Menthol sales                    Non menthol sales
                             Pre-ban        Post-ban            Pre-ban         Post-ban
  Newfoundland &                3.20            -0.05             51.70            49.64
  Labrador
                               (1.64)           (0.09)            (7.54)             (7.72)
  Prince Edward Island          0.28            -0.00              5.27               4.21

                               (0.10)           (0.00)            (1.45)           (0.84)
  Nova Scotia                   3.48             0.17             76.42            76.70
                               (0.47)           (0.45)           (10.00)          (11.70)
  New Brunswick                 3.61            -0.05             61.48            52.31
                               (0.55)           (0.21)            (8.11)           (9.89)
  Quebec                       21.85            -0.27            585.63           559.34
                               (8.06)           (0.76)           (89.58)          (91.24)
  Ontario                      41.38             0.19            849.81           794.53
                              (13.60)           (1.52)          (104.56)         (122.10)
  Alberta                      21.77             0.02            342.38           311.01
                               (3.12)           (0.77)           (48.22)          (53.19)
  Manitoba                                 5.38                             78.34
                                          (3.66)                           (14.27)
 Saskatchewan                              6.66                             82.40
                                          (4.10)                           (13.74)
 British Columbia                         16.27                            232.15
                                         (12.45)                           (35.47)
Notes: Provincial sales data from 2012-2018 provided by Health Canada.




                                              57
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




                                   Appendix Table 5: Descriptive Statistics, Survey Data
                                 2010-2017 CSTADS (youths) and 2003-2017 CTADS (adults)
                                                                                              (1)                            (2)
                                                                                           CSTADS                         CTADS
                                                                                       youths aged 11-17              adults aged 19+
                                                                                      Mean (sd)         N           Mean (sd)         N
  Age                                                                                    --                      46.776 (17.143) 196,250
  Male                                                                              0.513 (0.500)    192,349      0.492 (0.500)    196,250
  Grade 6-8                                                                         0.394 (0.489)    192,349           --
  Grade 9-12                                                                        0.606 (0.489)    192,349           --
  Aboriginal                                                                        0.048 (0.214)    190,545           --
  Married                                                                                --                       0.783 (0.412)    193,619
  Urban                                                                                  --                       0.807 (0.394)    173,710
  Household size                                                                                                  2.795 (1.235)    196,071
  Lives in a province with a menthol ban at time of survey                           0.163 (0.369)     192,349    0.059 (0.236)    196,250
  Ever smoked 100 or more cigarettes in lifetime                                     0.049 (0.216)     192,283    0.456 (0.498)    196,215
  Any cigarette smoking in past 30 days                                              0.076 (0.265)     192,277    0.178 (0.382)    196,218
  Ever tried to quit smoking (among past 30 day smokers)                             0.663 (0.473)      11,537    0.841 (0.365)     28,269
  Used menthol cigarettes in past 30 days                                            0.028 (0.166)     190,012    0.016 (0.124)     22,730
  Used non-menthol cigarettes in past 30 days                                        0.054 (0.225)     185,637    0.133 (0.339)     22,463
  Used e-cigarettes in past 30 days                                                  0.077 (0.266)      92,234    0.022 (0.148)     34,455
  Purchased cigarettes from a First Nations reserve in past 6 months                       --                     0.115 (0.320)     14,694
  Purchased cigarettes from a store or gas station not on a First Nations reserve in       --                     0.858 (0.350)     11,639
  past 6 months
Means and standard deviations. Author calculations. Sample size varies across the outcomes based on the years the questions were included in
each survey. See Appendix Tables 2 and 3 for a list of which years each survey included the relevant questions. Provinces with a menthol ban
include Nova Scotia, Alberta, Ontario and Quebec for CSTADS and Nova Scotia, Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, Newfoundland and Labrador,
Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick for CTADS. Urban variable is only available for CTADS 2004-2017.




                                                                     58
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




       Appendix Table 6: Expanded set of Coefficient Estimates, Youths
                            CSTADS 2010-2017

Outcome                        Any cigarette         Menthol cigarette use      Non-menthol
                             smoking in past 30        in past 30 days       cigarette use in past
                                    days                                           30 days
Provincial Menthol Ban             0.002                  -0.024***               0.017***
                                  (0.803)                   (0.001)                (0.004)
Male                             0.015***                  0.008***                0.011**
                                  (0.009)                   (0.013)                (0.026)
Aboriginal                       0.130***                  0.051***               0.096***
                                  (0.001)                   (0.008)                (0.000)
Grade 7                           0.013*                    0.004*                 0.010**
                                  (0.068)                   (0.108)                (0.048)
Grade 8                          0.036**                   0.011**                 0.027**
                                  (0.039)                   (0.055)                (0.041)
Grade 9                          0.067***                  0.027***               0.047***
                                  (0.005)                   (0.004)                (0.011)
Grade 10                         0.092***                  0.037***               0.062***
                                  (0.000)                   (0.000)                (0.001)
Grade 11                         0.130***                  0.045***               0.094***
                                  (0.000)                   (0.000)                (0.000)
Grade 12                         0.173***                  0.059***               0.131***
                                  (0.000)                   (0.000)                (0.000)
Provincial cigarette price         0.001                    0.001*                  0.001
                                  (0.596)                   (0.093)                (0.720)
Provincial minimum age             -0.010                    -0.006                 -0.006
for e-cigarette purchase
                                   (0.490)                 (0.566)                  (0.582)
Provincial                          0.001                   -0.000                   0.000
unemployment rate
                                   (0.882)                 (0.976)                  (0.917)

 R-squared                           0.06                    0.02                    0.05
 N                                  180,387                178,387                  174,030
Note: CSTADS 2010-2017. All models are estimated using OLS regressions and include province
fixed effects and indicators for survey cycles. Standard errors are clustered at province level. P-
values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of effective number of clusters.
Significance levels are ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                59
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




        Appendix Table 7: Expanded set of Coefficient Estimates, Adults
                             CTADS 2010-2017

Outcome                         Any cigarette        Menthol cigarette use    Purchased cigarettes
                              smoking in past 30       in past 30 days        from a First Nations
                                    days                                        reserve in past 6
                                                                                     months
Provincial Menthol Ban              -0.039                 -0.031**                  0.043*
                                    (0.143)                 (0.033)                  (0.056)
Age                               -0.003***                -0.001**                  -0.000
                                    (0.000)                 (0.047)                  (0.487)
Male                              0.044***                   -0.007                   -0.008
                                    (0.002)                 (0.124)                  (0.401)
Married                            -0.032**                 -0.002                   -0.012
                                    (0.043)                 (0.853)                  (0.201)
Urban                                  --                     0.002                -0.059***
                                                            (0.529)                  (0.006)
Household size                    -0.023***                -0.006**                    0.004
                                    (0.000)                 (0.028)                  (0.692)
Provincial cigarette price           0.000                    0.000                   -0.001
                                   (0.621)                  (0.449)                  (0.739)
Provincial minimum age               0.024                    0.006                    0.028
for e-cigarette purchase
                                   (0.188)                  (0.418)                 (0.434)
Provincial                         0.005**                   0.004                   0.009
unemployment rate
                                   (0.025)                  (0.417)                 (0.280)

R-squared                            0.03                    0.01                    0.04
N                                  193,408                  22,376                  13,997

Note: CTUMS/CTADS 2003-2017 for `Any cigarette smoking in past 30 days', CTADS 2015-2017
for `Menthol cigarette use in past 30 days' and CTUMS/CTADS 2010-2017 for `Purchased
cigarettes from a First Nations reserve in past 6 months'. All models are estimated using OLS
regressions and include province fixed effects and indicators for survey cycles. Standard errors are
clustered at province level. P-values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of
effective number of clusters. Significance levels are ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                60
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




     Appendix Table 8: Effects of Menthol Bans at Reducing Menthol Cigarette Use are Robust, Survey Data
                                   CSTADS 2010-2017 and CTADS 2015-2017
                          Coefficient on Provincial Menthol Ban, Fully Saturated Model
                                    (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)                 (8)
                                 Baseline       (1), but     (1), but        (1), but    (1), but     (1), but     (1), but         (1), but drop
                                  model         exclude       Wild            drop        drop         drop       drop Nova            treated
                                  (from        controls     bootstrap        Ontario     Alberta      Quebec        Scotia,        provinces that
                                 Table 3)      for other     cluster                                                 New               exhibit
                                               smoking                                                            Brunswick,         stockpiling
                                                policies                                                          and Prince     (Newfoundland,
                                                                                                                   Edward         Prince Edward
                                                                                                                    Island        Island, Ontario
                                                                                                                                    and Quebec)
 Youths 11-17, CSTADS,
 menthol cigarette use
 Provincial Menthol Ban         -0.024***     -0.024***      -0.024*     -0.027***      -0.023**      -0.021**     -0.024***         -0.018**
                                  (0.001)       (0.000)      (0.053)       (0.000)       (0.029)       (0.035)      (0.004)           (0.027)

 R-squared                        0.02          0.02           0.02           0.03       0.02          0.03           0.02             0.03
 N                               178,387       178,387       178,387         154,853    153,066       160,214       142,911          106,079
 Adults 19+, CTADS,
 menthol cigarette use
 Provincial Menthol Ban          -0.031**     -0.029**      -0.031**      -0.026**      -0.046***     -0.037**      -0.033*          -0.017**
                                  (0.033)      (0.030)       (0.020)       (0.032)        (0.001)      (0.028)      (0.066)           (0.033)

  R-squared                        0.01           0.01          0.01         0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02             0.02
  N                               22,376         22,376        22,376       19,005        20,139       19,812         16,488           12,612
Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. See notes to Table 3. P-values are in parentheses and are estimated using
the method of effective number of clusters.




                                                                        61
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




  Appendix Table 9: Provincial Menthol Bans Did Not Affect Use of Other
                                Substances
               CSTADS 2010-2017 and CTADS 2010-2017
       Coefficient on Provincial Menthol Ban, Fully Saturated Model
                                    (1)                       (2)                   (3)
                             Used marijuana in        Used alcohol in past   Binge drinking in
                              past 12 months              12 months           past 12 months
 Youths 11-17,
 CSTADS
 Pre-reform mean                   0.182                     0.565

 Provincial Menthol Ban            -0.005                   -0.006
                                  (0.657)                  (0.652)
 R-squared                          0.11                     0.19
 N                                158,022                  151,081
 Adults 19+, CTADS
 (CTADS Time period               2004-17                  2013-17               2013-17
 for the outcome:)

 Pre-reform mean                   0.087                     0.777                 0.076

 Provincial Menthol Ban            -0.052                    0.001                 -0.005
                                  (0.125)                   (0.914)               (0.546)
 R-squared                          0.10                      0.03                  0.07
 N                                168,770                   33,257                32,857
Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. See notes to Table 3. P-
values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of effective number of clusters.




                                                 62
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




  Appendix Table 10: Adult Evasion Effects are Larger for Adults in Rural
                                  Areas
                            CTADS 2010-2017
       Coefficient on Provincial Menthol Ban, Fully Saturated Model
                                                  (1)               (2)               (3)
                                            Baseline model     Adults in rural     Adults in
                                            (from Table 7)         areas          urban areas
 Adults 19+, CTADS, First Nations
 cigarette purchase
 Provincial Menthol Ban                         0.043*            0.087**             0.032
                                                (0.056)           (0.027)            (0.248)

 R-squared                                         0.04               0.05             0.04
 N                                                13,997             4,315            9,682
Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. See notes to Table 3. P-
values are in parentheses and are estimated using the method of effective number of clusters.




                                               63
Intended and Unintended Effects of Banning Menthol Cigarettes




           Appendix Table 11: Effects of Menthol Bans on Substitution and Evasion Outcomes are Robust
                                    CSTADS 2010-2017 and CTADS 2010-2017
                           Coefficient on Provincial Menthol Ban, Fully Saturated Model
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)        (5)           (6)           (7)                (8)
                                 Baseline       (1), but      (1), but        (1), but   (1), but      (1), but     (1), but        (1), but drop
                                  model         exclude        Wild            drop       drop          drop       drop Nova           treated
                                  (from        controls      bootstrap        Ontario    Alberta       Quebec        Scotia,       provinces that
                                 Table 7)      for other      cluster                                                 New              exhibit
                                               smoking                                                             Brunswick,        stockpiling
                                                policies                                                           and Prince    (Newfoundland,
                                                                                                                    Edward        Prince Edward
                                                                                                                     Island       Island, Ontario
                                                                                                                                    and Quebec)
 Youths 11-17, CSTADS,
 non-menthol cigarette use
 Provincial Menthol Ban          0.017***      0.016***      0.017**          0.013***   0.020**        0.014       0.016**           0.016*
                                  (0.004)       (0.007)      (0.035)           (0.001)   (0.039)       (0.229)      (0.020)           (0.079)

 R-squared                        0.05          0.05          0.05             0.04       0.05         0.05           0.05             0.06
 N                               174,030       174,030       174,030          150,928    149,120      156,145       139,626          103,523
 Adults 19+, CTADS, First
 Nations cigarette purchase
 Provincial Menthol Ban           0.043*        0.048*         0.043          0.021*      0.049       0.056**        0.049*           0.059*
                                  (0.056)       (0.081)       (0.123)         (0.087)    (0.238)      (0.023)        (0.085)          (0.072)

  R-squared                         0.04          0.04          0.04          0.05         0.04          0.04           0.04             0.07
  N                               13,997         13,997        13,997       12,653        12,610        12,432         9,795            6,478
Notes: *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. See notes to Table 3. P-values are in parentheses and are estimated using
the method of effective number of clusters.




                                                                         64
