                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE AND COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

                                          Juan Chaparro
                                         Aaron Sojourner
                                        Matthew J. Wiswall

                                       Working Paper 26813
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26813


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2020




Thanks to Flavio Cunha, Liz Davis, Greg Duncan, Drew Griffen, Rob Grunewald, Jeff Smith,
Chris Taber, Deb Vandell and communities at Cornell, Purdue, Ohio State, UC Berkeley, UC
Irvine, UMinnesota, UWisconsin IRP, and Yale for valuable discussion. Chaparro and Sojourner
received funding from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD under Award P01HD065704, the
Center for Personalized Prevention Research, and the Human Capital Research Collaborative.
Wiswall received support from National Science Foundation grant 1357636. Content is solely
the authors' responsibility and doesn't represent the National Institutes of Health's official views.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Juan Chaparro, Aaron Sojourner, and Matthew J. Wiswall. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Early Childhood Care and Cognitive Development
Juan Chaparro, Aaron Sojourner, and Matthew J. Wiswall
NBER Working Paper No. 26813
February 2020
JEL No. J13

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper combines multiple sources of information on early childhood development in a unified
model for analysis of a wide range of early childhood policy interventions. We develop a model
of child care in which households decide both the quantities and qualities of maternal and non-
maternal care along with maternal labor supply. The model introduces a novel parenting-effort
channel, whereby child care subsidies that permit less parenting may enable better parenting. To
estimate the model, we combine observational data with experimental data from the Infant Health
and Development Program (IHDP) which randomly assigned free child care when the child was 1
and 2 years old. We estimate a cognitive skill production function and household preferences,
giving insight into mechanisms driving the ex post heterogeneous effects of the IHDP
intervention, accounting for alternative care substitutes available to the control group and
spillovers of the child care offer across the household's decisions. We also estimate ex ante
effects of counterfactual policies such as an offer of lower-quality care, requiring a co-pay for
subsidized care, raising the maternal wage offer, or a cash transfer. Finally, we use the model to
rationalize existing evidence from outside the US on the effects of universal child care programs.

Juan Chaparro                                   Matthew J. Wiswall
School of Economics and Finance                 Department of Economics
Universidad EAFIT                               University of Wisconsin-Madison
Carrera 49 # 7 Sur - 50                         1180 Observatory Drive
Medellin, Colombia, South America               Madison, WI 53706
jcchaparrc@eafit.edu.co                         and NBER
                                                matt.wiswall@gmail.com
Aaron Sojourner
Carlson School of Management
321 19th Ave S, 3-300
Minneapolis, MN 55409
asojourn@umn.edu
1       Introduction
This paper develops a framework to combine various sources of information on early childhood
development, including observational data and experiments, into a unified model which can be
used to analyze a wide range of early childhood policy interventions. Our empirical analysis
focuses on a period of human development, the first 3 years of life, that is critical to cognitive
development: this is the period when development by family socioeconomic status (SES) differs
the most.1 However, in the U.S., child care and education during these younger ages receives
substantially less government funding than at later ages, primarily due to large expenditures
on public K-12 schooling.2
    Our analysis starts with a model of early childhood development in which households with
heterogeneous structures, incomes, skills, and preferences make a rich set of choices regard-
ing the quantity and quality of maternal and nonmaternal child care. Children's cognitive
skills develop through the combination of these care experiences according to a production
technology that allows for dynamic complementarity between the child's initial human capi-
tal endowment and multiple investments in care quality in the first years of life. To estimate
the model, we combine information from a large, randomized-control, early-childhood care ex-
periment from the 1980s, the Infant Health and Development Program (IHDP), with several
nationally-representative, observational datasets. The combination of observational and exper-
imental evidence identifies key parameters of the model that would not be identifiable from
either of the sources alone. The estimated model allows us to understand the mechanisms un-
derlying heterogeneous, ex post effects of the IHDP treatment, and provides a credible basis for
estimating important economic parameters and simulating ex ante effects of a variety of early
childhood policies.
    The paper makes four main contributions. First, we extend the literature on models of child
development by integrating new dimensions of choice into a tractable framework, offering new
insights into the tradeoffs parents face. Following in the path of previous structural models
of child development including Blau and Hagy [1998], Bernal and Keane [2010], Del Boca
et al. [2014], and Griffen [2019], we model mothers' decisions about labor supply jointly with
how much time to spend providing maternal care and how much nonmaternal care to use. In
    1
     In the first three years of life, children's brains develop critically-important neural structures and functions,
which shape lifelong development and outcomes [Knudsen et al., 2006]. The relationship between SES and
average gray-matter volume is weak in the first year of life, but large SES-based gaps emerge between ages 1 and
3 as average gray-matter volume becomes strongly and positively correlated with SES [Hanson et al., 2013]. By
age 5, reading and math achievement is strongly correlated with family income [Heckman, 2006; Reardon, 2011;
Figlio et al., 2014]. Gaps in cognitive skills existing at that point persist throughout childhood without further
widening and have strong relationships with adult productivity and life success [Cunha et al., 2006; Council of
Economic Advisers, 2016b]. The early childhood period matters for human development.
   2
     Children from birth through age 4 are covered by publicly-financed early care and education programs for
an average of only 5 hours per week during standard business hours, equivalent to 9 percent of children's time
during this period. In contrast, kids age 6 to 12 spend just over half these hours in publicly-financed care and
education [Council of Economic Advisers, 2016a]. And, eligible children are more than 11 times as likely to be
served by the federal Head Start program each year when age 3-4 than when age 0-2, via the much smaller Early
Head Start program (Authors' calculations from enrollment figures in Elango et al. [2015]). See also Hotz and
Wiswall [2019].



                                                          1
contrast to these studies, which primarily model the quantity of child care time, one of our main
contributions is to allow for a rich space for heterogeneous and endogenous child care quality as
well.3 Several other studies, including Cunha et al. [2010], Agostinelli and Wiswall [2020], and
Attanasio et al. [forthcoming], use various measures, such as number of books in the home and
number of times parents read to their children, to capture some notion of quality and quantity
of parental investments, but without explicit models of household decision making or child care.
    Our model is of one child and a unitary household decision maker, which we refer to as the
mother because data indicate that mothers provide the vast majority of child care hours. In our
framework, a household can purchase higher quality child care on the private market, allowing
higher-income households to provide higher quality care for their children. We also allow
the quality of maternal care to vary, depending on maternal characteristics (human capital),
household structure (number and ages of children), and through an endogenous "parenting
effort" choice. In this way, maternal care quality and labor market activity can be correlated.
And, our model captures the fact that parenting and other forms of caregiving are demanding,
effortful activities. To our knowledge, modeling effort is novel in the economics of parenting but
related to common models of worker productivity. This model offers a new channel by which
child care subsidies can increase maternal-care quality; by reducing the number of maternal-care
hours, subsidies can lead mothers to provide higher quality maternal care.4 We identify the
magnitude of this relationship leveraging the IHDP experiment and measures of maternal-care
quantity and quality to causally identify the effect of maternal-care hours on maternal-care
quality.
    Second, our model's rich choice set and combination of experimental and observational data
provides a general framework to understand standard experimental treatment effect estimates.
Our paper stands at the intersection of two strands of the child development literature: one
focuses on evaluating existing programs, either smaller demonstration programs (like the famous
Perry and Abcedarian programs) or larger scale programs like Head Start, typically through
random-control trials (RCT) [Elango et al., 2015; Duncan and Magnuson, 2013], and the other
strand that uses structural models of child care choice, as discussed above. As in Kline and
Walter's study of the Head Start Impact Study RCT [Kline and Walters, 2016], we show how
the effects of program take-up on child development critically depends on the counterfactual
alternative child care arrangement: offers of subsidized care have larger effects on households
which would otherwise provide lower-quality care to their children.5 We generalize the Kline and
   3
      Blau and Hagy [1998] model demand for quantities of different child care modes, and child care attributes
(caregiver-to-child ratio) which are possibly correlated with quality. Del Boca et al. [2014] models the number of
hours of "passive" and "active" time from mothers and father separately, and these different kinds of time have
different productivities in producing child cognitive skills. See a recent extension in this framework [Mullins,
2019]. Griffen [2019] assumes that for every 6 month period, non-Head Start eligible households receive one
non-maternal childcare offer (a quality and price pair) and can choose the number of hours to take-up (none,
part-time, or full-time). Quality of mother's care is exogenous, but mothers can endogenously affect how much
children are exposed to this home quality by adjusting child-care hours. A number of other recent papers consider
related issues but in a simpler child care decision space, see for example Guner et al. [2018], Caucutt and Lochner
[2017], Abott [2019], and Daruich [2018].
    4
      This notion is already captured in the psychology literature. Parenting less may create psychological space
to parent better and avoid parenting burnout [Roskam et al., 2018].
    5
      In this way, this issue relates to the larger literature on program evaluation when the programs have "close"


                                                        2
Walters approach, which estimates a model of the choice between 3 homogeneous care types.
Our model allows for multiple alternative arrangements which vary continuously in intensity
and quality, and allows multiple channels through which program take-up itself endogenously
affects the household, through effects on labor supply, income, and expenditures on private care,
and through changing parenting effort by providing participating mothers child care relief. By
combining the standard data on program effects on child outcomes with rich information about
effects on the household more generally, we identify various spillovers by which program take-up
affects child development.
    This paper builds on a long literature studying the IHDP's ex post average treatment ef-
fects on maternal and child outcomes and how effects differed conditional on child birth weight,
maternal education, and other observables.6 Although selected on low birth weight and early
birth, unlike many other experimental studies whose study population consisted of only disad-
vantaged children, the IHDP sample is economically diverse. One of the key findings from this
experiment is that this intervention had large positive effects on child IQ at age 3 for the low
SES children, but almost no effect on the high SES children. And, these effects on child cog-
nitive skill fade down but remain positive, substantial, and significant for many years after the
end of the treatment for children from low-income families in the higher birthweight subsample
[Duncan and Sojourner, 2013]. Our study leverages the model as a unified lens through which
to interpret the complex patterns of ex post treatment effects [Wolpin, 2013], in particular the
larger effects on children from lower SES households.
    Third, we integrate experimental and observational data in a novel way, and the random-
assignment experiment at the heart of the IHDP provides valuable leverage to evaluate the
credibility of our identifying conditions. We develop an identification strategy for the effect of
maternal hours on parenting quality using the random assignment of the treatment offer as an
instrument for maternal care hours. We provide an identification argument for preference het-
erogeneity without strong parametric assumptions using observed continuous choices. Finally,
we validate the structural model showing that we can replicate the experiment's control-group
data by counterfactually removing the treatment offer from the treatment group. This is sim-
ilar to a typical validation exercise of counterfactually providing the treatment to the control
group [Todd and Wolpin, 2006; Griffen, 2019]. We do the converse because the program specific
parameters are not identified in the control sample.
    The final contribution is that our estimated model allows ex ante simulation of the effects
of many hotly-debated, child care and family subsidy policies. The model represents the IHDP
treatment as one possible child care subsidy policy with a particular quality and price (free).
Our analytic framework facilitates counterfactual policy simulations of alternative in-kind child
care programs, varying the quality of the program offer and price (co-pay), and then simulating
substitutes, see for example [Heckman et al., 2000].
    6
      Gross et al. [1997] describes the experiment and initial analysis of effects through age-3. A series of studies in
child development and medicine reported treatment effects on various outcomes such as child cognitive skill and
behavior [Brooks-Gunn et al., 1993], quality of the parenting and the home environment [Bradley et al., 1994],
quality of parenting and maternal employment [Brooks-Gunn et al., 1994], and the use of paid child care [Gross
et al., 1997]. Berlin et al. [1998] studied mechanisms focusing especially on heterogeneity along demographic
lines. They find that child cognitive effects are larger among those who take-up more care. Duncan and Sojourner
[2013] and Chaparro and Sojourner [2015] look at heterogeneous effects without the lens of a structural model.


                                                           3
endogenous take-up of the counterfactual program offers and their heterogeneous effects on
child development, maternal labor supply, maternal-care quality, and demand for nonmaternal
care. Our framework also allows simulation of counterfactual policies that replace the offer
of a specific subsidized program with different types of unrestricted income transfers, allowing
households to choose their child care as desired.
    We highlight four key empirical results. First, we find a substantial quantitative importance
of the "exhaustion effect," and estimate that reducing maternal-care hours increases average
maternal-care quality. This channel is important. The program offer raised measured maternal
quality by about 1/4 of a standard deviation. And, using the estimated model, if we do not
allow adjustment on the effort margin, the average predicted treatment effect of the program
offer falls by about 10 percent. Second, we find that the offer of access to high-quality, in-kind
care boosts average child cognitive skill by more than 4 times as much as an equivalent-cost
cash transfer to the family, though effects of each are bigger among mothers with less education.
Third, the quality of the subsidized care offered is of first-order importance. Controlling for
the quantity and quality of other care used in our general framework, we estimate that the
IHDP program care was of very high quality and estimate how counterfactual effects on child
skill, maternal time allocation, and other choices would differ depending on the quality of
the program-care offered. For instance, reducing offered program-care quality to the average
nonmaternal-care quality observed in the control group eliminates most of the average effect
on child skill. Finally, given observed heterogeneity in program effects, the composition of the
program take-up group governs the overall effect of the program on children. For households
with good alternative care, taking up a low-quality program would have negative effects on child
skill development. We show how this finding can rationalize why some universal expansions of
subsidized child care, such as in Qu´ ebec, have negative effects [Baker et al., 2015, 2008].
    The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the data and
some main empirical findings. The following sections describe the model and our identification
and estimation strategy. The final sections discuss results and counterfactual policies. We
conclude by discussing some limitations of our approach and directions for future research.


2    Setting
The Infant Health and Development Program (IHDP) was an experimental intervention carried
out in eight U.S. cities during the late 1980s to support the healthy development of babies born
low birthweight ( 2.5 kg) and premature ( 37 weeks gestational age at birth). Researchers
recruited families into the study in hospitals at an eligible child's birth and randomly assigned
each family to a treatment (one-third chance) or control group.7 The treatment group was
offered free, high-quality center-based child care service between the ages of 12- and 36-months.
Child care services were provided at a researcher-established Child Development Center (CDC)
in each city for up to nine hours per day (45 hours maximum each week) over those 2 years.
Caregivers followed an Abecedarian-type game-based curriculum that emphasized language
  7
    Recruitment occurred in eight university hospitals in Boston, Dallas, Little Rock, Miami, New Haven, New
York City, Philadelphia, and Seattle.



                                                     4
development [Gross et al., 1997], and the staff was paid substantially more than typical day
care teachers.8 Unlike many early childhood interventions, family income was not a selection
criteria for participation and an economically diverse set of families participated. The IHDP
also collected rich data on the quantity and quality of maternal and non-maternal care, the
allocation of mothers' time and each child's skill development.9
    We focus on the IHDP's 880 singleton infants.10 The remainder of this section describes the
sample's baseline characteristics at the time of the child's birth and intent-to-treat effects of the
program offer, both overall and by maternal-education subgroup. Although results are similar to
those described in the prior literature, we present them here as context for readers unfamiliar
with the IHDP and as motivation for the structural model we present next. Birth weight
averages 1.8 kilograms (4 pounds) and gestational age at birth averages 33 weeks. The sample
includes never-married (50 percent), married (42 percent), and previously-married mothers (8
percent). On average, mothers are 25 years old at the time of the child's birth. Forty-three
percent had not completed high school, 27 percent had only a high school diploma, 17 percent
had some college but no bachelor's degree, and 13 percent had at least a bachelor's degree.
Most mothers are either African-American (52 percent) or non-Hispanic white (34 percent).
Panel A of Table 1 presents basic descriptive statistics broken out by treatment status and a
balance test on each observable. Overall, treatment groups are balanced at baseline (p=0.79 of
joint test).
    Panel B of Table 1 reports the means by treatment group and average intent-to-treat effects
on children's cognitive skill, time allocation, and quality of care. Overall, the child cognitive
skill effect at the end of the intervention (age 36-months) is 9.5 IQ points, about two-thirds of
a nationally-normed standard deviation.11
    Underneath this average effect, child cognitive-skill effects differ greatly depending on mater-
nal education (Table 2). There is no significant cognitive-skill effect among children of mothers
with at least a bachelor's degree (2.6 points, p = 0.48), but children of mothers with less formal
   8
     Gross et al. [1997]: "whereas most day care teachers earned between $12,000 and $18,000 per year, IHDP
child development teachers earned between $15,000 and $22,000 (1986-1988$).... higher salaries were essential to
the project's success in hiring and keeping qualified and experienced staff."
   9
     The treatment group was also offered weekly home visits between birth and age 12-months, which was
intended to shift maternal beliefs and expectations about child development and parenting. Our model ignores
this element of the treatment and focuses only on the child care and education offer. This choice could be
problematic if the home-visiting program shifted maternal beliefs and knowledge. However, plentiful evidence
suggests this did not occur. The IHDP collected data on maternal beliefs and knowledge using the Concepts
of Development Questionnaire and the Knowledge of Infant Development Index when the children were age
12-months. There were no treatment effects on these measures [Gross et al., 1997]. Also, there was no evidence
of a treatment effect on the HOME environment inventory nor on child skill at 12-months. Bradley et al. [1994]
state, "whatever else the intervention accomplished during the 1st year, it did not produce home environments
that demonstrated a significantly higher level of stimulation or support for infants learning and development.
Gross et al. [1997] report no effect on age-1 cognitive skill, as measured by the Bayley mental development scale.
Home visits were not conducted by nurses, which research has shown limits their effectiveness [Olds et al., 2002].
  10
     The IHDP included another 105 twin pairs but tradeoffs and production technologies may be quite differ-
ent here. We take account of family size and ages of other children in the household in our modeling of the
maternal/home care quality.
  11
     Child cognitive skill is measured by Stanford Binet IQ at 36 months, with mean 100 and standard deviation
15 in the national population. Child age is chronologically-corrected based on due date.


                                                        5
education obtain large cognitive-development benefit from the intervention. Among children
of mothers with only a high-school degree, treatment increases IQ by a full standard deviation
(16.4 points, p < 0.01), and, for children whose mothers did not complete high school, the
treatment lifts child IQ by about two-thirds of a standard deviation (9.1 points, p < 0.01).12
    One might suspect that large differences in effects on child skill by maternal education group
derive from differences in take-up of the IHDP's offer of free CDC care, but this is not the case.
Average hours of program care taken up do not vary significantly by maternal education. On
average, treatment-group children whose mothers did not have a high-school degree spent 17.7
hours weekly in CDC care. This is neither statistically nor substantially different than the 19.7,
18.2, and 16.2 hours weekly for children of mothers with high-school only, some college, and
bachelor's degree, respectively. The treatment and its take-up are the same across maternal
education group but its effects on children's development are very different. Understanding
differences in the re-allocation of time and resources across family types in reaction to the
treatment offer is a primary motivation for the present study.
    Mothers with less education use program care largely as a substitute for maternal care but
those with more education tend to use it to substitute for other, nonmaternal care. In the
control group, the children of mothers with less education spend more time in maternal care
than other children do. Given free access to a CDC, mothers without a high-school degree
reduce average weekly maternal care by 13.3 hours (p < 0.01) and reduce other nonmaternal
care less (-4.4 hours, p = 0.01). At the other end of the maternal-education spectrum, mothers
with a bachelor's degree do not substantially reduce maternal-care hours (treatment effect =
-1.9 hours weekly, p = 0.53) but cut back sharply on other nonmaternal care (-14.3 hours,
p < 0.01). There is no significant effect on maternal hours spent earning in the labor market
overall, although there are marginal increases of 3-4 earning hours among mothers with less
education.
    Treatment effects on maternal-care quality also differ sharply by maternal education. Among
mothers with less education ­ who cut back maternal care hours, increase labor supply, and
whose children experience large positive effects on cognitive skill ­ treatment raises maternal-
care quality by over a third of a (control-group) standard deviation. In contrast, treatment
has no evident effect on maternal-care quality among mothers with a bachelor's degree, those
whose maternal-care and earning hours change little and whose children do not experience a
cognitive-skill effect.
    Non-monotonicity of child-skill effects in maternal education is consistent with the operation
of countervailing channels. For instance, as maternal education rises, the child-skill returns to
substituting CDC care for maternal care may fall, diminishing the incentive to replace maternal
care with CDC care. However, hourly earnings from maternal earning increase with maternal
education, strengthening the incentive to replace maternal care with CDC care. These factors
  12
     The effects on child cognitive skill fade down but remain positive, substantial, and significant for many
years after the end of the treatment for children from low-income families in the higher birthweight subsample
(2,000-2,500 grams) [Duncan and Sojourner, 2013]. As discussed there, these results suggest great promise for
offers of high-quality child care to close skill gaps between children from higher- and low-income families from
either targeted or universal programs, especially given evidence that the skill-development process is smooth in
birth weight above 800 grams (Figlio et al. [2014]: Fig. 5).



                                                       6
could also be confounded with maternal preferences for child skill, "leisure" time, parenting
time, or with the productivity of care quality in generating child skill. In the following sections,
our model and empirical analysis serve as a unified lens through which to interpret this rich,
ex post, reduced-form evidence, to disentangle mechanisms, and to harness empirical variation
to answer additional questions.


3     Model
Our model embeds early cognitive-skill production within household resource-allocation choices.
The framework imposes a child care time constraint and features a rich space of child care
options that households can select to meet this constraint while balancing consequences for the
family budget, maternal time-use, and child development. It represents care-subsidy policies in
a way that is useful for expressing key tradeoffs parents face in their child's first years of life,
interpreting experimental evidence, and predicting counterfactual policies.

3.1    Environment
The model is of one child and a unitary household decision maker, which we refer to as the
mother.13 It is a model of resource allocation for a child aged 12 to 36-months, during the
period when the treatment group is eligible for free care in the IHDP program. A child enters
the period endowed with a level of baseline skill [Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Aizer and Cunha,
2012]. Given this, and several other household characteristics, the mother jointly decides her
labor supply and what combination of child care options to use. Through a child-development
production technology, the child care inputs and the initial level of child skill produce the child's
level of skill at 36 months. The mother's own labor income combined with non-labor income,
including labor income from a spouse or transfers from a non-resident father, constrain the
household's purchase of non-maternal care. Each mother's utility depends on consumption,
hours and effort parenting the child, "leisure" hours, and the child's skill at the end of the
period. The model allows for heterogeneity in the mother's skills in parenting and in the labor
market, the mother's preferences, the child's initial endowments of skills, in family composition
(number and ages of other children, if any) and marital status (never, currently, or formerly),
and the father's contribution to family income, if any.

3.2    Child Care
Our model's rich child care decision space distinguishes it from previous work. Each type of
care is characterized by a quantity, quality, and cost. Maternal-care quality depends on the
mother's skills and a parenting effort decision. Program care has a fixed, externally-determined
  13
     A single agent makes decisions. Whether we label the decision maker as the "parent," "household," "mother,"
or "father" does not fundamentally affect the modeling framework. The preferences we specify and ultimately
estimate from observed choices are not necessarily the mother's or the father's preferences per se, but could
be determined by some prior stage intra-household interaction between parents or between the mother and a
non-father spouse.



                                                       7
quality and a maximum hours available, which depends on treatment status. If program care is
available, the mother chooses how many hours to take up. Program care is free but we allow for
individual heterogeneity in (dis)taste for its use, allowing an additional channel to understand
incomplete program take-up. Other non-maternal care is available for purchase, with hourly
cost increasing in quality.14

3.2.1    Quantities of Care
A young child requires supervision and care for a total of TC waking hours per week, creating
a child time constraint. The weekly time budget for every child is

                                              m + p + n = TC                                                    (1)
where m  0 is hours of maternal care, p hours of program care with p  [0,         ¯p ], and n  0
is non-maternal, non-program care. 15  Households in the treatment group can choose up to
¯p = 45 hours per week. In the control group, this care is not offered so ¯p = 0.

3.2.2    Qualities and Costs of Care
Care differs in quality, where quality is defined with respect to its effect on child-skill devel-
opment, as defined by the child skill production function, discussed below. There is a quality
level for each of the three types of care: qm denotes the quality of maternal care, qp the quality
of program care, and qn the quality of other care. Each quality level is strictly positive: qj > 0
for j  {m, p, n}.

Maternal Care Maternal-care quality is both heterogeneous and endogenous. Mothers vary
in their parenting ability and choose how much instantaneous parenting effort to exert. The
quality of maternal care, qm , is determined by

                                             ln qm = X qm + ln e                                                (2)
where X is a vector of maternal and household characteristics, including the mother's stock
of human capital measured using education and an IQ score, the numbers of other children
aged less than five years and aged five years or more in the household, and the mother's age.
qm is the associated vector of quality-productivity parameters. This specification expresses
the idea that parents can differ in their ability to produce higher care quality and that this
ability can be correlated, via the mother's human capital, with earning power in the labor
market. Maternal-care quality can also depend on the number of other children the mother has
and their ages to capture her human-capital in parenting accumulated from experience raising
  14
     Because in the period of the IHDP there is very little to no other government programs available for 12-36
month old children, we do not model an alternative government programs. Note that Head Start, a major federal
program which exists during this period, is almost entirely available only to older children.
  15
     This includes care at all other providers, such as the father or any other relative, childcare centers or home-
based providers, neighbors, or nannies.




                                                         8
other children, possible spillovers of (in)attention in multiple-child families (congestion effects),
or other sources of heterogeneity correlated with fertility.
    The maternal-effort choice variable is e  (0, ), with e  0 indicating lowest effort. Effort
is expressed directly in terms of maternal-care quality. Maternal effort in parenting affects
maternal-care quality, and ultimately child development through the skill-production process
described below.16 The costs of maternal care are the time and effort required to produce a
given quantity-quality combination, (m , qm ), with shadow prices described below.
    The inclusion of this parenting effort choice is a novel feature of the model. It borrows a
convention from many principal-agent models in personnel economics and elsewhere such that
productivity depends on observable worker characteristics as well as a latent, choice-of-effort
variable. Allowing for maternal effort recognizes that it may be possible for all types of parents
to produce high- or low-quality care. For a given mother, producing a higher level of maternal-
care quality requires higher effort. Mothers with different levels of human capital and parenting
experience (X ) may require different levels of effort to produce the same quality.

Non-Maternal Care Non-maternal, non-program care is available at any quality level, qn ,
and is chosen by the mother. The hourly price is qn > 0, with exogenous  > 0 is the price
per "effective unit" (quality x quantity), qn n , of such care. Total expenditure on this care is
qn n .17

Program Care The quality of program care, qp , is fixed by program designers and out of
the mother's control. If offered program care, a mother chooses how much to use (p ). In the
program we study, program care is free to the parents, and we experiment with counterfactual
non-zero prices (co-pay) below. In addition to possible direct monetary costs, individuals
also have heterogeneous utility costs (or benefits) to using program care, as specified below.
Modeling the program as a particular type of non-maternal care available at a different cost
and quality gives us leverage to use the experiment to model how families would respond to
offers of subsidized care at counterfactual quality and price levels.
   16
      Our specification is equivalent to ln qm = X qm + e ln e, where we normalize the productivity of effort
parameter e = 1. Effort e is then in "efficiency" units in terms of maternal-care quality.
   17
      We return to the issue of the market availability of care of different qualities below and discuss how assump-
tions regarding the child care market affect the interpretation of our findings. We also discuss how we proxy
for the price of care when care is provided by relatives and does not have an observed price. An alternative
formulation of non-maternal care is found in Griffen [2019] where it is assumed households exogenously receive
a stochastic draw of a child care quality and price pair. In that model, the exogenous quality and price draws
depend on household characteristics (e.g. maternal education), thus allowing the model to fit the pattern of a
positive correlation between child care quality and expenditure with family income. Our model takes a more
traditional approach, treating non-maternal child care as a good purchased in a market, and child care is en-
dogenously chosen given the household's preferences, productivity, and resources available. Several other papers
model endogenous expenditures on children generally, but do not link these costs to the time spent caring for
children, e.g. [Del Boca et al., 2014].




                                                         9
3.3    Child Skill Production Technology
Child skill is denoted ht > 0 for periods t = 0, 1. h0 is the initial stock of skills (at age 12
months), and h1 is the level produced at the end of the investment period (at age 36 months).
We specify the technology of early-childhood cognitive skill h1 as a function of the initial
skill level h0 , the quantities and the qualities of the three types of child care inputs, and a
productivity shock h :
                                          m                 n               p
              ln h1 = 0 (h0 ) + m (h0 )      ln qm + n (h0 ) ln qn + p (h0 ) ln qp + h ,                      (3)
                                          Tc                Tc              Tc
where the  parameters express the productivity of the various inputs for age-3 skill. 0 (h0 ) is
a general function of h0 representing the contribution of the initial endowment. The level of
"investment" in children is determined by both the qualities and quantities of care received by
the child. Modeling investment as the combination of care experiences in this way is substan-
tially different from many previous models which have generally focused on either care quality
or quantities, given the kind of data available, but not both together.18
    Our specification of the skill-production function incorporates two key generalities. First,
the investment contribution of each type of care j (h0 ) ln qj is weighted by the fraction of
time the child spends in that care: (j /TC )  [0, 1] for j  {m, p, n}. Given the child's time
constraint, (m /TC ) + (n /TC ) + (p /TC ) = 1, these time-allocation fractions can be considered
endogenous "factor shares" and provide the relative "weighting" over the child care quality
inputs. For example, if a child spends all of her time with her mother (m /TC = 1), so
(log) child investment is simply the (log) quality of this mother's maternal care m (h0 ) ln qm .
Therefore, unlike some standard alternatives, this specification allows for well-defined "corner
solutions" in child investments. In general, this function embodies the idea that improving the
quality of each type of child care improves the overall level of child care investment in proportion
to the endogenously-chosen fraction of time spent in that type of child care. To see this, note
that the elasticity of child skill with respect to an improvement in maternal-care quality is:

                                 ln h1
                                       = (j /TC )j (h0 ) for j  {m, p, n}.                                    (4)
                                 ln qj
For maternal time, for example, our model implies that the productivity of increasing maternal
care quality on child skill development is increasing in the fraction of time the mother actually
spends with the child (m /TC ). Both the quantity and quality inputs are endogenously and
jointly determined in our model.
   18
      For instance, Del Boca et al. [2014] model parental time and expenditures but not on particular types of
care and without an endogenous effort channel. Cunha et al. [2010] measure the quality of care at home but not
elsewhere nor the quantities of time spent in different care settings. Bernal and Keane [2010] measure if a child
is in maternal care or not as the complement to whether the mother is earning full-time, part-time, or not at
all. They do not measure variation in the quality of non-maternal care nor have direct measures of quality of
maternal care. They proxy for it using maternal human capital. Kline and Walters [2016] measure if a child is
in any non-parental care but not each household's number of hours or level of quality. The closest formulation
to ours is found in Griffen [2019], which models investment, as we do here, as a weighted average of the childcare
quality received by the child.



                                                       10
     A second key feature of our technology specification is that j (h0 ) for j  {m, p, n} pro-
ductivity parameters of each care type are functions of the child's initial skill, or endowment
h0 . The elasticity of child-skill output with respect to any input (4) can depend on h0 . j (h0 )
increasing in h0 would imply a higher return on investment for children with high levels of base-
line skill than for children with low levels of baseline skill, a positive dynamic complementarity
[Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Aizer and Cunha, 2012; Almond and Mazumder, 2013; Cunha
et al., 2010; Attanasio et al., forthcoming, 2019]. j (h0 ) decreasing in h0 would imply that
investment productivity declines in initial skill, a negative complementarity. We let our data
speak and estimate the relationship between investment productivity and initial skill without
imposing a particular sign on the relationship.19

3.4    Other Household Constraints
Beyond the child time constraint (1) and the production technologies (2-3), there are two other
household constraints: the maternal-time constraint (5) and the budget constraint (6). The
mother divides her time endowment (TM ) between three activities: maternal child care (m ),
earning wages through hours in the labor market (L), and leisure or other household production
(l).20

                                               m + L + l = TM                                                  (5)
    For every hour in the labor market, L, the mother earns wage w.21 Total maternal income
equals labor earnings plus any non-labor income (Y ). Non-labor income includes spousal in-
come, transfer income from the government, and any capital income. Total income can be used
to pay for consumption (c) and to purchase child care via expenditure qn n .

                                c + qn n = (1 -  (w, L, Y, X ))(wL + Y )                                       (6)
where  (w, L, Y, X )  [0, 1] is the income tax rate, which depends on the labor income, non-
labor income (primarily spouse's income for married women), and household characteristics X
(marital status and number of children).22
  19
     A limitation of the standard constant-returns-to-scale CES production function in this context, h1 = (I  +
(1 - h      (
         0 ) 1/ ) with I being some investment, is that complementarities across inputs (I and h0 ) are constrained
                        h1
to be nonnegative, Ih      0
                              0. The CES form in the child development context assumes that the marginal
productivity of investment is nondecreasing in the child's initial endowment. Although this is of course sensible
in standard production technologies (e.g. capital and labor inputs producing some output good), this may not be
appropriate in the child development context, where one of the inputs is the existing stock of skill. In contrast,
our specification allows this complementarity to be either positive or negative. See Agostinelli and Wiswall [2020]
for evidence of negative complementarities in child cognitive development at ages five and older, and Hoynes
et al. [2014] for evidence of higher impacts of Head Start on low skill children.
  20
     m includes all time the mother is caring for the focal child while the child is awake, including time also
engaging in other activities or with other people simultaneously. "Leisure" here includes home production and
caring for other children if the focal child is not in her care.
  21
     Our model also abstracts away from dynamic impacts of career interruptions, which can impact parents'
incentives to take time away from work to provide care [Anderson et al., 2002; Adda et al., 2017].
  22
     The tax function  (w, L, Y, X ) ­ an approximation of federal, state, and local taxes ­ is taken from Guner



                                                        11
3.5    Preferences
We assume the following form for mother/household/parental utility:
                                                                                 
                  U = ln c + l ln l + h1 ln h1 + m ln(m + 1) - e,1 eme,2 + p p .                             (7)
We normalize utility parameters with respect to log consumption, which is assumed to have
a marginal utility of 1. To conserve on notation, we do not write household level subscripts
on the preference parameters, but as described below in the estimation section, we allow a
rich level of individual heterogeneity in the full set of preferences given by the vector  =
(l , h1 , m , e,1 , e,2 , p ).
    l  0 represents the preference for leisure. Importantly, given that "leisure" here includes
caring for other children, this preference could depend on the number and ages of other children
in the household. We discuss the heterogeneity of preferences in the next section. h1  0 the
preference for the child's human capital. We assume the household has a preference for the
child's human capital directly. The value of h1 for a household can represent a combination
of altruistic preferences over the child's future consumption and the household's belief about
how human capital at this early period generates the child's future labor market earnings and
consumption.
    The specification of the utility from maternal time m and maternal effort (e) is the least
standard aspect of our preference specification. It allows for the mother either to enjoy maternal
time (m > 0) or to have a distaste for it (m < 0), beyond the utility implication of foregone
leisure.
    Utility from maternal time may also depend on effort expended in producing maternal care.
Effort e > 0 is expressed as per each hour of maternal time m . We write the marginal utility
cost of maternal effort as depending on the level of effort and the time spent in care-giving:
              
c (e) = e,1 me,2 , with e,1  0, assuming a (weak) distaste for effort. With m = 0 (no maternal
care), then there is no effort cost. If the mother devotes the minimum effort to her child's
care (e  0), then the effort cost approaches 0, and the direct utility from any maternal time
approaches m ln(m + 1).
    Parents' tradeoff between parenting quality and quantity has been missing from the eco-
nomics literature, perhaps because datasets with both parenting time and parenting quality are
rare.23 This model captures the idea that high-quality parenting is more difficult to maintain
over longer periods than shorter periods. Parenting can be exhausting. We are more likely to
stop reading with a child and plop her in front of a TV after 6 hours of intense, developmentally-
appropriate parenting than after 6 minutes. A potentially non-linear effort cost in parenting
time allows for the possibility that effort in care-giving becomes increasingly costly as parenting
                                                                 
hours increase. The marginal cost of additional effort is e,1 me,2 . With e,2 > 0, the marginal
cost of effort is increasing in maternal time, representing an "exhaustion effect" in maternal
care. If e,2 = 0, then there is no exhaustion effect and the marginal cost of effort is invariant
et al. [2018].  (L) =  +  ln(52(Lw + Y )/53, 006) + 0.045, with  and  depending on the household marital
status and number of children.
  23
     The family-size literature focuses on parents trading off the quantity of children against their quality but
not the hours and quality of parenting a particular child.


                                                       12
to the hours of maternal care provided. In the special case e,1 = 0 and m = 0, the only
"utility cost" to maternal time is foregone leisure, and is essentially the same preference speci-
fication as in some previous work, for example [Del Boca et al., 2014]. In the next section, we
devote considerable attention to analyzing how we can use our available data and the exogenous
experimental variation to identify these more general preferences for maternal care.
    Finally, including hours of program care selected (p ) as an element of the utility function
implies possible taste or distaste for program care. This is necessary to rationalize the choice of
some households to pass up available high-quality, free care and to pay for lower-quality care,
similar to Moffitt [1983] and Bernal and Keane [2010]. Individual heterogeneity in distaste
(p ) expresses variation in, for instance, felt stigma, sensitivity to administrative hassle, and
logistical challenges posed by nonstandard work hours or by having multiple young children
with only one eligible for program care.

3.6   Timing and Decision Making
The mother first observes the child's initial level of human capital, her wage offer and non-labor
income, and the productivity and price of various inputs, and then jointly decides her labor
supply, time and effort in maternal care, and a quantity and quality of non-maternal care. This
yields the level of child skill h1 .
    The full vector of choices is  = (c, qn , n , e, m , l, L, p ). The decision problem is:

                                     max U (c, l, h1 , e, m , p )                              (8)
                                       

subject to the (i) child's time constraint (1), (ii) production technologies (2-3), (iii) maternal
time constraint (5), (iv) budget constraint (6).
    The model has five sources of heterogeneity: i) child's initial human-capital endowment h0 ,
ii) household preferences  , iii) non-labor income, iv) mother's human capital and associated
maternal care quality and wage offers, and v) household composition (mother's marital status
and the number and age of other children).
    There are three inter-related choices faced in the model: (i) the mother's time and effort
allocation decision (between market work, care for the child with a chosen effort intensity, and
all other uses), (ii) the mother's allocation of income between expenditures on non-maternal
care and consumption, and (iii) the portfolio of child care types: maternal time, non-maternal
care of varying quality, and subsidized program care, if offered.

3.7   Interior Solutions
To provide some intuition for the tradeoffs in the model and to set up our analysis of iden-
tification in the next section, we describe interior solutions for all choice variables. However,
our full model-solution algorithm allows for corner solutions in time allocation (i.e. mother not
working (L = 0), no program participation (p = 0), take-up of all program hours (p = p    ¯), and
exclusive maternal care (m = TC ) ). Substituting the main constraints (5) and (6) into the
utility function (7) yields the following optimization:



                                                 13
            max         ln[(1 -  (L))(Lw + Y ) - qn (TC - m - p )] + l ln(TM - L - m )
         L,qn ,e,m ,p
                           m                          TC - m - p                 p
            +h [m (h0 )       (X qm + ln e) + n (h0 )            ln qn + p (h0 )    ln qn ]
                           TC                             TC                     TC
                                                                              
                                                       +m ln(m + 1) - e,1 eme,2 + p p

where we have implicitly conditioned on observable characteristics and ignored some elements
of the production technology that are not relevant for the optimal choices. The case we consider
here is when program care is offered (treatment group). In the control group, this care is not
offered so p = 0.
    First-order conditions for (L, qn , e, m , p ) illuminate the marginal costs and benefits bal-
anced in each choice. For an interior solution to labor supply, we have a standard condition:

                                 w[1 -  (L)L -  (L)] l
                                 L:                     -    =0                           (9)
                                           c               l
where  (L) is the derivative of the tax function with respect to labor supply. The optimal
amount of maternal time allocated to earning in the labor market balances the marginal benefit
from an after-tax consumption boost against the shadow value of lost leisure. The interior
condition need not apply. We allow for corner solutions in earning (L = 0).
   For purchased non-maternal quality, the FOC is given by
                                         n                     1
                                qn : -     + h n (h0 )(n /Tc ) = 0.                           (10)
                                         c                    qn
The optimal level of nonmaternal-care quality balances the mother's marginal cost in foregone
consumption from spending on higher-quality nonmaternal care against the marginal benefit
to the mother of additional child skill generated by that marginal increase in nonmaternal-care
quality.
    The maternal effort FOC, given by,

                                                                1
                           e: - e,1 me,2 + h m (h0 )(m /Tc ) = 0.                             (11)
                                                                e
expresses how the optimal level of parenting effort balances the marginal cost of additional effort
against the marginal benefit of additional child skill generated through improved maternal-care
quality. Both the marginal cost and benefit depend on the quantity of endogenous maternal-care
time.
   The interior-solution FOC for maternal time is given by

        qn l   m                -1
  m :     - +       - e,1 e,2 eme,2 + h (1/Tc )(m (h0 ) ln qm - n (h0 ) ln qn ) = 0.          (12)
        c  l  m + 1
The optimal amount of maternal time devoted to directly providing child care balances marginal
costs and benefits across five channels. First, a marginal hour in maternal care generates

                                                  14
a benefit by raising consumption by the saved cost of nonmaternal care. Second, an hour
of maternal care costs an hour of maternal leisure. Third, there is the direct preference for
maternal care: utility may be affected, positively or negatively according to the sign of m , by
the addition of an hour of maternal care. Fourth, because effort is expended across all maternal
hours, marginal maternal care time requires additional dis-utility from additional effort. Fifth,
maternal time has an impact on child skill development. Whether the impact is positive or
negative depends on whether, on the margin, maternal care is more or less productive than the
nonmaternal care it substitutes for: m (h0 ) ln qm - n (h0 ) ln qn .
    Finally, the interior FOC for program time, when program care is offered, is:
                            qn
                      p :        + h (1/Tc )(p (h0 ) - n (h0 ) ln qn ) + p = 0               (13)
                              c
The optimal amount of program care time balances costs and benefits across three channels.
First, adding an hour of program care boosts maternal consumption by the cost of an hour of
nonmaternal care that would otherwise be required. Second, it impacts child skill development:
whether the impact is positive or negative depends on whether, on the margin, program care
is more or less productive of child skill than nonmaternal care. In either case, the effect on
take-up is magnified by the strength of the mother's preference for child skill. Third, there is a
direct taste or dis-taste for the program.
    This FOC expresses some basic insights into what drives families' reactions to an offer of
program care. They will take up more hours of offered care if the quality of offered program
care is higher. Even if offered care is of low quality, some households may substitute away from
more productive forms of care to save parenting time and effort or nonmaternal care expenses.
In that case, the offer of subsidized care would make those children worse off, although the
decision maker­even an altruistic one­would be better off [Peltzman, 1973; Herbst and Tekin,
2010].
    The model clarifies how the choice to allocate child time across maternal, nonmaternal, and
program care requires balancing each type's particular combination of costs and benefits. It
allows these to vary across family types in a way that sensibly reflects differences in maternal
productivity, nonlabor income, preferences, and child endowment. It clarifies reasons that
the same offer of subsidized care induces very different responses from families with different
preferences and constraints.

3.8   Full Solution using Mixed Numerical/Analytic Methods
We conclude this Section by describing our full solution method for the model, including the
possibility of corner solutions. Our functional forms facilitate a mixed numerical and analytic
solution to the model. For each possible time allocation (L, m , n , p ), we solve for the optimal
maternal effort choice e and the optimal non-maternal quality expenditure qn . Given the
specifications described above, the solutions for e and qn must be at interior solutions, with qn
undefined if the child spends no time in non-maternal care and qm undefined if no maternal
effort. Importantly, our numerical solution to the problem explicitly allows "corner solutions".
There are a number of "corner solutions" possible: households can choose no maternal labor


                                               15
supply (L = 0), no non-maternal care (n = 0), no use of the program care (p = 0), or take-up
of all program hours (p = p  ¯). However, for each of these corner solutions, there is still a well-
defined interior solution for the maternal effort and quality of care purchased, when applicable.
This mixed numerical and analytic solution is both tractable and allows for important model
generalities.
    Our solution algorithm proceeds as follows. For each possible time allocation configuration
(L, m , n , p ), the "conditional" (on time allocation) solution for maternal effort is found by
solving (11):

                                                    h e
                                        e (m ) =                                               (14)
                                                    e,1 me,2
where e = m (h0 )  Tc .
                    m

   Likewise, the conditional solution for maternal quality from (10) is

                                                       h qn
                                qn (L, n ) = R(L)                                              (15)
                                                    n (1 + h qn )
where R(L) is the level of after-tax income (given labor supply L): R(L) = (1 -  )(wL + Y )
and qn = n (h0 )    Tc .
                     n

    Our mixed numerical-analytic solution to the model (8) uses a grid over the time allocation
choices (imposing the appropriate time constraints, depending on whether the program care is
offered) and computes e (m ) and qn    (L,  ) for each feasible time allocation choice on the grid.
                                            n
For each combination of choices on the grid, we compute the utility (7), and the optimal choice
is the highest utility choice vector on the grid. The specification of the utility function and the
direct tradeoffs in time allocation imposed by the time and budget constraints ensure a unique
solution to the problem. This mixed numerical-analytic algorithm not only easily allows for
corner solutions, it is also computationally fast.


4    Identification and Estimation
In this section, we analyze the identification of the model and describe our multiple-step esti-
mation procedure. Given the importance of credible identification of model primitives for the
counterfactual exercises to follow, we devote considerable space to this analysis. In general,
our identification and estimation algorithm relies on two sources of identification: i) rich data
including measures of quality and quantity of child care, and ii) exogenous variation from the
IHDP RCT experiment. Further details about the data sources is provided in the Appendix.
    We need to estimate two sets of parameters. One characterizes the production technologies
and resources available to each household, comprising the main constraints in the model. The
second characterizes the distribution of preferences. We discuss each in turn, and the identifi-
cation concepts we use are constructive, leading to a transparent multiple-step estimator.




                                                16
4.1    Child Skill Production Technology
Our identification of the production technology (3) relies on the unusually rich data collected in
the IHDP experiment, the availability of exogenous variation due to the experimental design,
and supplemental data from other datasets. We use the 36-month IQ score as the measure
of ln h1 and the 12-month Bayley mental development index score as the measure of ln h0 ,
standardized in the control group.24 The quantity of time in maternal, non-maternal, and
IHDP program care (m , n , p ) are observed.
    We measure endogenous maternal-care quality (qm ) with direct observations of mother-
child interactions and the home environment. We focus on a subset of the age-36 month
Home Observation for Measuring the Environment (HOME) that prior research finds to have a
strong theoretical and empirical relationship to child cognitive skill growth, the 12-item subscale
measuring parental Support for Learning and Literacy [Fuligni et al., 2004]. We measure ln qm
as the sum of the 12 binary Learning and Literacy items, standardized in the control group.
The m (h0 ) parameter relates maternal-care quality to age-3 child cognitive skill.
    We measure non-maternal care quality (qn ) using hourly expenditures on such care, sup-
plemented by a model of observation-based scores when expenditure data are missing. We
normalize the non-maternal care price ( ) to 1, implying that qn is in units of expenditure on
child care per hour. Given this normalization, qn is directly measured from the ratio of reported
expenditures on and hours in non-parental child care. For households who do not report paying
for child care directly, we proxy for the quality of care by exploiting data from the National
Institute for Child Health & Human Development's Study of Early child care and Youth De-
velopment (SECCYD). It covers a distinct, nonexperimental sample that overlaps in calendar
time with the IHDP sample. Both the IHDP and SECCYD include rich family background
variables and data on primary nonmaternal care category (paternal/partner, grandparent, other
relative, nonrelative in child's own home, nonrelative day-care home, or nonrelative day-care
center). The SECCYD contains a direct measure of care quality based on observed caregiver-
child interactions for the child's primary nonmaternal care provider. To construct a proxy for
nonmaternal care quality in the IHDP subsample that does not pay directly for nonmaternal
care, we use the rich set of covariates available in both datasets and construct an expendi-
ture proxy, essentially an estimate of the effective market price of the nonmaternal care the
household uses. More details are provided in the Appendix.
    Finally, for program-care quality (qp ), we identify it directly from the variation in cognitive
outcomes h1 between the randomized treatment and control groups. We normalize ln qp = 1
and identify the effective program quality p (h0 ) jointly with the remaining parameters, treating
program quality as homogeneous, but allowing its productivity to vary by the child's initial
human capital h0 .
    Putting all these elements together and adding i subscripts to denote child-i level variables,
we write (3) as
   24
      We also estimated models using various combinations of weight, gestational age, length, and head circum-
ference at birth, which all produced similar results. [Aizer and Cunha, 2012] also focus on the 12-month Bayley
mental development index as their preferred measure of initial endowment.




                                                      17
                                            mi                   ni                   pi
            ln h1i = h0 (h0i ) + m (h0i )      ln qmi + n (h0i )    ln qni + p (h0i )    + hi ,            (16)
                                            Tc                   Tc                   Tc
For any measured level of initial child skill h0 , we identify the  parameters in (16) given vari-
ation in the maternal, non-maternal, and program care inputs. The model structure implies
that optimal decisions do not depend on the realization of the hi shock, hence we identify these
production function parameters directly from the IHDP data without jointly solving the house-
hold behavior model.25 Although direct identification of this part of the production technology
is credible given the rich data available, as we discuss next, omitted-variable/endogeneity issues
become critical in identifying other aspects of the production technology, and we exploit the
experimental variation for identification there.

4.2    Maternal-Care Quality Function
As discussed above, maternal-care quality is measured using items from the age 36-month
HOME inventory. Adding household level indexes i, the maternal-care quality function (2)
becomes

                                            ln qmi = Xi qm + i                                             (17)
where, given that maternal effort e is unobserved, the residual is i  ln ei . We have two
inextricably-linked tasks. One, identify the qm productivity parameters (e.g. the productivity
of maternal human capital) in producing maternal-care quality. Two, identify the level of
unobserved parenting effort (e) each mother is deploying. Because maternal characteristics
generally relate to her endogenous effort decision (X is correlated with  ), we cannot credibly
identify qm from a regression of ln qm on X . For example, college-educated mothers have
higher average qm than mothers with less education. To what extent is this due to a difference
in productive human capital (X qm ) or to different levels of endogenous effort ei ?
    We address this identification challenge by exploiting the exogenous variation from the
IHDP experiment. Identification and the estimation procedure takes 3 steps:

    Step 1: Identify the "exhaustion" effect (e,2 ). Re-arranging the analytic solution for
effort (14) implies that log effort for any household i is:

                    ln ei = ln hi + ln m (h0i ) - ln Tc - ln e,1,i + (1 - e,2 ) ln mi                      (18)
Substituting into the maternal-care quality function (2) yields:
  25
    The key assumption is the additive log separability of both the production and utility functions, implying
that decisions on the margin depend on the  parameters and the level of h0 but not  . Given this, the OLS
estimator consistently estimates  parameters. In addition, the Appendix reports two robustness exercises: (i)
we re-estimated the production technology also including a vector of household characteristics, and (ii) we re-
estimated the production technology using an IV estimator, using the randomized treatment offer and this offer
interacted with household characteristics as instruments. In both cases, we find the main counterfactual results
are similar to those using the baseline estimation.




                                                      18
                                      ln qmi = Xi qm +  ln mi + i                                            (19)
where  = 1-e,2 and i is the sum of equation (18)'s remaining terms: i = ln hi +ln m (h0i )-
ln TC - ln e,1,i . We assume e,2 is homogeneous but allow e,1,i to be heterogeneous, imposing
a common exhaustion effect across all households but allowing the marginal cost of effort to
vary freely across households. With (ln qmi , Xi , mi ) observed, we could obtain a naive OLS
estimator of  and therefore e,2 = - + 1 from a regression following (19). However, this is
an inconsistent estimator because maternal time mi is likely correlated with the residual i :
maternal-care hours depend on heterogeneous preferences and productivities in i .
    To solve this endogenous-regressors problem, we use the experimental randomization as an
instrument for maternal-care hours. Consider conditioning on the randomly-assigned treatment
(offer of IHDP program care), treat  {0, 1}. The difference between the average treatment
effects on maternal-care quality and hours identifies e,2 :


  E (ln qm |treat = 1) - E (ln qm |treat = 0)
                                                = (1 - e,2 )[E (ln m |treat = 1) - E (ln m |treat = 0)]

This result follows because the experimental randomization is balanced across the X variables
and is independent of remaining preference and productivity characteristics, i.e. (X, )  treat.
This exclusion restriction assumes that the only way the program affects maternal-care quality is
through the maternal-care hours adjustment and the subsequent psychological-relief channel.26

    Step 2: Identify qm . Note that the main equation (19) has at least several endogenous
variables: each element of Xi (mother and household characteristics) are likely correlated with
the residual, representing unobserved parenting effort. Although we have a plausible instrument
for maternal time, and can consistently estimate the "exhaustion effect" as described above, the
IHDP experiment does not offer any additional exogenous variables we can use to instrument
for the maternal and household characteristics in Xi .
    Our strategy to identify the qm parameters is to use the first step estimation of the ex-
haustion effect, identified using the IHDP experiment, combined with a rich set of conditioning
  26
     In particular, consider some alternatives. First, it assumes parents do not learn how to parent better from
the program elements intended to improve parenting, such as the home visits during the first year and bimonthly
parent meetings in years 2 and 3. Second, it assumes parents do not learn how to parent better from interactions
with the CDC teachers during 12 to 36 months. Third, it assumes parents do not learn how to parent better
directly from their young children. We review a few key factors that lend credibility of this assumption. First,
as will be discussed in Table 3, there is no treatment effect on maternal-care quality at age 12-months, after the
year of offered home visits but before the start of program-care access. Home visits were also not conducted by
nurses, which research has shown limits their effectiveness [Olds et al., 2002]. Second, the IHDP provided free
transportation to the program-care centers. This encouraged take up but reduced parent-teacher interaction.
Third, as described by the IHDP principal investigators in Gross et al. [1997], "Significant main effects did not
emerge on any of the measures of maternal knowledge or concepts of child development at 12, 24, or 36 months."
Finally, recall that the maternal education groups experiencing the largest increases in maternal-care quality are
the same ones experiencing the largest reductions in maternal-care hours, even though take-up of program care
is about the same across the groups. We explore this in Figure 1. Behavior changed but not beliefs or knowledge.


                                                       19
variables included in the IHDP data. We first purge maternal quality from the contribution of
maternal hours using the IV estimate of  (19) from the first stage: ln qmi -    ^ ln mi . We then
regress this exhaustion effect purged measure of maternal quality on the Xi characteristics of
interest and a set of pre-determined variables Wi to capture additional variation in effort. The
optimal effort equation (18) from the model solution suggests relevant Wi variables that relate
to the effort choice and are pre-determined before the experiment: initial skill level h0i (as
these relate to the productivity of effort), and a number of other variables, that could plausibly
relate to preferences for maternal effort including a control-group normalized index of pre-natal
maternal behaviors such as smoking, drinking, and drug use during the pregnancy, and quarter
of first prenatal exam. We estimate qm using OLS applied to the following equation:

                                  (ln qmi - ^ ln mi ) = Xi qm + Wi  + i
A sufficient condition for identification of qm is then E (i |Xi , Wi ) = 0.

   Step 3: Identifying effort: e. The residual or "unexplained" level of each household's
maternal-care quality identifies the level of effort expended:27

                                            ln ei = ln qmi - Xi qm .
Note that our specification for maternal quality assumes there is no measurement error: any
residual variation in the maternal quality measure represents unobserved effort, not measure-
ment error. Although this is a strong assumption­as are any of the common assumptions that
the data at hand measures exactly the variable of interest­without access to multiple mea-
sures of maternal quality, it would be difficult to identify separately measurement error from
unobserved effort.28

4.3    Preferences
Our goal is to identify the preference vector (l , m , e,1 , e,2 , h , p ), up to the normalization
c = 1. Above, we used the measure of maternal-care quality and experimental variation to
identify a common effort-disutility "curvature" parameter (e,2 ), representing the "exhaustion
  27
     Note the Xi vector contains no constant. We implicitly assume that Xi = 0dim{X } . A hypothetical mother
with 0 years of schooling, age 0, with no other children, would have no human capital, and all maternal quality
for this mother is due to effort. This is a kind of identification-at-infinity argument to identify the constant
[Heckman and Navarro-Lozano, 2004].
  28
     To see this difficulty, write maternal quality as ln qmi = Xi qm + ln ei + i , where i is a measurement error
term. Even under strong classical measurement error assumptions (i is unbiased/mean-zero and independent of
Xi and ei ), we still could not separately identify the distribution of "real" unobserved effort from measurement
error without some additional parametric restrictions. For example, the observed conditional variance of maternal
quality under the classical measurement error assumptions is given by V (ln qm |X ) = V (ln e|X ) + V ( ), and it is
not possible to identify separately the variance due to unobserved effort and that due to measurement error. In
the Appendix, we report a robustness exercise where we re-estimate model parameters assuming classical Normal
measurement error calibrated so that 50 percent of total variation is measurement error. The main counterfactual
results under this alternative specification remain similar to the baseline results.




                                                        20
effect of parenting. This leaves 5 remaining preference parameters, which we allow to be het-
erogeneous across households.

Identification at the Interior We begin by considering non-parametric identification of the
preferences if all households were at an interior solution. Although a minority of households are
in fact at corner solutions, this analysis provides both a constructive component of identification
for households at an interior, and accessible intuition for the sources of identification, which is
typically quite murky in a structural model.
    For each household i, we observe labor supply Li , maternal time mi , maternal-care quality
qmi , non-maternal quality qni , and maternal effort ei . As discussed above, maternal-care qual-
ity is identified from direct observer measures of the mother-child interactions and the home
environment, non-maternal quality is identified from per hour expenditures on non-maternal
care, and maternal effort is identified from the "unexplained" residual maternal-care quality.
Parameters of the maternal-care and child-skill production technology, (2) and (3), are as-
sumed identified based on the analysis above. For this initial identification analysis, we also
assume wage offers wi and non-labor income Yi for each household are observed.29 We iden-
tify the 5-vector of each household's preferences (hi , e,1,i , li , m ,i , pi ) from this 5-vector of
household-level choice data (Li , mi , pi , qni , ei ). We discuss each element in turn.
    First, inverting the non-maternal care quality expenditure solution (15) yields:
                                                       qni ni
                                        hi =                                                     (20)
                                               qni (Ri (Li ) - qni ni )
where the price of non-maternal care is normalized to  = 1, Ri (Li ) is after-tax income as a
function of labor supply, and qni  n (h0i )     Tc . Higher expenditures on non-maternal quality
                                                 ni

(qn ), given household income R(L), implies a stronger preference for child skill, i.e. a higher
h .
     Similarly, inverting the optimal e solution (14), we solve for the effort preference that ratio-
nalizes the observed data:

                                                       hi m (h0i ) T
                                                                   mi
                                                                    c
                                             e,1,i =          e,2
                                                                                                 (21)
                                                          ei mi
Given the preference for child skill and maternal-care time, a higher effort level implies a smaller
dis-taste for parenting effort (e,1 ).
    Similarly, the preference for leisure is found from the FOC for an interior solution (9):

                                             li
                                      li =      wi [1 -  (Li )Li -  (Li )]                       (22)
                                             ci
where household i consumption ci is derived from the income and expenditures data. Preference
for leisure is identified from the ratio of leisure observed relative to consumption, given the effect
on the after-tax wage rate: mothers observed with a higher ratio of leisure hours relative to
consumption given their wage and tax rate are inferred to have a higher preference for leisure.
 29
      We discuss the data that we use to identify these below.



                                                        21
       Preference for maternal-care time is found by inverting its FOC (12):

                     li qni                e,2 -1
 mi = (mi +1){         -    + e,1,i e,2 ei mi     - hi (1/TC )(m (h0i ) ln qmi - n (h0i ) ln qni )} (23)
                     l   ci
This expression indicates that a household's preference for maternal-care time increases in the
observed amount of maternal-care time and declines in its productivity relative to endogenous
nonmaternal care time.
   Finally, the preference for program participation is identified by inverting the FOC for
program-care hours (13):
                                 qni
             pi = -                                - hi (1/TC )(p (h0i ) - n (h0i ) ln qni )                 (24)
                      R(Li ) - qni (TC - mi - pi )
where preference for program care increases in the observed use of the program given the relative
quality of program care versus alternative care.

Implementation To implement this identification strategy as a practical estimator, we face
two challenges. First, some households are not at the interior of the choice set, and we cannot
non-parametrically identify their preferences.30 Second, even for households that are in the
interior and preferences are non-parametrically identified, exactly identifying the 5-vector of
preference parameters for each sample household from a 5-vector of observed data for each
household risks over-fitting, which may compromise the counterfactual analysis.
    We solve these challenges by imposing some additional parametric structure on the dis-
tribution of preferences. We assume preferences are distributed jointly Normal (imposing the
appropriate sign restrictions), with the mean of the joint distribution depending on a rich set
of observable household characteristics, including marital status, maternal cognitive skill and
education, numbers and ages of other children in the household, initial child skill at age 12
months, and pre-natal characteristics. We estimate this preference distribution using the con-
trol sample only and, given random assignment, assume the treatment sample shares the same
(conditional on observables) distribution of preferences. Given their observable characteristics,
the preferences for any given household, including those at corner solutions, are assumed to
be a draw from this estimated distribution. The Appendix, particularly Appendix Table B-3,
provides additional details.

4.4      Hourly Wage and Non-Labor Income
The IHDP does not contain direct measures of wages and non-labor income but measures
strong determinants of them. To enrich the IHDP data, we draw on a parallel sample from the
  30
     There are four possible corner solutions in our model: no labor supply (L = 0), all maternal time (m = TC ),
no program time (p = 0), maximum hours program time (p =           ¯p ). The other corner solutions of no maternal
time and only non-maternal time do not occur in the sample and we can safely ignore them. In our sample,
about 8 percent of the IHDP sample has full-time maternal care, 40 percent have L = 0, 16 percent have p = 0
in treatment group, and no one is at maximum program hours (averaged across 2 years offered).



                                                       22
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY). We construct a similar NLSY subsample
to the IHDP, including only mothers who have children under 3, born 1983-1987, and whose
children were born low-birth-weight and premature so they meet the IHDP eligibility criteria.
Using this IHDP-like sample for the NLSY, we then estimate models of log hourly wages and
log weekly non-labor income using predictor variables common to both datasets: maternal
education, age, marital status, and maternal IQ score (PPVT in IHDP and AFQT in NSLY
but both standardized to national norms). Given the inclusion of education and IQ scores, we
argue that the bias from ignoring endogenous labor supply is minimal. Based on the estimated
models (Appendix Table B-1), we impute a predicted wage offer and non-labor income for each
IHDP sample member.

4.5   Estimation Algorithm
Our estimation algorithm has two main steps. In Step 1, we estimate the production technolo-
gies and resource functions. Given these, we then estimate preferences in Step 2. This has two
valuable advantages and one small disadvantage over joint estimation of all parameters. First,
it substantially reduces computation time. Second, identification of each subset of parameters
is more clearly defined by isolating the sources of empirical variation key to their identification.
The disadvantage is the familiar one, a loss of efficiency due to not imposing all model restric-
tions jointly. However, the precision of our parameter estimates is generally high so, in practice,
we believe this is not a substantial concern. We conduct inference using the non-parametric
bootstrap. We re-sample the data (each household) with replacement and, for every bootstrap
sample, re-compute all parameter estimates at each step in sequence. Repeating each step of
the estimation ensures that our standard errors accurately reflect the sampling variation at
each step of the estimator.


5     Results
Before analyzing the policy simulations in the next section, in this Section, we first discuss
estimates of key parameters and results of validity tests. We discuss model parameters directly,
and in terms of implied average elasticities. We focus on the unique features of our model, and
leave estimates of more standard features (e.g. wage offers) for the Appendix. We conclude
this section by discussing the model fit of our estimates and an out-sample validity test.

5.1   Maternal-Care Quality
A central contribution of the paper is introducing a parenting-effort choice, which influences
observed maternal-care quality, and proposing it as a channel by which child care subsidies
can spillover into affecting parenting care. Allowing parents to parent less may allow them to
parent better. When we take the model to the data, we use a specific measure of maternal-care
quality, based on the Learning and Literacy index from the HOME inventory at 36-months
[Fuligni et al., 2004; Chaparro and Sojourner, 2015]. Do differences in this really capture
differences in maternal effort?


                                                23
    Our first indication that maternal-care time is tightly related to maternal-care quality comes
from the experimental results reported in Table 2. For mothers with less than a bachelor's
degree, there is both an increase in measured maternal-care quality (ranging from 1/4 to 1/3
of a standard deviation across the lower maternal-education subgroups) and a substantial and
statistically significant reduction in maternal-care hours (ranging from about 9 to 13 hours per
week). In contrast, for the high-education group, there is no statistically significant treatment
effect on either maternal hours or quality. To get a more-refined view of whether the types of
mothers who experienced larger negative treatment effects on maternal-care time were also the
types that experienced larger positive treatment effects on maternal-care quality, we generalize
this approach. We add several more baseline covariates (mother's test score, number of other
children, and marital status) to maternal education and estimate conditional treatment effects
on maternal-care time and quality. Figure 1 plots a binscatter of estimated treatment effects
on these two variables conditional on these covariates. There is a strong, negative relationship.
Types of mothers where treatment induces large reductions in maternal-care time also have
large increases in maternal-care quality. Those with little change in maternal-care time have
correspondingly little to no change in maternal-care quality.
    We further explore the relationship between maternal-care time and quality using a number
of placebo tests. Table 3's Panel A presents estimates of regressions of various measures of
maternal-care quality on an indicator of the randomized treatment offer. Column (1) uses the
36-month Learning and Literacy subscale of the HOME inventory, our main measure of maternal
quality (ln qm ) as the dependent variable. Controlling for maternal education, cognitive test
scores, and age, and numbers and ages of other children, we estimate that the treatment offer
increases the Learning and Literacy index by about 0.25 standard deviations on average. To
check whether this effect size reflects the treatment, rather than some failure of randomization,
Column (2) uses the Learning and Literacy index measured at 12-months, before the offer of
program care. We do not find a meaningful nor statistically significant effect of treatment,
providing evidence that there were not systematic differences in maternal-care quality before
access to program care began.31 As an additional check, Column (3) repeats the analysis in
Column (1), but using each household's difference in scores between 36 and 12 months as the
dependent variable (a mother fixed-effect model). The estimated treatment effect is very similar
to that using the 36-month level in Column (1).
    Another concern is that the treatment effect we estimate may not identify the effect of
parenting effort, but instead represent a wealth-effect from receiving free child care. Items in
the Learning and Literacy index represent a mix of effort (e.g., child is encouraged to learn to
read a few words) and low-cost goods strongly complementary to effort (e.g., child has at least
10 children's books). To test for a confounding wealth effect, we look for items in the whole
55-item, 36-month HOME inventory that measure goods that do not represent maternal effort
nor complement effort. Four measures fit this category: home building appears safe, outside
play environment appears safe, the neighborhood is aesthetically pleasing, and the house has
at least 100 square feet of living space per person. If families have more resources from saved
child care expenses or increased earnings, they could provide a better living situation, requiring
 31
    This is also evidence that the home-visiting component of the treatment prior to 12 months did not affect
maternal-care quality. See above for a more detailed discussion of this.


                                                     24
more financial resources but not more active parenting effort. We sum these four indicators and
standardize in the control sample. The estimated treatment effect on this "not-effort" index is
not significant (Column 4), again suggesting the channel for the estimated effect on maternal
quality is through effort not wealth.
    Building on the analysis in Panel A, Panel B of Table 3 presents the estimates for the
primitives of the maternal quality model, using the randomized offer of the CDC care as an
instrument for log maternal care hours. Consistent with the descriptive patterns described
above, we find that the offer of CDC care is a strong instrument for maternal care hours, with
the treatment offer estimated to reduce maternal hours by 16.5 percent. The 2SLS IV estimate
indicates that a 1 percent increase in maternal hours reduces maternal quality by 0.015 standard
deviations.32 As described in the previous section, the IV estimate ( from equation 19), implies
a convex cost to effort parameter of e,2 = - + 1 = 2.5. Our estimates indicate that more
maternal-care hours make effort increasingly costly for mothers, reducing the effective quality
per hour of maternal care.33
    Finally, the top panel of Table 4 reports estimates of the remaining maternal-care quality
production technology parameters (2). We estimate that a 1 standard deviation increase in
the mother's own cognitive test score improves maternal-care quality (36-month Learning &
Literacy score) by 0.31 standard deviations, consistent with maternal human capital as an
important source of maternal-care quality heterogeneity.34 We also estimate that maternal
maturity has positive returns for productivity in maternal care. All else equal, a 30-year-old
mother would produce about 0.20 standard deviations higher maternal quality than a 20-year-
old mother. Mothers with more than 1 child in the household are estimated to produce lower-
quality maternal care for the focal child. This is consistent with a congestion effect in maternal-
care production that dominates any positive returns from parenting experience. This is also
consistent with older siblings reducing the average quality of parental care by dividing parents'
attention and negatively impacting younger siblings' cognitive-skill development [Kristensen
and Bjerkedal, 2007; Price, 2008; Breining et al., 2019].
  32
     Repeating the 2SLS estimation using maternal hours in levels, not logs, produces an estimate that a 1
hour per week increase in maternal hours reduces maternal quality by a statistically significant 0.026 standard
deviations.
  33
     Our evidence is consistent with prior work showing that subsidized child care can affect parenting. Love
et al. [2005] found that parents with kids randomly selected for Early Head Start (age 0-2) eligibility raise the
level of parenting quality and Gelber and Isen [2013] finds the same for Head Start (age 3-4). Gelber and Isen
recognize that it could be due to changes in parent time with children through impacts on the parent's time
constraint but lack good measures of parental care quantity to get at this directly. Chaparro and Sojourner
[2015] report that this occurs in the IHDP subsample with low maternal wages and add that it doesn't in the
higher-wage subsample.
  34
     Note that with the inclusion of a maternal cognitive skill measures, maternal education is no longer a
statistically significant source of care quality. These two measures of maternal human capital are strongly
positively correlated, and dropping the test score measure leaves a strong and statistically significant effect of
maternal education.




                                                       25
5.2    Cognitive Skill Production
The bottom panels of Table 4 report our estimates for the parameters of the child cognitive
skill production function (3). The output of the production process is age-3 IQ, and parameters
are interpretable in terms of that output. Age-3 IQ is in points, with a representative national
mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15. We split our sample by initial endowment ln h0
(measured by 12-month Bayley mental development index) and allow for different parameters
between children with below-median and above-median initial skill. This permits either com-
plementarity or substitutability between initial endowment and early investments [Cunha and
Heckman, 2008]. We do not find statistically-significant differences in productivity parameter
estimates across children with above- versus below-median initial skill, suggesting little evidence
of heterogeneity in the productivity of care inputs with respect to the level of initial skill and
little support for dynamic complementarity at this developmental stage and for this sample.35
     For the contribution of initial skill, we use a linear-in-logs function in initial skill with
separate slopes and intercepts in each sub-sample (below or above median h0 ): h0 (h0i ) =
0,h0 + 1,h0 ln h0i . We estimate that children's initial, 12-month level of skill (h0 ) is productive
for age-3 cognitive skill. Echoing previous studies [Aizer and Cunha, 2012] and [Cunha and
Heckman, 2008], initial skill measured even at very early ages, is self-productive, i.e. "skill
begets skill."
     Remaining parameters describe the productivity of each type of care (maternal, non-maternal,
IHDP program) in producing age-3 IQ. Two issues need to be considered in interpreting pa-
rameters. First, a ceteris paribus analysis is not strictly possible. An hour increase in one care
type must be balanced by an hour reduction in another care type. Second, each productivity
parameter provides the productivity given some quality level, and quality is not measured in
the same way for each care type. And, our specification of the technology is a general non-linear
one, as we allow for explicit complementarities or interactions between quality and quantity.
     Beginning with non-maternal care, given the normalization on the price of non-maternal care
( = 1)­implying that quality is equal to hourly expenditure­n indicates that an additional
1 percent increase in non-maternal expenditure raises IQ scores by n /TC for every hour of
non-maternal care, where TC = 87.5 (the total weekly hours of care each child receives). Given
the estimates of n around 16, a 1 percent increase in non-maternal care quality, i.e. hourly
expenditure, increases IQ by about 0.18 points (0.012 standard deviations). For maternal
care, log care quality is measured using (control-group standardized) scores on the Learning
& Literacy dimension of the HOME instrument (as discussed above). The estimate of m of
around 10 implies that a 1 percent increase in maternal quality per hour would produce an
increase in age-3 IQ of 0.1 points (0.007 standard deviations). We stress that caution should be
used in interpreting these numbers as they involve manipulating endogenous variables; below
we consider counterfactual changes in child care costs and other exogenous variables and the
resulting effects on age-3 IQ, taking into account all endogenous behaviors.
  35
    Comparing the two groups, none of the parameters are statistically different individually at the 10% level
nor are they different jointly. We caution that given our sample sizes, this is not the ideal dataset to test
thoroughly for dynamic complementarities. As a robustness check, we also split the sample at a higher Bayley
cutoff, classifying Bayley scores at or above 0.5 standard deviations above our sample mean as high h0 . This
yields similar results.


                                                     26
    For IHDP program care, we assume that the program has a homogeneous quality (although
potentially different effects on households of different child skill levels), and identify this quality
level using the experiment and observed age-3 IQ. We can express the estimated quality of the
program care in terms of the USD equivalent non-maternal care that would achieve the same
level of age-3 skill. We solve for this equivalent hourly care expenditure x from n ln x = p ,
or x = exp(p /n ). The estimate of p around 43 and n around 16 implies that the quality of
IHDP care is equivalent to private market care costing about $16.7 per hour (in 2018$), well
above the average quality of non-program care families purchase in our data.36 As shown in
the Appendix, our estimate is above the 99th percentile for the IHDP sample (but below the
highest value observed in this sample), and at around the 90th percentile of the hourly care cost
distribution using a more recent 2012 sample. In comparison to actual program costs, combining
the average of 18.2 hours of care used per week and the IHDP's weekly care cost of about $336
per child based on administrative spending records from the original study researchers [Gross
et al., 1997], the hourly cost of the CDC is estimated at $18.46, somewhat higher than the
market price we estimate.

5.3    Implied Elasticities
Beyond reporting model parameters directly, we can also compute elasticities implied by model
primitives. Table 5 reports the average elasticity of endogenous outcomes with respect to three
margins: an increase in the maternal wage offer (w), the hourly cost of nonmaternal care ( ),
and nonlabor income (Y ). For example, a 1 percent increase in the maternal wage offer is
estimated to cause a 0.07 percent increase in child cognitive skill (Column 2). A 1 percent
increase in hourly child care price holding quality fixed reduces child cognitive skill by 0.08
percent.37 Child cognitive skill responds very little to family income on average. In addition to
these average elasticities, the model allows general heterogeneous responses. Appendix Table B-
6 reports analogous elasticities separately by maternal-education subsample. Elasticities of child
skill and maternal-care hours do not vary much by maternal education groups but elasticities of
earning hours, maternal-care quality, and nonmaternal-care quality vary substantially, reflecting
the importance of analyzing sub-groups separately.
    Some of these elasticities can be compared with the literature, though many others are
novel. We estimate that a 1 percent increase in child care prices reduces average maternal
labor hours by 0.39 percent. This is similar to contemporaneous estimates which place this
elasticity in a range from slightly positive to around -0.4.38 There are relatively few studies
of how child care costs relate to non-maternal care demand. We estimate a -0.43 average
elasticity of nonmaternal care hours with respect to child care costs. This is similar but higher
  36
     For above median families, the quality is estimated at $22 and for below median at $11.4, implying an average
cost of 0.5*$22 + 0.5*$11.4 = $16.7.
  37
     Recall that, in estimation, we normalized the price of nonmaternal care to  = 1. Changing  to 1.01 makes
equivalent-quality care cost 1% more to families.
  38
     Estimates vary by demographic groups and time period, along with methodology. A relatively recent sum-
mary of the literature [Morrissey, 2017] indicates that the estimates range from -0.025 to -1.1, with most studies
providing estimates around -0.05 to -0.25. This review concludes that more recent estimates are smaller than
previous ones using data from the 1990s.


                                                       27
than the comparable estimate of -0.21 (based on Blau and Hagy [1998]; reported on page 75 of
Blau [2001]). Finally, our estimate of a 0.32 elasticity of nonmaternal-care quality demanded
with respect to family income is much higher than the 0.001 Blau [2001] reports­essentially
no demand for quality of child care. That study uses observable child care characteristics
(such as the child-teacher ratio and teacher education level) as measures of quality rather than
expenditures and observer-based ratings, as we do here. Our estimate of the labor supply
elasticity with respect to the maternal wage averages 2.8 and appears higher among mothers
with less formal education, echoing Keane and Wolpin [2010].39

5.4    Sample Fit and Validity Check
Table 6 displays within-sample fit for the control and treatment groups. The estimated model
fits the mean and standard deviation of age-3 IQ, child time allocations, labor supply, maternal
quality, and non-maternal care expenditures well. Two relatively minor issues stand out for our
within-sample fit for the treatment group: The model under-predicts the treatment group mean
age-3 IQ scores by about 1.25 IQ points, and over-predicts maternal hours (correspondingly
under-predicts non-maternal hours) by about 5 hours per week. We match the treatment
group's mean take-up of the program nearly exactly, about 18 hours in data and simulation.
     In Columns (5)-(6) of Panel A, we also perform an out-of-sample validity check. The
motivation for this exercise is past practice validating structural models by assessing the extent
to which they can predict experimental results. Todd and Wolpin [2006], for example, estimate
their structural model using control-group data only, and, then, counterfactually simulate the
effects of the Mexican Progressa subsidy program using their model's estimates. The close match
of the structural model's predicted effects to the actual observed treatment-group outcomes adds
credibility to their model specification and estimates.
     We cannot do this exact type of validation test here because we cannot identify the model
within the control group. The control group never had access to IHDP program care and we
make no a priori assumptions comparing the IHDP program care to care available to the control
group, so we cannot identify the quality of program care nor the program-specific distaste from
control-group data alone (we freely estimate both of these features using the treatment group
data). Instead, we conduct a validation test where we put the treatment group counterfactually
in the control condition (i.e., remove the treatment offer), simulate their choices, and report how
well the model predicts what the treatment group would do as captured by what the control
group did do. Thanks to the IHDP's random assignment of families to treatment group, we
expect the same distribution of preferences and productivities in the control-condition treatment
group as in the observed control group. Columns 5 and 6 present the means and standard
deviations of the treatment group's simulated endogenous variables in the control condition.
The similarity of columns 1-2 versus 5-6 expresses how well the model predicts families' choices
and their impacts on children's cognitive skill. For instance, compare the observed mean (SD)
  39
     We estimate 3.2, 3.6, 1.7, and 2.4 for those with no high school degree, high-school only, some college,
and at least a bachelor's, respectively (Appendix Table B-6). This echoes estimated elasticities among 6 latent
skill-preference types of women with ascending skill of: 9.2, 4.6, 3.9, 3.7, 1.2 and 0.6 from Keane and Wolpin
[2010].



                                                      28
of the control group's child IQ of 86.6 (19.2) to the treatment-group's simulated mean (SD) of
87.2 (21.2) in the counterfactual control condition.

5.5   Mechanisms
Prior work on the effects of subsidized child care with economically-diverse samples in the
U.S. [Bartik et al., 2012; Duncan and Sojourner, 2013; Cascio and Schanzenbach, 2013] and
Europe [Fort et al., 2019; Drange and Havnes, 2019] finds heterogeneous reduced-form effects
with respect to family income. However, the extent to which this heterogeneity is due to
family income per se or to correlated factors­such as maternal wages and human capital, child
endowment, non-maternal care quality, maternal-care quality, or preferences­remains unclear.
Our estimated model allows us to generate relevant, new evidence.
    To illuminate the mechanisms driving the IHDP effects, we simulate what would happen
if the economic environment were different and report how average treatment effects of the
program offer would change. If all mothers have nonlabor income equal to the average nonlabor
income of mothers with at least a bachelor's degree (BA+) but nothing else changes, the average
effect of the IHDP program offer on child cognitive skill would fall by more than half (Table 7:
Columns (1) & (2)). (Recall that "nonlabor" income here is mainly the mother's spousal labor
income.) This quantifies the share of treatment-effect heterogeneity by maternal education due
to nonlabor income per se, rather than due to wage, endowment, preferences or other factors
also correlated with education. If all mothers additionally have the average wage offer of BA+
mothers, the ATE of the program offer on child skill would essentially vanish, with the effect
size declining to 0.5 points (Column 3). At least part of the treatment effect re-emerges once
we counterfacually provide all households the BA+'s mothers' average productivity in maternal
care and child endowment. The final experiment in particular demonstrates some quantitative
importance of dynamic complementarity: even when households have higher resources (wage
offers and non-labor income), we estimate that the effect of the program offer would be non-
trivially positive if they also have a high level of child skill at 12 months. Lower rows display
analogous results for endogenous variables besides child skill.


6     Policy Simulations
In this Section, we use our estimated model to simulate the effects of a set of counterfactual
policies, and describe the lessons that emerge. First, we compare the distribution of effects
from the existing program offer to two alternative programs: (a) a cost-equivalent cash transfer
to households, and (b) a 25 percent increase in wages. Second, we change characteristics of
the care subsidy from those observed in the IHDP experiment, simulate how different kinds
of families react to these counterfactual programs, and estimate their effects on children. In
summary, we consider 5 types of changes to the IHDP-CDC program:

    · Replace the program with a cost-equivalent cash transfer

    · Replace the program with a 25% maternal wage subsidy


                                               29
       · Vary program-care quality

       · Vary program subsidy level (co-pay)

       · Vary program targeting and take-up

    Table 8 reports results for some of the main program changes we consider, including effects
on average child IQ, time use, and care quantities and qualities. We next discuss each policy
in turn.

6.1      Replacing IHDP with a Cash Transfer or Wage Subsidy
We first consider replacing the offer of IHDP-CDC care with an equally-costly cash transfer. In
this scenario, each household receives the average weekly cost of the program $336 in 2018$ as
an unrestricted non-labor income transfer (this is an annual transfer of $17,472). As discussed in
Del Boca et al. [2014], unrestricted income transfers have the advantage of providing the highest
welfare for the household (in these models, the parents), and, in this context, providing broad-
based relief to all families, even to those who have a high stigma/hassle cost to a subsidized care
program.40 Disadvantages to unrestricted income transfers from the perspective of influencing
child development is that the parents will "consume" part of the transfer and only part of it
flows to children.
    Figure 2 presents the distribution of treatment effects on age-3 IQ for the baseline IHDP
program offer versus the cash transfer. The offer of the IHDP program has a much higher
average effect on children's age-3 IQ. The equally-costly cash transfer policy boosts child cog-
nitive skill by an average of only 0.1 standard deviations (1.5 points) compared to nearly 0.5
standard deviations (7.4 points) simulated effect of the program offer. In Table 8, comparing
the cash-transfer (Column 3) versus the control condition (Column 1) indicates that households
use the extra non-labor income to reduce maternal labor supply by about 10 hours per week,
which they divide between a very small increase in maternal-care hours and a large increase in
other uses of maternal time (caring for other children or leisure). The quality of maternal care
falls slightly, consistent with an effort-channel response to more maternal care. But the largest
change and the main source of the higher age-3 IQ for children is the increase in the quality of
nonmaternal care purchased, from about $3 per hour to about $4.70. Average expenditure on
child care (qn n ) then increases from $83 to $120 per week. As with IHDP program effects, the
effect of a cash transfer is smaller among children of mothers with at least some college than
among those with less formal education (Appendix Table B-7).41 As in Del Boca et al. [2014],
an unrestricted cash transfer has non-trivial positive average effects on children. But, as we
demonstrate here, the effects are small relative to the in-kind offer of high-quality care, given
that parents allocate only some of the resources to the children.
  40
     From the public perspective, an additional advantage is that unrestricted transfers have lower administrative
costs than in-kind care offers because there is no need for costly income verification.
  41
     It should also be noted that the cash-transfer policy has a non-trivial, negative effect on some children
(Figure 2). The income effect on labor supply causes some mothers to increase their maternal-care hours, which
shifts some children to worse care environments.



                                                       30
   Raising mothers' hourly wages by 25 percent costs only a quarter as much as the cash-
transfer but delivers a similar effect on child skill.42 The wage subsidy does have different effects
on time use and care qualities. On average, mothers raise earning hours by about 5 hours (30
percent), half of that increase coming from reducing maternal-care and half from other time
uses ("leisure"). In response to this policy, households on average increase maternal-care quality
due to the effort channel and nonmaternal-care quality due to extra income.

6.2    Vary Program-Care Quality
The IHDP offered families access to high-quality, in-kind care, and produced large, positive
average treatment effects. Next, we counterfactually vary the quality of the program care
offered. For any given value of the p quality parameter, we re-solve the model, including all
of the endogenous household choices. Take-up of the program care offer is endogenous in our
model and, in general, changes in the quality of the offered care affect take-up. As we have
throughout, we assume households know this quality, and can choose any number of hours of
the program offer (from 0 to 45 hours).
     The top panel of Figure 3 displays how the ATE (average intent-to-treat effect) on child IQ
from an offer of free program care varies with the quality of program care offered. The horizontal
axis is program-care quality expressed as the dollar-per-hour price of equal-quality nonmaternal
care, from near $0 quality to $25, with the baseline estimate for the IHDP program-care quality
around $16.7 per hour of care. The vertical axis displays the ATE on age-3 IQ of the program
offer at these various quality levels.
     As the quality of program care increases, the ATE increases. At the lowest program-
qualities, the ATE starts near zero. Few households decide to take-up a low-quality program
and the effect is small for the few households that do. As quality improves, the ATE increases,
at an accelerating rate, as more households take-up the program and the effect on their children
is larger. The horizontal, dashed line shows the experimental sample's ATE estimated directly
from the data. The intersection of this line with our model's simulated ATE estimates at
different program-care quality levels graphically illustrates how we identify the IHDP's program
quality level.
     If offered program-care quality were reduced to equal the control group's observed average
nonmaternal-care quality (from about $16.7 to $3.14), the simulated average effect on child
skill falls proportionally more, from 7.4 age-3 IQ points to less than 1 point (Table 8: Columns
(5)-(1)). The bottom panel of Figure 3 shows how program-care quality affects the ATE in
each maternal education group. We see a similar pattern within each subsample and smaller
gains for children of mothers with the most formal education at every offered quality level.
Figure 4 describes how the same program-care quality changes affect maternal- and child-time
allocations. As program quality increases, take-up of the program increases substantially. There
is a smaller negative effect on labor supply and maternal care and a larger reduction in other
nonmaternal care.
  42
    Although the model includes taxes in calculating each household's budget set, we do not consider taxes here.
The 25-percent wage subsidy is pre-tax and the policy cost is the cost of the subsidy, not considering additional
tax revenue generated by the additional labor income due to the policy change.



                                                       31
6.3    Universal program
Various communities around the world have implemented universal, in-kind, public child care
programs and some have advocated adopting this approach in the U.S. Our results emphasize
that the effects of expanding to create such a program depend critically on two factors: the
quality of program care and, given the heterogeneity in effects, who is newly induced to take
up the program. The latter depends critically on the nature of programs existing prior to a
change. New compliers can come only from those not participating already.43
    Aside from cost and quality, other characteristics of the program affect families' willingness
to take-up the program. We next consider how varying the desirability of the program would
change the program's overall effects. To bound the effects, we first consider an extreme case
where take-up of the program was 100% and all households participated for the maximum 45
hours.44 Table 8 shows that full take-up of the program (at the estimated baseline quality level)
would increase the ATE on age-3 IQ from about 7 IQ points for the voluntary take-up offer
in baseline to about 20 IQ points under this counterfactual. Full take-up almost eliminates
the use of other nonmaternal care and reduces average maternal care by about 20 hours (33
percent). Earning hours increase by about an hour, but most of mothers' freed hours go to other
uses. An important spillover from the full take-up of the program and the substantial reduction
in maternal care time is an increase in effort and maternal quality by about 0.6 standard
deviations. These effects contribute to the large increase in age-3 IQ from the program.
    Figure 5 maintains the full take-up restriction but varies the quality of the program, as
in the previous exercise, shown in Figure 3. Two findings are particularly salient. First, for
low-quality programs, the overall ATE is negative with involuntary full-take-up. In contrast, as
shown in the previous exercise in Figure 3, low-quality programs do not do as much "damage"
to skill development with voluntary take up as they might otherwise do because households
endogenously avoid these programs. The break down by education is particularly stark as
children in higher maternal-education households are particularly hurt by full take-up of a low-
quality program. These are precisely the households that have high-quality, alternative care
and would tend to avoid this program.
    Second, as quality increases with full take-up, there are diminishing returns on age-3 IQ,
relative to the case with voluntary take-up in Figure 3. This highlights the endogeneity of
program take-up: as quality increases, more households are induced to participate, and this
increases the ATE of the program offer.45
  43
     At the time of the IHDP, there were almost no public child care subsidies for children under 3 in the U.S.
As discussed in the introduction, now there are subsidies via Early Head Start and CCDF vouchers for low-
income families. However, funding limitations mean that these cover only a small minority of eligible children.
The Child & Dependent Care Tax Credit did exist and provided small care subsidies to higher-income families.
Nonrefundability of this tax credit means it's essentially worthless to low-income families.
  44
     This counterfactual is not strictly enforceable of course, but represents the upper bound from program
changes that would somehow make the program more attractive to households (reducing hassle and stigma costs,
and making the program more convenient to households generally) and bringing in households that strongly
prefer maternal care over program care. A similar exercise is conducted by Kline and Walters [2016] in the
context of their discrete-choice model of Head Start and 2 alternative forms of care.
  45
     This does not necessarily change the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT), i.e. those who take-up
the program.


                                                      32
     These issues of quality and take-up come to the fore in understanding results from various
large-scale child care programs. One prominent example is the Qu´      ebec universal child care
program. Starting in the 1990s, the Canadian province of Qu´    ebec provided universal care to
children of all ages, with an out-of-pocket cost capped at CAN$5 per day. Using differences
between Qu´   ebec and other Canadian provinces, Baker et al. [2008] and Baker et al. [2015]
find that this program had substantial deleterious effects on child outcomes, such as anxiety,
aggressiveness, motor and social skills, and health. However it appears that the types of care
subsidized under this program were of lower quality than the programs considered in the U.S.46
In addition, the take-up of the Qu´ ebec program was twice as large for educated mothers (some
college or more) than for less educated mothers (high school or less), likely because low income
households already had access to subsidized care at the time the program began. Therefore,
it is possible that the Qu´ebec program caused many households to switch from higher-quality
care at home or in the market to lower-quality care in the public centers. Baker et al. [2015]
conclude that in the case of the Qu´   ebec program: "Our findings for young children clearly
contrast with those of the Perry, Abecedarian, and Head Start studies. These latter programs
both provide higher quality care and are targeted at less advantaged children."
     Using our estimated model, we attempt to see if we can replicate a similar result. Figure 6
graphs the age-3 IQ ATE from a simulation varying the fraction of college-educated compliers
to a low quality ($2 per hour) full take-up program. As we increase the fraction of college
educated compliers from 0 to 1, the overall ATE of the program declines, and if the fraction
of college-educated compliers exceeds about 2/3 (at least twice as many college graduates than
non-college graduates), the overall ATE becomes negative, mirroring the results of the Qu´   ebec
program.

6.4    Vary Subsidized Price
We next consider varying the subsidy level of the program by requiring that parents pay $1 per
hour of program care. Compared to the offer of the program for free, instituting this co-pay
reduces average hours by about two-thirds, from 18 hours to 6.6 hours per week. The ATE on
age-3 IQ is also substantially reduced by over half. Interestingly, even though hours of take-up
fall, imposing the co-pay increases maternal earning hours slightly as mothers work more to
pay for the program.

6.5    Limitations
Though the mechanisms and tradeoffs highlighted by our model remain at the center of families'
choices and sensible policymaking, care is required in drawing out lessons for today. Doing so
would require extrapolation in a few dimensions where we want to highlight concerns.
    First, the IHDP sample was selected to include only children born low birth weight and
premature. Although our sample excludes children born with extreme adverse health condi-
tions and includes primarily children close to the eligibility cutoffs, to the extent that skill-
  46
     Based on a audit study of the centers involved, Japel et al. [2005] report that a majority, 61%, had only a
"minimal" educational component, and an additional 12% were of "inadequate quality."



                                                      33
development technology, parental preferences, demographics, or correlations with wage and
income systematically differ in this subpopulation relative to the general population, then es-
timates drawn from here may be valid for this subpopulation but less relevant for the general
population. As discussed above, we tested for differences in sample statistics using a sample
of children close to the eligibility cutoffs and found only minor differences between this sub-
sample and our full sample. In addition, we allow rich patterns of heterogeneity by initial skill
differences, both in the skill production technology and preferences. We have also tested for
differences in skill production technology by birth weight and gestation age, in addition to age-1
measured skill, and find no statistically significant differences.
    On the other hand, our sample is economically diverse because it was selected on a different
margin, and can provide many important insights about the role of family resources in child
care because of this. In contrast, many papers in the literature on structural estimation of
child care choices with credible identification include only children from low-income families
such as studies of Perry Preschool [Heckman et al., 2010], welfare reform [Bernal and Keane,
2010], and Head Start [Kline and Walters, 2016]. Others include diverse samples but lack
quasi-experimental features Cunha et al. [2010]; Caucutt et al. [2017]; Del Boca et al. [2014].
    A second potential limitation is that the IHDP program we study is an offer of care between
12- and 36-months. Different care offers that start earlier and extend later would likely facilitate
stronger maternal connection to the labor market and could encourage even higher take-up.
    Third, the IHDP parents' choices took place in the late 1980s and much about the economic
and policy environment has changed. For instance, the IHDP occurred before any substantial
public investment in age 0-2 care. Since then, the Child Care and Development Block Grant's
Child Care Development Fund (1990) and Early Head Start (1995) program started subsidizing
care for children from low-income families in this age range. Wages, nonlabor income, and
prices of nonmaternal child care also evolved over this period (See Hotz and Wiswall [2019] for
a recent review). Further, our estimates ignore how scalability might change costs and benefits.
Concerns like this apply to many studies.
    Fourth, child cognitive skill at age-3 is our measure of child development but other outcomes
matter [Kautz et al., 2014]. The IHDP data include other margins of child development at this
endpoint of the treatment, such as behavior problems and health. Given that the prior IHDP
literature found smaller effects there, we focus on cognitive skill.47 This is essentially a static
model of a point-in-time decision process focused on the earliest ages of development. It should
inform and complement research examining longer-term dynamics in the child development
process [Cunha et al., 2010; Del Boca et al., 2014; Agostinelli and Wiswall, 2020]. There is a
  47
    The IHDP data also include follow-up measures of development across domains at older ages up to 18.
However, data on inputs in these intervening years is relatively weak. This model could be extended and made
dynamic to cover later ages but, lacking data of similar quality on endogenous inputs, we refrain from that
exercise. Duncan and Sojourner [2013] shows that, among the 2,000-2,500 grams at birth subsample, the positive
age-3 effect fades down and not out among children from low-income families to 0.59 standard deviations at
age 5 and 0.50 at age 8. At age-18, the cognitive skill effect is no longer statistically significant (a third of the
sample attrited) but the point estimate remains substantial at 0.36. The smaller age-3 effect for those from
higher-income families fades out by and after age-5. No data past age 18 was collected on the IHDP sample
but studies of the original Abecedarian project and replications other than the IHDP show positive impacts in
adulthood [Campbell et al., 2008, 2014].



                                                         34
large literature on the relationship between surrogate outcomes in childhood and later outcomes
of deeper interest [Elango et al., 2015].


7    Conclusion
Each child has only one first 3 years. The quality of the care environments they experience
over this short time has life-long consequences. In the first few years of children's lives, par-
ents struggle under the dual burden of care and earning with relatively less support from the
community than they will get as their children age. The policy and economic environment
shape the choices available. This paper illuminates key tradeoffs parents of young children face,
predicts how different kinds of families would react to changes in their environment, and how
it would impact their children's development and uses of parents' resources.
    Our approach synthesizes empirical evidence across multiple margins of parental choice and
leverages it to illuminate mechanisms and predict counteractual policy effects. Our theoretical
model highlights tradeoffs that much of the previous literature has not deeply considered ­
(1) quality versus quantity of maternal care and (2) quality and quantity of non-maternal
care ­ while also integrating more familiar tradeoffs such as how early skill levels affect the
productivity of later investment. In particular, adding a choice of parenting effort introduces
a new channel into the economic literature by which child care subsidies (and other programs)
might influence child development. Allowing parents to parent less can allow them to parent
better. We quantify the importance of this endogenous parenting effort channel, finding that
it accounts for a substantial part of the treatment effect on child skill and a larger share for
children of mothers with less formal education.
    Our comparison of alternative policies to invest in families with young children shows that in-
kind provision of high-quality care has some advantages over alternatives. The direct impacts on
child-skill development are large, as it replaces lower-quality care in the child's time budget, and
it induces indirect positive effects on the quality of nonprogram care, both maternal through
a relief channel and other nonmaternal through a budget channel. In our simulations, an
equivalent-cost cash transfer has a much smaller effect on child skill because little of it goes to
improving nonmaternal care quality and there is no positive spillover to maternal-care quality.
Relative to the cash-transfer, a 25-percent maternal-wage subsidy has similar effects on child
skill at a quarter the cost. Offering free mediocre-quality care has an even-smaller skill effect
at even lower cost. Finally, we rationalize evidence on negative average effects of universal
programs, showing that low quality programs taken up by advantaged households could lead
to overall negative effects.



References
B. Abott. Incomplete markets, the substitutability of time and money, and parental investments
  in children. Working Paper, 2019.



                                                35
J. Adda, C. Dustmann, and K. Stevens. The career costs of children. Journal of Political
  Economy, 125(2):293­337, 2017.

F. Agostinelli and M. Wiswall. Estimating the technology of children's skill formation. Working
  Paper, 2020.

A. Aizer and F. Cunha. The production of human capital: Endowments, investments and
  fertility. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.

D. Almond and B. Mazumder. Fetal origins and parental responses. Technical report, FRB of
  Chicago Working Paper, 2013.

D. J. Anderson, M. Binder, and K. Krause. The motherhood wage penalty: Which mothers
  pay it and why? American economic review, 92(2):354­358, 2002.

S. E. Anderson, R. A. Gooze, S. Lemeshow, and R. C. Whitaker. Quality of early maternal­child
   relationship and risk of adolescent obesity. Pediatrics, 129(1):132, 2012.

O. Attanasio, C. Meghir, and E. Nix. Human capital development and parental investment in
  india. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

O. Attanasio, S. Cattan, E. Fitzsimons, C. Meghir, and M. Rubio-Codina. Estimating the
  production function for human capital: Results from a randomized control trial in colombia.
  American Economic Review, forthcoming.

A. Auger and M. Burchinal. Cognitive stimulation and emotional support in preschool envi-
  ronments and childrens subsequent development. Technical report, University of California
  Irvine working paper, 2013.

M. Baker, J. Gruber, and K. Milligan. Universal child care, maternal labor supply, and family
 well-being. Journal of political Economy, 116(4):709­745, 2008.

M. Baker, J. Gruber, and K. Milligan. Non-cognitive deficits and young adult outcomes: The
 long-run impacts of a universal child care program. Technical report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, 2015.

T. J. Bartik, W. Gormley, and S. Adelstein. Earnings benefits of tulsa's pre-k program for
  different income groups. Economics of Education Review, 31(6):1143­1161, 2012.

L. J. Berlin, J. Brooks-Gunn, C. McCarton, and M. C. McCormick. The effectiveness of early
  intervention: examining risk factors and pathways to enhanced development. Preventive
  medicine, 27(2):238­245, 1998.

R. Bernal and M. P. Keane. Quasi-structural estimation of a model of child care choices and
  child cognitive ability production. Journal of Econometrics, 156(1):164­189, 2010.

D. M. Blau. Child Care Problem: An Economic Analysis. Russell Sage Foundation, 2001.


                                              36
D. M. Blau and A. P. Hagy. The demand for quality in child care. Journal of Political Economy,
  106(1):104­146, 1998.

R. H. Bradley, L. Whiteside, D. J. Mundfrom, P. H. Casey, B. M. Caldwell, and K. Barrett.
  Impact of the infant health and development program (ihdp) on the home environments of
  infants born prematurely and with low birthweight. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86
  (4):531, 1994.

S. Breining, J. Doyle, D. N. Figlio, K. Karbownik, and J. Roth. Birth order and delinquency:
  Evidence from denmark and florida. Journal of Labor Economics, 2019.

J. Brooks-Gunn, P. K. Klebanov, F.-r. Liaw, and D. Spiker. Enhancing the development of
  low-birthweight, premature infants: Changes in cognition and behavior over the first three
  years. Child development, 64(3):736­753, 1993.

J. Brooks-Gunn, M. C. McCormick, S. Shapiro, A. Benasich, and G. W. Black. The effects of
   early education intervention on maternal employment, public assistance, and health insur-
   ance: the infant health and development program. American Journal of Public Health, 84
   (6):924­931, 1994.

F. Campbell, G. Conti, J. J. Heckman, S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, E. Pungello, and Y. Pan. Early
  childhood investments substantially boost adult health. Science, 343(6178):1478­1485, 2014.

F. A. Campbell, B. H. Wasik, E. Pungello, M. Burchinal, O. Barbarin, K. Kainz, J. J. Spar-
  ling, and C. T. Ramey. Young adult outcomes of the abecedarian and care early childhood
  educational interventions. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 23(4):452­466, 2008.

E. U. Cascio and D. W. Schanzenbach. The impacts of expanding access to high-quality
  preschool education. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

E. Caucutt and L. Lochner. Early and late human capital investments, borrowing constraints,
  and the family, 2017.

E. M. Caucutt, L. Lochner, and Y. Park. Correlation, consumption, confusion, or constraints:
  Why do poor children perform so poorly? Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 119(1):
  102­147, 2017.

J. Chaparro and A. J. Sojourner. Same program, different outcomes: Understanding differential
   effects from access to free, high-quality early care, 2015.

Council of Economic Advisers. Issue brief: The disconnect between resources and needs when
  investing in children, 2016a.

Council of Economic Advisers. Economic report of the president. chapter 4: Inequality in early
  childhood and effective public policy interventions, 2016b.

F. Cunha and J. J. Heckman. Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology of cog-
  nitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4):738­782, 2008.

                                             37
F. Cunha, J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov. Interpreting the evidence on life
  cycle skill formation. Handbook of the Economics of Education, 1:697­812, 2006.

F. Cunha, J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach. Estimating the technology of cognitive and
  noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78(3):883­931, 2010.

D. Daruich. The macroeconomic consequences of early childhood development policies. Working
  Paper, 2018.

D. Del Boca, C. Flinn, and M. Wiswall. Household choices and child development. Review of
  Economic Studies, 81(1):137­185, 2014.

N. Drange and T. Havnes. Early child care and cognitive development: Evidence from an
  assignment lottery. Journal of Labor Economics, 37(2):581­620, 2019.

G. J. Duncan and K. Magnuson. Investing in preschool programs. Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 27(2):109­132, 2013.

G. J. Duncan and A. J. Sojourner. Can intensive early childhood intervention programs elim-
  inate income-based cognitive and achievement gaps? Journal of Human Resources, 48(4):
  945­968, 2013.

S. Elango, J. L. Garc´
                     ia, J. J. Heckman, and A. Hojman. Early childhood education. Technical
   report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

D. Figlio, J. Guryan, K. Karbownik, and J. Roth. The effects of poor neonatal health on
  children's cognitive development. American Economic Review, 104(12):3921­3955, 2014.

M. Fort, A. Ichino, and G. Zanella. Cognitive and non-cognitive costs of daycare 0­2 for children
 in advantaged families. Jornal of Political Economy, 2019.

A. S. Fuligni, W.-J. Han, and J. Brooks-Gunn. The infant-toddler home in the 2nd and 3rd
  years of life. Parenting, 4(2-3):139­159, 2004.

A. Gelber and A. Isen. Children's schooling and parents' behavior: Evidence from the head
  start impact study. Journal of public Economics, 101:25­38, 2013.

A. S. Griffen. Evaluating the effects of child care policies on childrens cognitive development
  and maternal labor supply. Journal of Human Resources, 54(3):604­655, 2019.

R. T. Gross, D. Spiker, and C. W. Haynes. Helping low birth weight, premature babies: The
  Infant Health and Development Program. Stanford University Press, 1997.

N. Guner, R. Kaygusuz, and G. Ventura. Child-related transfers, household labor supply and
  welfare. Working Paper, 2018.

J. L. Hanson, N. Hair, D. G. Shen, F. Shi, J. H. Gilmore, B. L. Wolfe, and S. D. Pollak. Family
   poverty affects the rate of human infant brain growth. PloS one, 8(12):e80954, 2013.


                                               38
J. Heckman and S. Navarro-Lozano. Using matching, instrumental variables, and control func-
   tions to estimate economic choice models. Review of Economics and statistics, 86(1):30­57,
   2004.

J. Heckman, N. Hohmann, J. Smith, and M. Khoo. Substitution and dropout bias in social
   experiments: A study of an influential social experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   115(2):651­694, 2000.

J. J. Heckman. Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children.
  Science, 312(5782):1900­1902, 2006.

J. J. Heckman, S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Yavitz. The rate of return to the
   highscope perry preschool program. Journal of public Economics, 94(1):114­128, 2010.

C. M. Herbst and E. Tekin. Child care subsidies and child development. Economics of Education
  review, 29(4):618­638, 2010.

V. J. Hotz and M. Wiswall. Child care and child care policy: Existing policies, their effects,
  and reforms. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 686
  (1):310­338, 2019.

H. Hoynes, M. P. Bitler, and T. Domina. Experimental evidence on distributional effects of
  head start. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

I. Iglowstein, O. G. Jenni, L. Molinari, and R. H. Largo. Sleep duration from infancy to
   adolescence: reference values and generational trends. Pediatrics, 111(2):302­307, 2003.

C. Japel, R. E. Tremblay, and S. C^
                                  ot´
                                    e. Quality counts! Choices, 11(5), 2005.

T. Kautz, J. J. Heckman, R. Diris, B. Ter Weel, and L. Borghans. Fostering and measuring
  skills: Improving cognitive and non-cognitive skills to promote lifetime success. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

M. P. Keane and K. I. Wolpin. The role of labor and marriage markets, preference heterogene-
 ity, and the welfare system in the life cycle decisions of black, hispanic, and white women.
 International Economic Review, 51(3):851­892, 2010.

E. E. Kisker, S. L. Hofferth, D. A. Phillips, and E. Farquhar. A profile of child care settings:
  Early education and care in 1990. Technical report, Mathematica Policy Research for the
  U.S. Department of Education, 1991.

P. Kline and C. R. Walters. Evaluating public programs with close substitutes: The case of
  head start. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):1795­1848, 2016.

E. I. Knudsen, J. J. Heckman, J. L. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff. Economic, neurobiological, and
  behavioral perspectives on building americas future workforce. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 103(27):10155­10162, 2006.


                                              39
P. Kristensen and T. Bjerkedal. Explaining the relation between birth order and intelligence.
  Science, 316(5832):1717­1717, 2007.

M. R. Linver, A. Martin, and J. Brooks-Gunn. Measuring infants' home environment: the
 it-home for infants between birth and 12 months in four national data sets. Parenting, 4
 (2-3):115­137, 2004.

J. M. Love, E. E. Kisker, C. Ross, H. Raikes, J. Constantine, K. Boller, J. Brooks-Gunn,
  R. Chazan-Cohen, L. B. Tarullo, C. Brady-Smith, et al. The effectiveness of early head start
  for 3-year-old children and their parents: lessons for policy and programs. Developmental
  psychology, 41(6):885, 2005.

R. Moffitt. An economic model of welfare stigma. American Economic Review, 73(5):1023­35,
  1983.

T. W. Morrissey. Child care and parent labor force participation: a review of the research
  literature. Review of Economics of the Household, 15(1):1­24, 2017.

J. Mullins. Designing cash transfers in the presence of childrens human capital formation.
  Working Paper, 2019.

N. E. C. C. R. Network et al. Child care and child development: Results from the NICHD study
  of early child care and youth development. Guilford Press, 2005.

D. L. Olds, J. Robinson, R. OBrien, D. W. Luckey, L. M. Pettitt, C. R. Henderson, R. K. Ng,
  K. L. Sheff, J. Korfmacher, S. Hiatt, et al. Home visiting by paraprofessionals and by nurses:
  a randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics, 110(3):486­496, 2002.

S. Peltzman. The effect of government subsidies-in-kind on private expenditures: The case of
  higher education. Journal of political Economy, 81(1):1­27, 1973.

J. Price. Parent-child quality time does birth order matter? Journal of human resources, 43
   (1):240­265, 2008.

S. F. Reardon. The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor: New
  evidence and possible explanations. Whither opportunity, pages 91­116, 2011.

I. Roskam, M.-E. Brianda, and M. Mikolajczak. A step forward in the conceptualization and
   measurement of parental burnout: The parental burnout assessment (pba). Frontiers in
   psychology, 9, 2018.

L. S. Sosinsky, H. Lord, and E. Zigler. For-profit/nonprofit differences in center-based child care
  quality: Results from the national institute of child health and human development study of
  early child care and youth development. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 28
  (5-6):390­410, 2007.




                                                40
P. E. Todd and K. I. Wolpin. Assessing the impact of a school subsidy program in mexico:
  Using a social experiment to validate a dynamic behavioral model of child schooling and
  fertility. American economic review, 96(5):1384­1417, 2006.

D. L. Vandell. Early child care: The known and the unknown. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly
  (1982-), pages 387­414, 2004.

D. L. Vandell, J. Belsky, M. Burchinal, L. Steinberg, N. Vandergrift, and N. E. C. C. R. Network.
  Do effects of early child care extend to age 15 years? results from the nichd study of early
  child care and youth development. Child development, 81(3):737­756, 2010.

K. I. Wolpin. The limits of inference without theory. MIT Press, 2013.




                                               41
8     Tables and Figures

                           Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Balance Tests

                                             Treatment Control                   Difference     P-Value
                             Panel A: Baseline characteristics
 Birth weight, kg.                                 1.82       1.79                      0.03        0.46
 Gestational Age, weeks                           33.03      33.06                     -0.03        0.90
 Cog. skill at 12-months                           0.06       0.07                     -0.02        0.84
 Maternal age, years                              25.57      25.87                     -0.30        0.54
 Maternal cognitive skill                         -0.00       0.01                     -0.01        0.86
 1(married)                                        0.43       0.51                     -0.08        0.04
 1(never married)                                  0.49       0.42                      0.07        0.07
 1(prev. married)                                  0.08       0.07                      0.01        0.63
 1(Less than high school)                          0.39       0.35                      0.04        0.37
 1(High school grad)                               0.29       0.29                     -0.01        0.87
 1(Some college)                                   0.20       0.22                     -0.02        0.53
 1(College graduate)                               0.13       0.14                     -0.01        0.77
 # of kids < age 5                                 1.43       1.44                     -0.00        0.95
 # of kids  age 5                                  0.48       0.48                      0.00        0.95
                                Panel B: Choice variables
 Child cognitive skill at 36 months (ln h1 )      96.10      86.59                     9.51         0.00
 Hours per week of program care (p )              18.18       0.00                    18.18         0.00
 Hours per week of maternal care (m )             52.40      62.07                    -9.67         0.00
 Hours per week other caretakers (n )             16.92      25.43                    -8.52         0.00
 Earning hours (L)                                17.97      16.68                     1.29         0.35
 Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                    0.32       0.09                     0.23         0.00
 Quality non-maternal care (qn )                   3.08       3.10                    -0.02         0.88
Note: All calculations were made for singleton-born infants in the IHDP sample (N = 880; 334 in the treatment
group and 546 in the control group).      Due to missing data, cognitive skill at 12-months (N = 796) and
maternal IQ (N = 721) statistics were calculated on smaller sub-samples. F-test of joint significance of baseline
characteristics: F(12, 689) = 0.65; Prob > F = 0.795. Quality of maternal care is based on the sum of 13
binary Learning & Literacy items from the HOME questionnaire at 36-months.            It has been standardized
within sample, using the mean and standard deviation of the control group, on the full sample before sample
restrictions. Quality of non-maternal care is in equivalent USD per hour of care. See Appendix for more details.




                                                       42
                                 Table 2: Experimental Average Treatment Effects by Maternal Education

                                                                                   Maternal Education Sub-Sample
                                                                 Less than HS          HS grad.      Some coll.  Bachelors+
             Child cognitive skill at 36 months (ln h1 )          9.08 (0.00)        16.43 (0.00)   7.60 (0.03)   2.58 (0.48)
             Hours per week of program care (p )                 17.71 (0.00)        19.69 (0.00) 18.23 (0.00) 16.16 (0.00)
             Hours per week of maternal care (m )               -13.32 (0.00)       -10.08 (0.00) -8.56 (0.00)   -1.86 (0.53)
             Hours per week other caretakers (n )                -4.39 (0.01)        -9.61 (0.00) -9.67 (0.00) -14.30 (0.00)
             Earning hours (L)                                    3.31 (0.08)         3.93 (0.12) -4.41 (0.14)    2.01 (0.61)
43




             Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                       0.33 (0.01)         0.35 (0.02)   0.25 (0.07)  -0.11 (0.32)
             Quality non-maternal care (qn )                     -0.03 (0.82)         0.18 (0.25)   0.20 (0.52)  -0.50 (0.56)
             Number of observations                                356                 240           176           108

     Note: All calculations were made for singleton-born infants in the IHDP sample. The cells report estimates of Average Treatment Effects (ATE).
     For any outcome Y and each educational sub-group X , we report the difference E (Y |treatment, X ) - E (Y |control, X ). The corresponding p
     value is to the right in parentheses. Hours per week in IHDP program care correspond to averages among members of the treatment group. Four
     educational sub-groups: less than a high school degree (Less than HS), high-school graduates (HS grad.), some years of college (Some coll.), and
     at least a bachelor's degree (Bachelors+).
                               Table 3: Maternal-Care Quality Validation and Exhaustion-Effect Estimation

                                                Panel A: Maternal-Care Quality Validation
                                           (1)                (2)                    (3)                                (4)
                  Dep. Variable:    36-Month L&L       12-Month L&L       (36 - 12) Month L&L                  36-Month Non-Effort
                                          score           (Placebo)             Difference                          (Placebo)
                  1(treatment)         0.253***             0.016                 0.256***                            -0.066
                                        (0.063)            (0.065)                 (0.072)                           (0.071)
                  N                        652               687                     633                               652
                                                  Panel B: Exhaustion-Effect Estimation
                  Estimator:          Naive OLS         IV 1st Stage           IV 2nd Stage
                  Dep. Variable:    36-Month L&L Log Maternal Hours           36-Month L&L
                  Log Hours              -0.157                                  -1.536***
                                        (0.123)                                    (0.415)
44




                  1(treatment)                            -0.165***
                                                           (0.019)
                  N                        652               652                     652

     Note: Robust SEs in parentheses. Significant at:  10%  5%  1%. All models include same controls as the maternal-care quality production
     function: maternal cognitive skill, education, and age, number of other children aged five or younger, and those over five years of age.
     Panel A: Regressions of various measures of maternal-care quality on indicator of randomly-assigned treatment group. Outcomes by model:
     (1) The 36-month Learning and Literacy score (L&L), which is our primary maternal-care quality measure (log (qm )).
     (2) 12-month L&L: Placebo because program-care offer started at 12-months.
     (3) Within-individual change in L&L between 36- and 12-months.
     (4) Index of the 4 non-effort items from 36-month HOME inventory: Placebo.
     Outcomes 1, 2, and 4 are standardized in control group. 3 is difference between 1 and 2.
     Panel B: Estimates of the exhaustion effect, as described in the text (19). 36-month L&L ln qm is the primary maternal-care quality measure as
     described in the text. Column 1 is the simple OLS regression of ln qm on log weekly maternal-care hours ln m . Column 3 is the 2SLS estimate
     using the randomly-assigned treatment group indicator as the instrument for log maternal hours. Column 2 reports the first-stage from that 2SLS
     estimator.
                        Table 4: Estimated Production-Function Parameters

                                                    Estimate               (SE)
                           Panel A: Production of maternal-care quality
                    Maternal cognitive skill             0.31           (0.057)
                    Maternal years of education          0.01           (0.027)
                    # of kids < age 5                   -0.17           (0.058)
                    # of kids  age 5                    -0.19           (0.049)
                    Maternal age, years                  0.02           (0.008)
                    Panel B: Child cognitive skill for above-median endowment
                    h0 (Self-Productivity)               6.84           (1.631)
                    m (Maternal Care)                   11.90           (1.210)
                    n (Non-Maternal Care)               14.84           (3.507)
                    p (Program Time)                    45.90           (6.400)
                    Panel C: Child cognitive skill for below-median endowment
                    h0 (Self-Productivity)               7.21           (1.206)
                    m (Maternal Care)                    8.86           (1.444)
                    n (Non-Maternal Care)               16.57           (4.539)
                    p (Program Time)                    40.32           (7.547)

Notes: This table reports estimates of the maternal-care quality and child skill production functions. Panel
A reports on the maternal-care quality function (2). Panels B and C report the child-skill function (3), where
parameters can differ by whether the child is above or below the sample median endowment, the 12-month Bayley
mental development index score. Standard errors from a cluster bootstrap procedure over all estimation steps.




                                                     45
                                                           Table 5: Average Elasticities

                                                                   Baseline     Wage Offer      Care Cost      Non-Lab. Inc.
                                                                    Level       Elasticity      Elasticity       Elasticity
                                                                      (1)          (2)             (3)               (4)
                         Child cog. skill, 36-months (ln h1 )       87.45          0.07           -0.08             0.00
                         Maternal-care hours (m )                   60.96         -0.14            0.11             0.05
                         Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                26.54         0.58            -0.37            -0.11
46




                         Earning hours (L)                          16.89         2.54            -0.35            -2.06
                         Maternal-care quality (ln qm )             0.16           1.78           -0.63            -0.24
                         Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )              3.34         0.66            -0.92             0.32
                         Effort (e)                                  1.25         0.23            -0.16            -0.08

     Notes: All statistics are averages of simulated endogenous variables in the treatment sample. Column 1: level in the control condition. Column
     2: Elasticity with respect to a 1 percent increase in the wage offer. Column 3: Elasticity with respect to a 1 percent increase in the price of
     non-maternal care. Column 4: Elasticity with respect to a 1 percent increase in non-labor income.
                       Table 6: In-Sample Fit and Out-of-Sample Validation

                                                  (1)     (2)    (3)    (4)              (5)       (6)
                                                Mean      SD Mean       SD              Mean       SD
                                     Panel A: Control Condition
    Type of outcome:                                Data        Simulated                Simulated
    Sample:                                        Control       Control                  Treated
                                                                                        No Program
    Program Hours (p )                               0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00   0.00
    Non-Program Hours (m + n )                      87.50     0.00    87.50     0.00    87.50   0.00
    Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )       86.59    19.16    87.45    19.84    86.70 20.02
    Maternal-care hours (m )                        62.07    15.54    60.96    14.49    62.07 14.38
    Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                     25.43    15.54    26.54    14.49    25.43 14.38
    Earning hours (L)                               16.68    17.05    16.89    16.01    16.74 15.56
    Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                   0.09     0.99     0.16     0.97     0.04   1.01
    Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                   3.10     1.93     3.34     2.11     3.00   1.79

                                Panel B: Treatment Condition
    Type of outcome:                              Data       Simulated
    Sample:                                    Treatment     Treatment
    Program Hours (p )                        18.18    8.84 18.52   9.31
    Non-Program Hours (m + n )                69.32    8.84 68.98   9.31
    Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 ) 96.10 18.38 94.01 19.83
    Maternal-care hours (m )                  52.40 11.64 58.03 10.45
    Nonmaternal-care hours (n )               16.92 11.00 10.95 12.22
    Earning hours (L)                         17.97 16.11 15.62 15.32
    Maternal-care quality (ln qm )             0.32    0.90  0.12   1.03
    Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )             3.08    2.15  3.20   1.94

Notes: In panel A, columns 1 & 2 are summary statistics from the control group sample's observed endogenous
variables. Columns 3 & 4 are from their simulated observations and comparing them to columns 1 & 2 measure
within-sample fit. Columns 5 & 6 are from a simulation where we counter-factually assign the treatment-group
sample to the control condition by removing the offer of program care. Comparing these to columns 1 & 2
provides an out-of-sample validation. In panel B, columns 1 & 2 are summary statistics from the treatment-
group sample's observed variables. Columns 3 & 4 are from their simulated observations and comparing these
to columns 1 & 2 measure within-sample fit.




                                                    47
                          Table 7: Average Treatment Effect of Program Offer Under Counterfactual Conditions


                                                                             Change            + Change        + Change             + Change
                                                             Baseline     Non-Labor Inc.         Wage         Mat. Product.        Endowment
                                                                 (1)            (2)                (3)              (4)                 (5)
           Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )           7.31            3.52               0.29             0.85               3.63
           Program Hours (p )                                 18.52            9.29               9.29             9.73               15.89
           Maternal-care hours (m )                            -4.04          -3.20              0.85              0.93               -0.14
           Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                        -14.48          -6.09             -10.14           -10.65              -15.75
48




           Earning hours (L)                                   -1.12          -0.04             -10.27            -9.75               -9.77
           Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                       0.09           0.07              -0.04            -0.04               -0.01
           Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                      0.20            0.26              -0.96            -0.90               -0.67
           Effort (e)                                           0.15           0.12              -0.02            -0.01                0.03


     Notes: Each cell presents an average treatment effect: E (y |treat = 1) - E (y |treat = 0) for the y variable listed in the rows. Column (1) is the
     original, baseline estimate. Column (2) changes the non-labor income of households to be the average non-labor income of the BA+ sub-sample.
     Each column progressively adds additional changes. Column (3) changes both non-labor income and the wage offer to match that of the BA+
     sub-sample. Column (4) changes the maternal/household characteristics X in the maternal quality function to match the BA+ sub-sample.
     Column (5) changes the initial skill endowment to match the average endowment of the BA+ sub-sample.
                                         Table 8: Outcomes under Counterfactual Policy Simulations

                                                                                          Cash     Wage      Prog.          Full    $1/hour
                                                           Control     Treatment       Transfer     25%      Qual.      Take Up      Co-pay
                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)      (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)
          Program Hours (p )                                  0.00          18.52          0.00     0.00      3.16         45.00       6.69
          Non-Program Hours (m + n )                         87.50          68.98         87.50    87.50     84.34         42.50      80.81
          Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )          86.70          94.01         88.08    88.18     87.42        107.33      90.00
          Maternal-care hours (m )                           62.07          58.03         62.70    60.13     60.33         41.57      58.50
          Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                        25.43          10.95         24.80    27.38     24.00          0.93      22.31
          Earning hours (L)                                  16.74          15.62          6.77    20.60     17.03         18.45      17.44
          Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                      0.04           0.12          0.02     0.09      0.07          0.61       0.11
          Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                      3.00           3.20          4.40     3.50      3.05          3.61       3.08
          Effort (e)                                          1.20           1.34          1.18     1.26      1.25          2.30       1.32
49




          Policy cost, weekly $/child                              0            336          336      84           10        831          117

     Note: cells present averages of simulated endogenous variables in the treatment sample.
        1. Control : the control state of the experiment, in which program care is not offered.
        2. Treatment : the treatment state, free access to IHDP program care is offered.
        3. Cash Transfer : cash transfer to each household equal to the IHDP's per capita cost. No care subsidy.
        4. Wage +25% : boosts each mother's wage by 25%. No care subsidy.
        5.  Program-Care Quality : similar to IHDP's program-care offer but quality of program care reduced to equal the control-group's average
           nonmaternal-care quality, $3.14 hour.
        6. Full Take-up : forces all households to take-up treatment program care 45 hours weekly and simulates choices they would make on all other
           margins.
        7. Co-pay : like treatment care offer but program care requires a $1 per hour co-pay.
Figure 1: Binscatter of Treatment Effect on Log Maternal Quality vs. Treatment Effect on
Maternal Time
   ATE Maternal Quality (Standardized Home Score)
    0        .1          .2         .3       .4




                                                    -15          -10                   -5                    0
                                                          ATE Maternal Time (Hours per Week)

Notes: Each dot is the average treatment effect (of program offer) on (log) maternal quality for each of 10 decile
bins of the treatment of effect on maternal time. The solid line is the linear regression fit. Log maternal quality
is measured using standardized home scores, as described in the text. We estimate the predicted treatment
effect for each sample member i using a regression of Yi = {ln qmi , mi } on a vector of covariates Xi ­ indicators
for mother's education (drop-out, high school graduate, some college, college graduate), mother's test score,
number of children aged less than 5 and greater than 5, and indicators for mother's marital status (married
and divorced)­by program offer separately. The predicted value is Yoffer,i = Xi Y,offer for offer = {0, 1}. The
estimated treatment effect for each sample member i is then Y1,i - Y0,i .




                                                                       50
Figure 2: Distribution of Treatment Effects on Child Skill of Program Care Offer and
Equivalent-Cost Cash Transfer



                                                Program Offer
      Density




                                                      ATE: 7.3

            -10                      0                10                  20   30
                                           Treatment Effect (IQ points)
                kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.4561



                                                Cash Transfer
      Density




                                         ATE: 1.4

            -10                      0                10                  20   30
                                           Treatment Effect (IQ points)
                kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.6019
                                                        51

Notes: solid (dashed) vertical line at average (0) treatment effect.
Figure 3: Child Cognitive Skill: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects of Program Care Offer



                                                                Overall
                 15
 Counterfactual ATE
                10




                                      Observed ATE
   5             0




                                  0           5            10             15         20             25


                                                      By maternal education
 Counterfactual ATE on child IQ
  0       5       10        15




                                  0          5            10          15             20             25
                                             Counterfactual program-care quality, $/hour

                                            Less than high school               High school
                                            Some college                        Bachelors or more


                                                                52
     Figure 4: Maternal- and Child-Time Allocations: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects of Program Care Offer by Counterfactual
     Program Quality



                                                     Maternal time use                                                   Child time outside maternal care

                         80




                                                                                                           80
                                  60




                                                                                                                    60
             Average weekly hours




                                                                                               Average weekly hours
                     40




                                                                                                       40
53




                         20




                                                                                                           20
                         0




                                                                                                           0
                                       0           5     10      15        20             25                             0          5     10      15        20      25
                                                  Program-care quality, $/hour                                                     Program-care quality, $/hour

                                                               Earning hours                                                               Nonmaternal care hours
                                                               Maternal care hours                                                         Program care hours
                                       Note: all other time uses (''leisure'') omitted.                                  Note: maternal-care hours omitted.
Figure 5: Full Take-Up: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects of Program Care on Child Cognitive
Skill as a Function of Counterfactual Program Quality if All Children Attended Full Time,
Overall and by Maternal Education



                                         Cognitive skill effect (IQ points)
                  30     20
        Counterfactual ATE




                                  Observed ATE
        0       10-10




                              0           5            10           15           20             25
                                                 Program-care quality, $/hour
                  30
        Counterfactual ATE
         0      10-10   20




                              0          5            10          15             20             25
                                         Counterfactual program-care quality, $/hour

                                        Less than high school               High school
                                        Some college                        Bachelors or more




                                                          54
Figure 6: Changing the Compliers: ATE of Low-Quality Program Care as a Function of the
Share of Compliers with at Least a Bachelor's Degree
                      6
      Counterfactual ATE (IQ points)
           0          2
                      -2        4




                                       0   .2            .4            .6            .8            1
                                           Fraction Compliers Who Are College Graduates

                                                         ATE             ATE = 0



Notes: Program care quality is assumed to be equivalent to $2 per hour. In this simulation, full-take up of the
program is assumed. Horizontal axis measures fraction of household compliers that are college graduates, from
0 to 1. Vertical axis measures overall ATE of program on all households. The horizontal line indicates the the 0
   ATE. With over 60 percent of households complying, the overall ATE of the program becomes negative.




                                                               55
Online appendices for Chaparro, Sojourner & Wiswall




                                56
A     Data Appendix
A.1    IHDP Data
The Infant Health and Development Program data are publicly available through the Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR #9795 and #23580). The
following variables come from the Primary Analysis Dataset: treatment status, birth weight,
site, gestational age, length at birth, head circumference, maternal age at birth, marital status
at birth, maternal education, maternal race, number of home visits per year, number of days at
the CDC per year, average number of daily hours at the CDC per year during the intervention,
Bayley test at 12 months and Stanford Binet IQ at 36 months.
    Hours per weekday of maternal care correspond to the average of maternal self-reported
hours in the 18-month and 30-month family interviews. Hours of care at the CDC come from
administrative data and are the average weekly attendance over the 2 years during which the
program was offered. Hours of care with other care takers is calculated as a residual, using the
child's time constraint. Based on Iglowstein et al. [2003], average night time sleep duration for
2 year olds is approximately 11.5 hours. Therefore, the average child would require (24 11.5)
x 7 = 87.5 hours of direct care per week.

A.2    Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development (SECCYD) Data
       on Nonmaternal Care Quality
One of the problems we face in modeling non-maternal care is that some of this care was not
purchased on the private market (e.g., provided by relatives such as grandparents). For only
about a quarter of the IHDP sample do we observe positive expenditures on child care. For the
IHDP cases without hourly expenditures on nonmaternal care, we leverage the observer-based
measure of nonmaternal care quality in another dataset, the Study of Early Child Care and
Youth Development (SECCYD). We use this dataset to provide a highly detailed imputation
of non-maternal care quality and market price for the IHDP households.
    The SECCYD collected panel data on child and family characteristics and their use of
various care settings from a sample of 1,364 children aged 0 to 3 from 1991 to 1994 in ten study
sites around the country, two of which overlap with the IHDPs eight sites. The two samples
are quite parallel in their target populations and purposes, although the SECCYD sample was
not limited to low birth weight and premature births. We do use those variables a predictors,
as described below. The SECCYD was produced by the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD) and is a widely-used observational dataset [Network et al.,
2005; Sosinsky et al., 2007; Vandell et al., 2010; Anderson et al., 2012].
    Our imputation method uses the overlap in a rich set of variables found in both the IHDP
and SECCYD datasets. Our imputation method takes 3 steps.

    Step 1: First, we model nonmaternal care quality in the SECCYD sample as a function
of a set of child and household variables common to both datasets. For each child and each
nonmaternal care setting used, the SECCYD measured care quality using the Observational
Record of the Child care Environment (ORCE) [Vandell, 2004; Vandell et al., 2010], which is


                                               57
composed of three different types of scores: Behavioral Scales, Qualitative Ratings and measures
of Structural Variables. We follow Auger and Burchinal [2013], who show that a good measure
of the quality of interactions geared toward cognitive stimulus is the ORCEs Qualitative Rating
on Stimulation of Development. This rating is available in the SECCYD data at 15, 24 and
36 months (Phase 1). We pool these observations together to estimate a model of nonmaternal
care quality. The types of care are: father/partner, grandparent, other relative, non-relative in
child's home (sitter or nanny), non-relative in day care home, and child care center. Table A-1
reports the means and standard deviations of nonmaternal care quality in the SECCYD by
type with this measure standardized within sample (mean 0, standard deviation 1). Notably,
average care quality is highest among a non-relative in the child's home and lowest for care
from a relative other than the father/partner or grandparent (e.g., older sibling or aunt).

     Table A-1: Care Quality by Primary Nonmaternal Care Type in SECCYD Sample

                             Father/partner                     0.11
                                                               (1.10)

                             Grandparent                        0.11
                                                               (0.99)

                             Other relative                     -0.33
                                                               (0.85)

                             Non-relative in child home         0.39
                                                               (1.12)

                             Non-relative day care home        -0.016
                                                               (0.98)

                             Child care center                  -0.14
                                                               (0.91)
                             Note: mean (SD). Observations total 1820.



    The relevant, parallel predictors of non-maternal quality available in both datasets that we
include in our model of nonmaternal-care quality are the following:

   · child: gestational age and weight at birth (levels and squares of each), birth order, gender,
     and age at the time that caregiver quality is observed,

   · maternal: age, education level with high-school only omitted, race/ethnicity with non-
     Hispanic white omitted and marital status at child's birth with married omitted, and
     maternal-care quality when child is 12-months old as measured by the sum of the 10
     Learning and Literacy components of the HOME inventory ([Linver et al., 2004]),


                                                58
   · primary nonmaternal (and non-CDC in IHDP) care type: harmonizing across the SEC-
     CYD and IHDP classifications produced 6 categories. They are: father/partner, grand-
     parent, other relative (e.g., sibling, aunt, or cousin), nonrelative in child's own home (e.g.,
     sitter or nanny), family day care in nonrelative provider's home (the omitted category),
     and child care center.

    To measure primary nonmaternal, non-CDC provider type in the IHDP, we focused on the
36-month family interview because it alone explicitly distinguished child care centers between
the CDC and others. It asks who usually provided the most care during the six months between
the child's age 30- and 36-months during weekdays. In a series of three sets of questions, the
survey elicits information about primary, secondary, and tertiary care providers. There is also
a fourth set of questions, which asks about the primary provider now, at 36-months. We look
for the primary nonmaternal, non-CDC provider using the three sets of questions and then
the fourth set if no nonmaternal, non-CDC provider is named in the first three. This yields a
primary nonmaternal, non-CDC provider for most, but not all, of the IHDP sample.
    Because of the missing information on non-maternal child care type for some IHDP house-
holds, we estimate two models in the SECCYD sample (Table A-2). The first includes all of
the predictors listed above, and this is used to predict nonmaternal care quality for the IHDP
subsample with observed values on all predictors. The second model excludes primary nonma-
ternal care type and is used to predict nonmaternal care quality for the IHDP subsample in
which primary nonmaternal care type is missing.

    Step 2: Second, with the coefficients from this model estimated from the SECCYD and
with parallel predictors in the IHDP, we score each IHDP child's predicted nonmaternal care
quality based on the maternal, child, and nonmaternal care characteristics listed in the first
step. This prediction provides an imputed level of non-maternal quality for each IHDP sample
household.




                                                59
Table A-2: Models of Nonmaternal-Care Quality in SECCYD Sample



                                        (1)        (2)
        Father/partner                0.198
                                      (2.21)

        Grandparent                   0.193
                                      (1.99)

        Other relative                -0.114
                                      (-1.09)

        Non-relative in child home    0.402
                                       (3.76)

        Child care center             -0.145
                                      (-2.18)

        Less than high school         0.0536     0.0415
                                      (0.40)     (0.32)

        Some college                   0.117      0.121
                                       (1.59)     (1.67)

        College grad                  0.169      0.177
                                      (2.10)     (2.19)

        African-American              -0.226     -0.257
                                       (-2.64)    (-3.01)

        Hispanic                      -0.129     -0.128
                                      (-0.91)    (-0.94)

        Other                          0.164      0.166
                                       (1.24)     (1.22)

        Never married                 -0.114     -0.143
                                      (-1.22)    (-1.61)

        Formerly married              -0.257     -0.303
                                      (-1.46)    (-1.69)

        Maternal-care quality index   0.0759     0.0700



                                60
                                                                  (3.63)     (3.36)

                     Child birth order                        -0.146        -0.123
                                                               (-4.21)       (-3.67)

                     Girl child                                   0.128      0.135
                                                                  (2.38)     (2.42)

                     Child birth weight                           0.460      0.513
                                                                  (0.95)     (1.07)

                     (Birth weight)2                          -0.0624       -0.0720
                                                              (-0.92)       (-1.08)

                     Gestational age at birth                     0.911      0.698
                                                                  (1.78)     (1.28)

                     (Gest. age)2                             -0.0118       -0.00903
                                                              (-1.77)        (-1.28)

                     Maternal age                                 0.0119     0.0114
                                                                  (1.91)     (1.80)

                     At 24 months                                 0.0305    0.00304
                                                                  (0.65)     (0.06)

                     At 36 months                                 0.103      0.0414
                                                                  (2.04)     (0.82)

                     Constant                                     -19.39    -15.23
                                                                  (-2.01)   (-1.47)
                     Observations                                  1820      1820
                     t statistics in parentheses
                                                   
                        p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001




    Step 3: Using the IHDP sub-sample that pays for care, we regress observed log expenditures
per hour on a quadratic function of predicted nonmaternal care quality. We use this regression
to predict the market price for care without observed expenditure. Finally, because it appears
that total expenditure is too low (likely because some households are only paying for some
of their non-maternal care), we adjust the per hour price of non-maternal care to match the
average price of center-based care reported in a contemporary study Kisker et al. [1991].


                                                       61
Comparison to NSECE In Table A-4 we compute various statistics on the distribution of
hourly prices for care, computed for the IHDP sample (using SECCYD data imputation as
described above) and using another, much more recent survey of child care providers, the 2012
National Survey of Early Care and Education (NSECE). The data consists of about 14,000
center and home-based care providers. In this table, we compute the maximum hourly price of
care (listed price, before any discounts or subsidies) charged to families of two-year-old children,
weighting each provider by sample weights and child enrollment. Hourly rates are expressed
in 2018$. The data indicate that their has been secular rise in the price of early child care,
in particular, a much larger right-tail in the distribution of hourly rates for the more recent
period.




                                                62
                   Table A-4: Distribution of Child Care Hourly Rates


                                        IHDP    NSECE
                                mean     3.09     6.29
                                p1       0.51     0.56
                                p10      1.90     2.05
                                p25      2.11     2.73
                                p5       1.71     1.71
                                p50      2.56     4.10
                                p75      3.41     6.84
                                p90      4.93    15.12
                                p95      6.32    19.15
                                p99     11.37    27.35
                                max     21.11    44.35


Notes: NSECE uses combined center- and home-based hourly rates, weighted by enrollment.
All figures in 2018$.




                                          63
B             Additional Figures and Tables

              Figure B-1: Distribution of Care Qualities Given Production-Function Estimates
    Density




                  -20                        0                             20                            40
                                                   Care Quality

                                          Maternal                     Non-Maternal


Notes: This figure displays the distribution of care qualities using the parameter estimates of the skill production
function. Maternal-care quality is m ln qm and nonmaternal-care quality is n ln qn .




                                                        64
      Table B-1: Estimated Parameters of Wage Offer and Non-Labor Income Functions

                                                      Estimate               (SE)
                                        Panel A: Wage Offer
                           Intercept                       0.73            (0.184)
                           Maternal education, years       0.06            (0.013)
                           Maternal age, years             0.05            (0.007)
                           Maternal cognitive skill        0.06            (0.022)
                                     Panel B: Non-Labor Income
                           Intercept                       4.46            (0.298)
                           Maternal education, years       0.05            (0.016)
                           1(Married)                      1.03            (0.140)
                           1(Never married)                0.14            (0.153)
                           Maternal age, years             0.01            (0.012)

Notes: Standard errors are from a cluster-bootstrap procedure over all estimation steps.




                                                      65
                                 Figure B-2: Distribution of Wage Offers
66




     0                 10                 20                 30            40   50
                                                  wage
     kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.4820
                                      Figure B-3: Distribution of Maternal Labor Supply



                                       Control                                        Treated



               .2
     Density
               .1
67




               0




                     0           20              40           60    0            20             40   60
                                                  Maternal earning hours
               Graphs by treat
                    Table B-2: Distribution of Estimated Preference Parameters

                                                                        Mean       SD
                       Preference for Leisure (l )                      3.099    2.200
                       Preference for Parenting Time (m )               3.118    2.543
                       Disutility of Parenting Effort (e,1 )            0.151    0.226
                       Preference for Child Cognitive Skill (h )        0.044    0.040
                       Preference for Program Care (p )                -0.012    0.014


    Notes: This table reports sample means and standard deviations of the estimated marginal distributions of
preferences. Distaste for effort e1 is re-scaled by 10,000.




                                                        68
                          Figure B-4: Estimated Marginal Distributions of Preference Parameters




        0        5        10        15        20        0        .1        .2         .3     .4   -.1       -.05      0         .05
                 Taste for leisure (l)                          Taste for child skill (h)         Taste for program-care hours (p)
69




        0          5         10        15               0         .5        1       1.5       2
        Taste for maternal-care hours (taum)                Distaste for parenting effort (e)

     Note: taste for program-care hours (p) estimated only for treatment group.
    Table B-3: Relation Between Preferences and Observable Household Characteristics

                                          (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)
Dep. Var.                                  l          h           m          e,1        p
Maternal cognitive skill                0.025        0.003       0.020      0.014     0.001
                                       (0.101)     (0.002)     (0.122)    (0.012)   (0.001)
Mat. age, years                        0.040*      -0.001*       0.014     -0.001     0.000
                                       (0.018)     (0.000)     (0.021)    (0.002)   (0.000)
1(Mat. Educ = high-school grad)       -0.554**   -0.021***   -1.084***   -0.070**     0.004
                                       (0.190)     (0.004)     (0.228)    (0.023)   (0.002)
1(Mat. Educ = some college)          -1.171***   -0.025***   -1.581***    -0.068*     0.005
                                       (0.235)     (0.005)     (0.283)    (0.028)   (0.003)
1(Mat. Educ = BA+)                      -0.012      -0.006      -0.548      0.004     0.000
                                       (0.345)     (0.007)     (0.415)    (0.041)   (0.004)
# other kids < 5 years old            0.390***      -0.001   0.518***       0.010     0.001
                                       (0.112)     (0.002)     (0.135)    (0.013)   (0.001)
# kids 5 or older                    0.474***       -0.000     0.261*      -0.015     0.001
                                       (0.095)     (0.002)     (0.114)    (0.011)   (0.001)
1(Mother married)                    -2.065***   -0.022***   -1.654***     -0.068     0.003
                                       (0.307)     (0.006)     (0.369)    (0.036)   (0.004)
1(Mother never-married)                 0.156        0.000       0.331     0.051     -0.000
                                       (0.310)     (0.006)     (0.373)    (0.037)   (0.004)
Child cognitive skill at 12-months      0.005        0.001       0.145      0.003    -0.001
                                       (0.078)     (0.002)     (0.094)    (0.009)   (0.001)
Prenatal investment index               -0.057    -0.003**    -0.254**   -0.025**    -0.001
                                       (0.064)     (0.001)     (0.077)    (0.008)   (0.001)
N                                        618          618         618        618       240




                                            70
            Table B-4: Sample Fit by Maternal Education (Control Group)


                                              Data          Simulated        Simulated
                                             Control         Control          Treated
                                                                            No Program
                                           Mean      SD Mean          SD    Mean      SD
                                             (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)
                              Panel A: Less than high school
Program Hours (p )                          0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 87.50    0.00   87.50     0.00    87.50    0.00
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )  78.93 13.60     81.09    15.97    78.47   16.20
Maternal-care hours (m )                   67.01 14.33     64.65    14.72    64.16   14.70
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                20.49 14.33     22.85    14.72    23.34   14.70
Earning hours (L)                           9.13 12.99     11.31    12.93    12.52   14.34
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )             -0.38    0.94    -0.27    0.94    -0.32    0.95
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )              2.55    1.28     2.94    1.43     2.63    1.51
                                Panel B: High school only
Program Hours (p )                          0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 87.50    0.00   87.50     0.00    87.50    0.00
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )  81.47 17.50     81.70    18.00    86.69   18.47
Maternal-care hours (m )                   61.90 15.08     61.30    13.73    63.46   14.34
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                25.60 15.08     26.20    13.73    24.04   14.34
Earning hours (L)                          16.00 17.75     14.88    13.76    14.91   13.75
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )             -0.06    0.95     0.02    0.85    -0.09    0.80
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )              2.51    0.91     2.62    1.32     2.61    1.28
                                  Panel C: Some college
Program Hours (p )                          0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 87.50    0.00   87.50     0.00    87.50    0.00
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )  91.49 19.31     91.84    19.42    88.24   18.83
Maternal-care hours (m )                   58.07 16.76     57.44    13.70    60.38   12.47
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                29.43 16.76     30.06    13.70    27.12   12.47
Earning hours (L)                          26.20 15.77     25.38    17.37    25.94   15.69
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )              0.42    0.79     0.48    0.83     0.24    0.99
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )              3.22    1.70     3.24    1.55     2.66    0.98
                               Panel D: College graduates
Program Hours (p )                          0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 87.50    0.00   87.50     0.00    87.50    0.00
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 ) 109.29 14.44 108.96       16.46   109.09   18.36
Maternal-care hours (m )                   56.11 13.81     56.37    14.48    55.23   14.43
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                31.39 13.81     31.13    14.48    32.27   14.43
Earning hours (L)                          22.41 17.55     22.10    18.46    19.55   16.94
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )              1.10    0.43     1.06    0.69     1.08    0.88
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )              5.60    3.01     6.02    3.34     5.49    2.48

                                           71
    Table B-5: Sample fit by Maternal Education (Treated Group)


                                               Data          Simulated
                                           Mean       SD    Mean     SD
                                              (1)     (2)     (3)    (4)
                      Panel A: Less than high school
Program Hours (p )                         17.71     7.32    18.75    7.78
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 69.79     7.32    68.75    7.78
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )  88.01 14.00       86.24   16.60
Maternal-care hours (m )                   53.68 12.46       59.85   10.52
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                16.11 10.71        8.90   11.43
Earning hours (L)                          12.44 15.24       11.04   13.34
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )              -0.05    0.86    -0.23    0.98
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )               2.51    0.58     2.82    1.65
                        Panel B: High school only
Program Hours (p )                         19.69     8.29    18.84    9.07
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 67.81     8.29    68.66    9.07
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )  97.90 17.37       94.61   18.33
Maternal-care hours (m )                   51.82 10.28       58.33    9.75
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                15.99     9.72    10.33   11.95
Earning hours (L)                          19.93 14.44       14.07   13.75
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )               0.29    0.95     0.02    0.84
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )               2.69    1.20     2.79    1.42
                          Panel C: Some college
Program Hours (p )                         18.23 10.52       18.87   10.97
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 69.27 10.52       68.63   10.97
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )  99.09 19.31       95.68   20.03
Maternal-care hours (m )                   49.51 11.79       57.34   10.09
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                19.76 12.10       11.29   12.08
Earning hours (L)                          21.79 16.57       25.40   16.24
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )               0.67    0.70     0.31    1.00
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )               3.42    1.70     2.81    1.13
                        Panel D: College graduates
Program Hours (p )                         16.16 11.09       16.58   11.42
Non-Program Hours (m + n )                 71.34 11.09       70.92   11.42
Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 ) 111.87 18.81      113.42   18.19
Maternal-care hours (m )                   54.24 11.33       52.90   11.02
Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                17.10 12.53       18.02   13.26
Earning hours (L)                          24.42 17.11       17.97   16.26
Maternal-care quality (ln qm )               0.99    0.55     1.13    0.92
Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )               5.11    4.73     5.83    2.64



                                   72
                      Table B-6: Average Elasticities by Maternal Education

                                                 Baseline Wage Offer Child Care Cost               Non-Labor Inc.
                                                  Level     Elasticity  Elasticity                   Elasticity
                                                    (1)        (2)          (3)                         (4)
                                         Panel A: Less than high school
 Child cognitive skill, 36-months      (ln h1 )   81.09        0.07       -0.08                          0.02
 Maternal-care hours (m )                          64.65      -0.13        0.10                           0.01
 Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                       22.85       0.67       -0.47                          0.00
 Earning hours (L)                                 11.31       3.06       -0.50                          -2.51
 Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                    -0.27      -0.01       -0.04                          0.02
 Effort (e)                                         1.11       0.21       -0.16                          -0.02
 Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                    2.94        0.58       -0.91                          0.42
                                            Panel B: High school only
 Child cognitive skill, 36-months      (ln h1 )   81.70        0.08       -0.08                          0.00
 Maternal-care hours (m )                          61.30      -0.14        0.10                           0.06
 Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                       26.20       0.63       -0.35                          -0.09
 Earning hours (L)                                 14.88       2.67       -0.32                          -2.15
 Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                     0.02       3.82        0.01                          0.04
 Effort (e)                                         1.21       0.22       -0.15                          -0.09
 Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                    2.62        0.64       -0.93                          0.33
                                               Panel C: Some college
 Child cognitive skill, 36-months      (ln h1 )   91.84        0.08       -0.08                          -0.01
 Maternal-care hours (m )                          57.44      -0.16        0.11                           0.10
 Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                       30.06       0.49       -0.31                          -0.29
 Earning hours (L)                                 25.38       1.76       -0.24                          -1.63
 Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                     0.48       0.56       -0.60                          -0.54
 Effort (e)                                         1.44       0.25       -0.17                          -0.15
 Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                    3.24        0.79       -0.94                          0.20
                                            Panel D: College graduates
 Child cognitive skill, 36-months      (ln h1 )   108.96       0.07       -0.07                          -0.00
 Maternal-care hours (m )                          56.37      -0.15        0.12                           0.07
 Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                       31.13       0.37       -0.26                          -0.14
 Earning hours (L)                                 22.10       2.60       -0.27                          -1.76
 Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                     1.06       0.42        0.31                          -0.05
 Effort (e)                                         1.39       0.24       -0.18                          -0.11
 Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                    6.02        0.71       -0.92                          0.27

Note: All statistics are averages of simulated endogenous variables in the treatment sample. Column 1: in
the control condition. Column 2: Elasticity with respect to a 1 percent increase in the wage offer. Column 3:
Elasticity with respect to a 1 percent increase in the price of non-maternal care. Column 4: Elasticity with
respect to a 1 percent increase in non-labor income.



                                                       73
                 Table B-7: Outcomes under Counterfactual Policy Simulations by Maternal Education

                                                                           Cash    Wage     Prog.       Full   $1/hour
                                                  Control Treatment Transfer        25%     Qual.   Take Up     Co-pay
                                                      (1)          (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)
                                            Panel A: Less than high school
     Program Hours (p )                              0.00       18.75       0.00    0.00     2.67      45.00      6.80
     Non-Program Hours (m + n )                     87.50       68.75      87.50   87.50    84.83      42.50     80.70
     Child cognitive skill, 36-months   (ln h1 )    78.47       86.24      80.87   79.87    79.14     100.68     81.91
     Maternal-care hours (m )                       64.16       59.85      63.43   62.32    62.74      41.65     60.67
     Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                    23.34         8.90     24.07   25.18    22.09       0.85     20.04
     Earning hours (L)                              12.52       11.04       3.18   16.09    12.65      13.25     13.00
     Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                 -0.32        -0.23     -0.31   -0.28    -0.30       0.30     -0.25
     Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                  2.63         2.82      4.60    3.01     2.66       3.18      2.68
     Effort (e)                                      1.08         1.23      1.11    1.13     1.13       2.20      1.20
     Policy cost, weekly $/child                        0          327       327      45        8        831       119
                                               Panel B: High school only
74




     Program Hours (p )                              0.00       18.84       0.00    0.00     4.20      45.00      8.46
     Non-Program Hours (m + n )                     87.50       68.66      87.50   87.50    83.30      42.50     79.04
     Child cognitive skill, 36-months   (ln h1 )    86.69       94.61      87.90   88.13    87.76     108.51     90.83
     Maternal-care hours (m )                       63.46       58.33      64.29   61.54    60.77      41.65     58.80
     Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                    24.04       10.33      23.21   25.96    22.53       0.85     20.24
     Earning hours (L)                              14.91       14.07       4.23   18.83    15.41      17.09     15.74
     Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                 -0.09         0.02     -0.11   -0.04    -0.03       0.52      0.01
     Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                  2.61         2.79      3.88    3.06     2.67       3.13      2.70
     Effort (e)                                      1.05         1.22      1.05    1.10     1.12       2.17      1.20
     Policy cost, weekly $/child                        0          364       364      62       13        831       148
                                                 Panel C: Some college
     Program Hours (p )                              0.00       18.87       0.00    0.00     3.40     45.00       6.45
     Non-Program Hours (m + n )                     87.50       68.63      87.50   87.50    84.10     42.50      81.05
     Child cognitive skill, 36-months   (ln h1 )    88.24       95.68      88.21   89.88    88.84    108.57      91.42
     Maternal-care hours (m )                       60.38       57.34      63.38   58.17    59.36     41.55      57.53
                                                                                     Continued on next page
                                         Table B-7 ­ Continued from previous page
                                                                             Cash                   Wage        prog.         Full     $1/hour
                                                    Control Treatment Transfer                       25%       quality    Take Up       Co-pay
                                                         (1)          (2)      (3)                    (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
          Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                  27.12       11.29     24.12                  29.33       24.73         0.95       23.52
          Earning hours (L)                            25.94       25.40     13.89                  30.09       26.19        30.43       26.87
          Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                0.24         0.31     0.16                   0.30        0.26         0.78        0.31
          Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                2.66         2.81     3.34                   3.19        2.72         3.18        2.74
          Effort (e)                                    1.34         1.46     1.23                   1.42        1.37         2.37        1.45
          Policy cost, weekly $/child                      0          336      336                    143           11         831         113
                                                 Panel D: College graduates
          Program Hours (p )                            0.00       16.58      0.00                    0.00        1.97        45.00        2.81
          Non-Program Hours (m + n )                   87.50       70.92     87.50                   87.50       85.53        42.50       84.69
          Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )  109.09       113.42    109.89                  110.65      109.37       122.76      110.31
          Maternal-care hours (m )                     55.23       52.90     55.94                   53.35       53.61        41.19       52.77
          Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                  32.27       18.02     31.56                   34.15       31.92         1.31       31.92
          Earning hours (L)                            19.55       17.97     12.39                   23.68       19.94        18.94       20.26
75




          Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                1.08         1.13     1.06                    1.14        1.11         1.49        1.14
          Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                5.49         5.83     6.56                    6.41        5.57         6.62        5.60
          Effort (e)                                    1.66         1.78     1.63                    1.74        1.72         2.77        1.78
          Policy cost, weekly $/child                      0          298      298                     157           6          831          49




     Note: Cells present averages of simulated endogenous variables in the treatment sample. See notes in Table 8 for definitions of policy experiments
     in columns.
                 Table B-8: Experimental Average Treatment Effects by Maternal Education (Above-Median Bayley)

                                                                                   Maternal Education Sub-Sample
                                                                 Less than HS         HS grad.       Some coll.    Bachelors+
             Child cognitive skill at 36 months (ln h1 )          8.63 (0.00)       13.64 (0.00) 12.59 (0.01)      9.33 (0.01)
             Hours per week of program care (p )                 17.97 (0.00)       20.65 (0.00) 21.15 (0.00) 18.73 (0.00)
             Hours per week of maternal care (m )               -11.02 (0.00)       -9.01 (0.00) -12.12 (0.00)     0.64 (0.86)
             Hours per week other caretakers (n )                -6.95 (0.02)      -11.64 (0.00)    -9.02 (0.02) -19.37 (0.00)
             Earning hours (L)                                    0.37 (0.90)        7.28 (0.05)    -1.16 (0.77)  -0.92 (0.85)
             Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                       0.32 (0.10)        0.16 (0.41)     0.31 (0.06)  -0.00 (0.99)
             Quality non-maternal care (qn )                     -0.31 (0.28)       -0.03 (0.87)     0.35 (0.34)   0.20 (0.84)




     Note: This sample includes only observations with above-median Bayley scores. The cells report Average Treatment Effects (ATE) estimates.
     For any outcome Y and each education sub-group X , we report the difference E (Y |treatment, X ) - E (Y |control, X ). The corresponding p -value
76




     is to the right in parentheses. Hours per week at IHDP program care correspond to averages for members of the treatment group. Four education
     sub-groups: less than a high school degree (Less than HS), high-school graduates (HS grad.), some years of college (Some coll.), and at least a
     bachelor's degree (Bachelors+).
                 Table B-9: Experimental Average Treatment Effects by Maternal Education (Below-Median Bayley)

                                                                                   Maternal Education Sub-Sample
                                                                  Less than HS         HS grad.      Some coll.   Bachelors+
             Child cognitive skill at 36 months (ln h1 )           9.65 (0.00)       18.23 (0.00)    3.30 (0.48) -7.70 (0.29)
             Hours per week of program care (p )                  17.52 (0.00)       18.65 (0.00) 14.61 (0.00) 12.09 (0.00)
             Hours per week of maternal care (m )                -15.10 (0.00)      -11.16 (0.00)   -3.60 (0.40) -6.44 (0.23)
             Hours per week other caretakers (n )                 -2.42 (0.27)       -7.49 (0.01) -11.01 (0.02) -5.66 (0.27)
             Earning hours (L)                                     5.56 (0.02)        0.63 (0.86)   -9.23 (0.04)  8.62 (0.21)
             Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                        0.35 (0.03)        0.51 (0.02)    0.23 (0.35) -0.27 (0.13)
             Quality non-maternal care (qn )                       0.19 (0.11)        0.40 (0.09)    0.01 (0.98) -1.73 (0.29)




     Note: This sample includes only observations with below-median Bayley scores. The cells report Average Treatment Effects (ATE) estimates.
     For any outcome Y and each education sub-group X , we report the difference E (Y |treatment, X ) - E (Y |control, X ). The corresponding p -value
77




     is to the right in parentheses. Hours per week at IHDP program care correspond to averages for members of the treatment group. Four education
     sub-groups: less than a high school degree (Less than HS), high-school graduates (HS grad.), some years of college (Some coll.), and at least a
     bachelor's degree (Bachelors+).
                  Table B-10: Experimental Average Treatment Effects by Maternal Education (Exclude Low Bayley)

                                                                                  Maternal Education Sub-Sample
                                                                   Less than HS       HS grad.      Some coll.   Bachelors+
             Child cognitive skill at 36 months (ln h1 )            9.65 (0.00)     18.23 (0.00)    3.30 (0.48) -7.70 (0.29)
             Hours per week of program care (p )                   17.52 (0.00)     18.65 (0.00) 14.61 (0.00) 12.09 (0.00)
             Hours per week of maternal care (m )                 -15.10 (0.00)    -11.16 (0.00)   -3.60 (0.40) -6.44 (0.23)
             Hours per week other caretakers (n )                  -2.42 (0.27)     -7.49 (0.01) -11.01 (0.02) -5.66 (0.27)
             Earning hours (L)                                      5.56 (0.02)      0.63 (0.86)   -9.23 (0.04)  8.62 (0.21)
78




             Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                         0.35 (0.03)      0.51 (0.02)    0.23 (0.35) -0.27 (0.13)
             Quality non-maternal care (qn )                        0.19 (0.11)      0.40 (0.09)    0.01 (0.98) -1.73 (0.29)


     Note: This sample excludes 77 observations with Bayley scores below 1 standard deviation below the mean. The cells report Average Treatment
     Effects (ATE) estimates. For any outcome Y and each education sub-group X , we report the difference E (Y |treatment, X ) - E (Y |control, X ).
     The corresponding p -value is to the right in parentheses. Hours per week at IHDP program care correspond to averages for members of the
     treatment group. Four education sub-groups: less than a high school degree (Less than HS), high-school graduates (HS grad.), some years of
     college (Some coll.), and at least a bachelor's degree (Bachelors+).
C      Robustness to Alternative Specifications
C.1     Alternative Skill-Production Technology: Including Household Covari-
        ates
We first consider an alternative to the skill-production technology (16), including a vector of
household and mother characteristics (Xi ):

                                      mi                   ni                   pi
      ln h1i = h0 (h0i ) + m (h0i )      ln qmi + n (h0i )    ln qni + p (h0i )    + Xi  + hi ,   (C-1)
                                      Tc                   Tc                   Tc
where the Xi vector includes mother's education, mother's test score, mother's age, mother's
marital status, number of children under 5 years of age, and number of children 5 and older.
    Table C-1 reports estimates of the counterfactual policy simulations with all parameters
re-estimated using the alternative technology specification (C-1). Comparing these results to
the original estimates Table 8, we see only small differences in the counterfactual results. This
indicates that the main counterfactual results are robust to the alternative technology specifi-
cation.




                                                      79
                   Table C-1: Outcomes under Counterfactual Policy Simulations: Including Household Covariates)

                                                                                          Cash     Wage      Prog.          Full    $1/hour
                                                           Control     Treatment       Transfer     25%      Qual.      Take Up      Co-pay
                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)      (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)
          Program Hours (p )                                  0.00          18.52          0.00     0.00      1.40         45.00       6.56
          Non-Program Hours (m + n )                         87.50          68.98         87.50    87.50     86.10         42.50      80.94
          Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )          86.70          94.01         88.61    88.69     88.23        107.53      90.94
          Maternal-care hours (m )                           62.07          58.03         61.70    59.31     60.31         41.38      57.60
          Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                        25.43          10.95         25.80    28.19     25.78          1.13      23.34
          Earning hours (L)                                  16.74          15.62          7.69    21.76     18.00         18.66      18.51
          Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                      0.04           0.12          0.04     0.11      0.08          0.61       0.14
          Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                      3.00           3.20          4.70     3.86      3.32          4.05       3.40
          Effort (e)                                          1.20           1.34          1.20     1.28      1.24          2.28       1.34
80




          Policy cost, weekly $/child                              0            336          336      84           10        831          117

     Note: cells present averages of simulated endogenous variables in the treatment sample.
        1. Control : the control state of the experiment, in which program care is not offered.
        2. Treatment : the treatment state, free access to IHDP program care is offered.
        3. Cash Transfer : cash transfer to each household equal to the IHDP's per capita cost. No care subsidy.
        4. Wage +25% : boosts each mother's wage by 25%. No care subsidy.
        5.  Program-Care Quality : similar to IHDP's program-care offer but quality of program care reduced to equal the control-group's average
           nonmaternal-care quality, $3.14 hour.
        6. Full Take-up : forces all households to take-up treatment program care 45 hours weekly and simulates choices they would make on all other
           margins.
        7. Co-pay : like treatment care offer but program care requires a $1 per hour co-pay.
C.2    Alternative Skill-Production Technology: Using Instrumental Variables
       to Estimate the Skill-Production Technology
We next consider an alternative estimator for the skill-production technology (16). We use
the specification above, including household covariates (C-1) and estimate the parameters of
this specification using instrumental variables based on the random experimental treatment
assignment, and the treatment assignment interacted with included household covariates.
    Table C-3 reports estimates of the counterfactual policy simulations with all parameters re-
estimated using the alternative IV estimator. Comparing these results to the original estimates
Table 8, we see only small differences in the counterfactual results. This indicates that the main
counterfactual results are robust to using the IV estimator.




                                               81
     Table C-2: Outcomes under Counterfactual Policy Simulations: Using Instrumental Variables to Estimate the Skill Pro-
     duction Technology)

                                                                                          Cash     Wage      Prog.          Full    $1/hour
                                                           Control     Treatment       Transfer     25%      Qual.      Take Up      Co-pay
                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)      (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)
          Program Hours (p )                                  0.00          18.52          0.00     0.00      1.58         45.00       6.76
          Non-Program Hours (m + n )                         87.50          68.98         87.50    87.50     85.92         42.50      80.74
          Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )          86.70          94.01         87.35    87.45     86.96        108.46      90.03
          Maternal-care hours (m )                           62.07          58.03         62.62    60.17     61.10         41.57      58.39
          Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                        25.43          10.95         24.88    27.33     24.82          0.93      22.35
          Earning hours (L)                                  16.74          15.62          6.85    20.66     16.98         18.48      17.53
          Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                      0.04           0.12          0.02     0.09      0.06          0.61       0.12
          Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                      3.00           3.20          4.44     3.54      3.05          3.65       3.11
82




          Effort (e)                                          1.20           1.34          1.18     1.25      1.22          2.29       1.32

          Policy cost, weekly $/child                              0            336          336      84           10        831          117

     Note: cells present averages of simulated endogenous variables in the treatment sample.
        1. Control : the control state of the experiment, in which program care is not offered.
        2. Treatment : the treatment state, free access to IHDP program care is offered.
        3. Cash Transfer : cash transfer to each household equal to the IHDP's per capita cost. No care subsidy.
        4. Wage +25% : boosts each mother's wage by 25%. No care subsidy.
        5.  Program-Care Quality : similar to IHDP's program-care offer but quality of program care reduced to equal the control-group's average
           nonmaternal-care quality, $3.14 hour.
        6. Full Take-up : forces all households to take-up treatment program care 45 hours weekly and simulates choices they would make on all other
           margins.
        7. Co-pay : like treatment care offer but program care requires a $1 per hour co-pay.
C.3    Alternative Maternal-Care Quality Function: Including Measurement
       Error in Maternal-Care Quality
We next consider an alternative to the specification of the maternal-care quality function (17).
We assume that the measure of latent maternal-care is given by Mmi , where the measure is
the learning and literacy items of the observer based HOME score, as described in the main
text This measure relates to latent maternal-care quality ln qmi through this measurement
relationship:

                                       Mmi = ln qmi + mi                                     (C-2)
mi is a classical measurement error term which is distributed mi  i.i.d.N (0,  2 ). We as-
sume the measurement error is independent of the latent maternal-care quality and all other
observable variables. Latent maternal-care quality remains as specified above:

                                     ln qmi = Xi qm + ln ei ,                                (C-3)
where measured maternal-care quality is then

                                   Mmi = Xi qm + ln ei + mi                                  (C-4)
   For this robustness exercise, we set the standard deviation of the measurement error  such
that 50 percent of the residual variation (M = Mmi - Xi   ^q ) is "noise":
                                                            m


                                           V (mi )
                                                          = 0.5
                                     V (ln ei ) + V (mi )
    Using this specification of the measurement process, we then re-estimate the effort level
for each household, adjusting for measurement error using a simulation algorithm. For each
household i, we draw a measurement error  from the given mi distribution, and compute
latent effort as

                                   ln ei = Mmi - Xi ^q -  .
                                                      m

    This compares to the baseline specification where effort is computed without measurement
error as

                                      ln ei = Mmi - Xi ^q .
                                                         m

   Using this measurement error process we recompute all preference parameters, and re-
simulate the counterfactual policies using the new estimates, displayed in Table C-3. Comparing
these results to the original estimates Table 8, we see only small differences. This indicates that
the main counterfactual results are robust to the alternative maternal-quality measurement
specification.




                                                83
     Table C-3: Outcomes under Counterfactual Policy Simulations: Including Measurement Error in Maternal-Care Quality)

                                                                                          Cash     Wage      Prog.          Full    $1/hour
                                                           Control     Treatment       Transfer     25%      Qual.      Take Up      Co-pay
                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)      (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)
          Program Hours (p )                                  0.00          18.52          0.00     0.00      3.13         45.00       6.72
          Non-Program Hours (m + n )                         87.50          68.98         87.50    87.50     84.37         42.50      80.78
          Child cognitive skill, 36-months (ln h1 )          86.70          94.01         88.64    88.75     87.95        107.79      90.52
          Maternal-care hours (m )                           62.07          58.03         62.75    60.18     60.43         41.58      58.59
          Nonmaternal-care hours (n )                        25.43          10.95         24.75    27.32     23.94          0.92      22.19
          Earning hours (L)                                  16.74          15.62          6.75    20.60     17.00         18.45      17.40
          Maternal-care quality (ln qm )                      0.04           0.12          0.01     0.09      0.07          0.61       0.11
          Nonmaternal-care quality (qn )                      3.00           3.20          4.41     3.50      3.05          3.61       3.07
          Effort (e)                                          1.20           1.34          1.44     1.54      1.53          2.87       1.62
84




          Policy cost, weekly $/child                              0            336          336      84           10        831          117

     Note: cells present averages of simulated endogenous variables in the treatment sample.
        1. Control : the control state of the experiment, in which program care is not offered.
        2. Treatment : the treatment state, free access to IHDP program care is offered.
        3. Cash Transfer : cash transfer to each household equal to the IHDP's per capita cost. No care subsidy.
        4. Wage +25% : boosts each mother's wage by 25%. No care subsidy.
        5.  Program-Care Quality : similar to IHDP's program-care offer but quality of program care reduced to equal the control-group's average
           nonmaternal-care quality, $3.14 hour.
        6. Full Take-up : forces all households to take-up treatment program care 45 hours weekly and simulates choices they would make on all other
           margins.
        7. Co-pay : like treatment care offer but program care requires a $1 per hour co-pay.
