                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                OVERPRICING IN CHINA'S CORPORATE BOND MARKET

                                             Yi Ding
                                           Wei Xiong
                                          Jinfan Zhang

                                       Working Paper 26815
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26815


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank workshop participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, the Five
Star Conference in Beijing, and PBC School of Finance for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Yi Ding, Wei Xiong, and Jinfan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Overpricing in China's Corporate Bond Market
Yi Ding, Wei Xiong, and Jinfan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 26815
March 2020
JEL No. G15,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a comprehensive dataset of Chinese corporate bond issuances, we uncover substantial
evidence of issuance overpricing: the yield spread of newly issued bonds at their first secondary-
market trading day is on average 5.35 bps higher than the issuance spread. This overpricing is
robust across subsamples of bond issuances with different credit ratings, maturities, issuance
types, and issuer status. We further provide extensive evidence to support a hypothesis that
competition among underwriters drives this overpricing through two specific channels--either
through rebates to participants in issuance auctions or through direct auction bidding by the
underwriters for themselves or their clients.

Yi Ding                                         Jinfan Zhang
Chinese University of Hong Kong                 Chinese University of Hong Kong
Longxiang Ave. 2001                             Longxiang Ave. 2001
Shenzhen City                                   Shenzhen City
Guangdong Province                              Guangdong Province
P.R.China 518172                                P.R.China 518172
yiding@cuhk.edu.cn                              zhangjinfan@cuhk.edu.cn

Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu
     Pricing in the primary markets of securities such as stocks and bonds reflects the efficiency of
these markets and directly concerns issuers, investors, and regulators. The extensive literature on
this important topic has found substantial evidence of underpricing in equity IPOs, e.g., Ritter
(1987), Loughran and Ritter (2002), Ritter and Welch (2002), and Ljungqvist (2007). The literature
often attributes this underpricing to premiums offered by issuers to compensate investors for the
risks related to asymmetric information and adverse selection they face in purchasing IPOs. While
the literature on the issuance pricing of corporate bonds, which we review later, is not as developed
and is less conclusive, it mostly finds evidence of underpricing in corporate bond markets of
developed economies and also attributes the underpricing to asymmetric information faced by
bond investors. Is underpricing a universal phenomenon in security issuance, especially in security
markets of emerging economies, which tend to have different institutional environments and
underwriting mechanisms from the United States? This paper addresses this issue in China's
corporate bond market.

     As part of the government's effort to liberalize interest rates in China, China's corporate bond
market has experienced rapid growth in recent years. By the end of 2018, outstanding corporate
bonds in China reached 3.8 trillion USD, making it the second-largest corporate bond market in
the world, just behind the United States, with 9.2 trillion USD in outstanding bonds and ahead of
Japan's 0.7 trillion USD in outstanding bonds.1 China's corporate bond market is different from
the more developed U.S. market in several ways, as reviewed by Amstad and He (2019). First, it
directly grew out of China's banking sector, with commercial banks as its major investors and
underwriters. This means that bond issuance directly competes with bank loans for firms'
financing needs. Second, debt securities issued in this market are mostly commercial paper and
medium-term notes with an average maturity of 1.7 years, which is substantially shorter than that
in the U.S. corporate bond market. Third, the bond default rate has been artificially low due to
explicit or implicit government guarantees to bond issuers, as discussed by Zhu (2016). These
differences make examining pricing in China's corporate bond market particularly interesting.

     In China, firms can issue debt securities in two separate markets, one in the interbank market
and the other in the exchange market, with the interbank market accounting for about 90% of bond

1According to SIFMA: https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/us-bond-market-issuance-and-outstanding/ and the Asian
Development Bank: https://asianbondsonline.adb.org/economy/?economy=CN#data.
                                                                                                                  1
issuances in recent years. We collect a comprehensive dataset of 14,310 debt securities issued by
2,288 non-financial firms in 2015­2018 in the interbank market, including both bond IPOs and
reissuances. In sharp contrast to pricing in the U.S. corporate bond market, we uncover strong
evidence of overpricing in China's corporate bond market. The yield spread of a bond at its first
secondary-market trade is, on average, 5.35 bps higher than its yield spread at the bond issuance,
relative to the yield of a Treasury bond with similar maturity. Given the total issuance size in our
sample of about 17 trillion RMB and an average bond maturity of 1.7 years, this overpricing
implies substantial savings of around 4 billion RMB for bond issuers each year. Furthermore, this
overpricing is robust across bonds with different characteristics, such as an IPO or non-IPO,
maturity, underwriter type, and across issuers with different attributes, such as credit rating, size,
and state ownership.

    Why is pricing so different in China's corporate market? It is ultimately driven by the
institutional setting of this market. Asymmetric information between issuers and investors is less
of a concern, with banks serving as the major investors and underwriters in the market. Their
underwriting activities make them well-informed of market conditions and the risks of individual
bond issuers. The aforementioned low default rate in this market further alleviates the adverse
selection problem, which is the key mechanism driving underpricing of security issuances in
developed economies.

    What has caused the pervasive overpricing in China's corporate bond market? Our main
hypothesis is that competition among underwriters for underwriting business has led them to drive
up the issuance price. The yield of a firm's bond issuance serves as a key indicator of the firm's
debt financing cost, which not only measures the firm manager's performance but more
importantly provides a publicly observed benchmark rate for its future bank loan financing (by far
the most important financing channel for firms in China). For these reasons, bond issuers may care
about a lower bond yield for new issuances more than a lower issuance fee, which in turn may lead
underwriters to compete for issuance business based on lower issuance yields rather than lower
underwriting fees. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that a higher yield spread in the
issuance of a bond (i.e., lower pricing) predicts a higher probability of the underwriter's being
fired by the issuer from underwriting its future bond issuance. This finding directly links


                                                                                                     2
overpricing with underwriters' incentives.2

     To formally test the hypothesis, we identify two specific channels through which underwriters
can influence the issuance price. In China's interbank market, there are typically one or two
licensed underwriters, which are mostly commercial banks, who underwrite a bond issuance
through a single-price auction. Only qualified institutions can bid in the auction, and bonds are
allocated to the highest bidders. The underwriters are not only responsible for attracting qualified
institutions to participate in the auction, but can also bid for themselves and their clients who are
not qualified to directly bid.

     The first channel that underwriters can use to influence the issuance price is a rebate they
provide to winning auction participants. While the public cannot access data on the use of such
underwriter rebates, it is so widely used that the regulator of the interbank market, the National
Association of Financial Market Institutional Investors (NAFMII), issued a new regulation that
took effect on October 1, 2017, to prohibit underwriters from using rebates, with the objective of
promoting fair competition and transparency in bond issuances. In 2018, after this ban on
underwriter rebates, the average overpricing in bond issuance dropped from 5.55 bps in 2017 to
1.72 bps.

     This policy shock provides an opportunity to test the causal relationship between the rebate
and overpricing, as implied by our main hypothesis, by using a difference-in-difference analysis
to examine how the drop in issuance overpricing varied across different issuers and underwriters.
As central state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are giant firms with the central government's implicit
guarantees, they are more valuable than other firms, causing more intense competition among
underwriters for their bond underwriting business. Consistent with this notion, we find that after
the underwriter rebate ban, the drop in overpricing is significantly greater for bonds issued by
central SOEs than those issued by other firms. Furthermore, we also find that the drop in
overpricing is significantly smaller for bond issuances underwritten by the top four banks, which
are the largest underwriters in the interbank market. This finding is consistent with the notion that
these top underwriters face less competition and thus have less incentive to use rebates in bond

2
  It is common to measure a firm's cost of debt financing by the yield of its bond issuance rather than the yield from
secondary market trading, due to the potential lack of liquidity in the secondary market. As a result, bond issuers desire
a lower bond yield at issuance.
                                                                                                                        3
issuance. These significant difference-in-difference results support that underwriter rebates served
as an important channel for underwriters to drive up bond issuance prices.

    Interestingly, issuance overpricing remained significant even after the ban on underwriter
rebates caused the overpricing to drop substantially. This observation motivates our analysis of the
second channel--underwriters' direct bidding in an auction. By bidding more aggressively,
underwriters can directly drive up the bond issuance price. Interestingly, underwriters on average
acquired 42% of the bond issuances in our sample. We find a surprising pattern that underwriters
tend to acquire more bonds in bond issuances with higher overpricing. This pattern is in sharp
contrast to an alternative hypothesis that underwriters buy more at low prices to take advantage of
their superior information about the issued bonds. Furthermore, we find that after an institution
obtains the underwriting license, it tends to buy more in bond issuances underwritten by itself, at
greater overpricing. These findings all support our main hypothesis that underwriters buy more to
drive up issuance prices at the expense of themselves or their clients.

    Our study contributes to three streams of the finance literature. First, our paper expands the
literature on issuance pricing of corporate bonds. Cai, Helwege and Warga (2007), Goldstein and
Hotchkiss (2009), Helwege and Kleiman (1998), and Hale and Santos (2007) document significant
underpricing for IPOs and reissuances of both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds
in the United States. However, Datta et al. (1997) find moderate overpricing in a sample of 18
IPOs of investment-grade bonds in the United States. There is also evidence of underpricing in the
European Union bond markets, e.g., Zaremba (2014) and Wasserfallen and Wydler (1988).
Different from other major corporate bond markets around the world, McKenzie and Takaoka
(2008) and Matsui (2006) provide preliminary evidence of issuance overpricing in the Japanese
bond market. It is perhaps not surprising that overpricing appears both in Japan and China, as the
bond markets in both countries share important similarities including having banks as major
investors and underwriters. Our analysis not only shows robust evidence of overpricing in China's
corporate market but also provides extensive analysis of the mechanisms that lead to the
overpricing, which is missing from the studies of overpricing in the Japanese market.

    Second, our paper adds to the economic understanding of issuance pricing. The existing
literature has mostly focused on two key mechanisms for security underpricing. One is information

                                                                                                   4
asymmetry, e.g., Rock (1986), Allen and Faulhaber (1989), Grinblatt and Hwang (1989),
Benveniste and Spindt (1989), Benveniste, Busaba and Wilhelm (2002), and Sherman and Titman
(2002), while the other is liquidity, e.g., Ellul and Pagano (2006), and Booth and Chua (1996).
Complementing these studies, our analysis provides extensive evidence for a different mechanism
that generates issuance overpricing--underwriter competition. Datta, et al (1997) speculate that
the overpricing found in their study of bond IPOs in the U.S. market could be driven by excessive
competition among underwriters, but they do not provide evidence on either underwriter incentives
or the channels.

    Third, our paper also adds to the quickly growing literature on China's financial system. See
the handbook edited by Amstad, Sun and Xiong (2019) for chapters on different segments of
China's financial system and, in particular, the chapter of Amstad and He (2019) for an overview
of China's corporate bond market. Ang et al. (2017) examine the pricing of municipal bonds in
China and link the pricing to real estate and political risks. Chen, He and Liu (2018) argue that the
rapid growth of China's corporate bond market is driven by the need of local government's
financing platforms to roll over bank loans initially given during China's 4 trillion RMB post-
crisis stimulus package. By exploring the different rules used by the interbank market and the
exchange market for repo transactions, Chen et al. (2018) find that an increase in haircut
requirement can have a substantial effect on firms' bond financing cost in China. Our paper shares
the common theme of these papers in exploring important characteristics of China's corporate
bond market, albeit with a distinct focus on issuance pricing.

    The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section I introduces the institutional
background of China's interbank bond market. Section II summarizes our data, the methodology
of defining overpricing, and the explanatory variables. Section III documents bond overpricing,
and Section IV examines the underlying mechanisms. We conclude the paper in Section V.


                                  I.      Institutional Background


    In this section, we provide a brief overview of key features of China's bond market and bond
issuance institutions, which are directly related to our study.

                                                                                                    5
A. Overview of China's corporate bond markets


     China's bond market is comprised of both exchange and interbank bond markets. The
interbank bond market is an over-the-counter wholesale market. In contrast, the exchange market
is a retail market, in which individuals and small- and medium-sized institutions trade bonds
through centralized trading platforms.

     The interbank bond market was established in 1997 to provide an alternative to bank loans for
firms to finance their investment. Bank loans had been Chinese firms' primary source of external
financing. As a legacy of China's credit plan, banks had closely followed the benchmark lending
rates announced by the People's Bank of China to determine the rates for bank loans, rather than
based on market conditions and credit quality of the borrowers. To reform this key sector of
China's financial system, the Chinese government adopted its usual strategy of dual-track reform
by introducing a market track--i.e., the interbank bond market, which allows firms to issue
corporate bonds to banks--to compete with the existing state track, i.e., the bank loan market.3
That is, a firm can now choose to either get a bank loan directly from a bank or issue a bond in the
interbank market, depending on which market offers a more attractive rate. This competition is
aimed to make the bank loan market, which continues to be the primary channel of firm financing,
more market driven. Different from a typical corporate bond market outside China, investors of
corporate bonds in China's interbank market are primarily banks, because banks, as the initial
financial institutions before other types of financial institutions were eventually introduced during
China's economic reforms, hold most of the national savings, including those of households, firms
and local governments. Due to this reason, the interbank market is the dominant market for bond
issuance and trading in China.

     As Figure 1 shows, the interbank market accounted for nearly 100% of new bond issuances
in 2010. While the market share of the interbank market dropped in more recent years due to the


3
 See Song and Xiong (2018) for a discussion of China's dual -track reforms and Ma and He (2019) for a review of
China's interest rate liberalization.
                                                                                                              6
development of the exchange market, it remained above 88% even at its lowest point in 2016 and
bounced back to 90% in 2018. Due to the dominance of the interbank market, this paper focuses
on corporate bond issuance in the interbank market. 4 As a wholesale market, only qualified
institutional investors including commercial banks, mutual funds, insurance companies, and
security firms can participate in the interbank market. The total number of interbank market
members reached 6,543 in December 2018. The People's Bank of China (PBC), the central bank
in China, oversees the interbank market. Under the guidance of the PBC, the NAFMII is
responsible for formulating rules to govern institutional participants in the interbank market.

     There are three major categories of fixed-income securities in China's interbank market based
on issuing entities: government bonds, financial bonds, and non-financial corporate bonds. In this
paper, we focus on non-financial corporate bonds issued by non-financial firms.5 Figure 2 shows
the issuance size of different types of non-financial corporate bonds for each year in 2009­2018.
The total annual issuance size has grown substantially, from around 1 trillion RMB in 2009 to 5.5
trillion RMB in 2018; commercial paper and mid-term notes account for about 90% of all issuances.
Our sample is comprised of commercial paper and mid-term notes.


B. Corporate bond issuance


     To issue a debt instrument in the interbank market, an issuer must register the instrument with
NAFMII following its Rules on the Registration for Issuance of Non-Financial Enterprises Debt
Financing Instruments in the Interbank Bond Market. The issuance takes the form of book building,
which is a standard single-price auction. The issuer usually hires one, and sometimes, two
underwriters. NAFMII has issued licenses to 55 underwriters, which are listed in Appendix I. The


4
  In the exchange market, there is a long waiting period between the bond issuance and the secondary market trading.
This period varies from one week to three months and is, on average, about 45 days in our sample period. Due to the
potential bond price fluctuation during this long waiting period, it is difficult to precisely measure the issuance
overpricing. This difficulty also motivates us to exclude bonds issued in the exchange market from our analysis.
5
  Financial bonds are mainly issued by large commercial banks that have implicit government guarantees. Since major
investors and underwriters in the primary market are also the same group of commercial banks, financial bonds have
very different characteristics compared to non-financial bonds.
                                                                                                                  7
initial 24 underwriters that obtained their licenses before 2010 included all of the large banks in
China--the five state banks (Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Agricultural Bank of
China, Bank of China, China Construction Bank, and Bank of Communications), the two
development banks (China Development Bank and the Import-Export Bank of China), and all of
the so-called joint stock commercial banks (such as China Merchant Bank and Ping An Bank).
There were only two non-bank institutions on the initial list of underwriters, CITIC Securities and
China International Capital Corporation. This list of underwriters was gradually expanded to
include more smaller banks and more securities firms, including subsidiaries of three non-Chinese
banks, HSBC Bank (China), Standard Chartered Bank (China), and BNP PARIBAS (China).
NAFMII also authorized 77 other financial institutions to participate in issuance auctions. In a
bond issuance, the underwriter is responsible for not only attracting investors based on the book
building needs of the issuance but also participating in the auction to bid the issued instruments
for their own accounts or for their clients who are not qualified to directly participate in the auction.
The other qualified participants may also bid for unqualified investors.

    Figure 3 provides a timeline to illustrate key steps of the book building process. Prior to book
building, the issuer and the underwriter sign a letter to confirm the price range for book building.
After that, the underwriter contacts potential investors to participate in the auction. One day before
the book building day, the underwriter sends a formal subscription statement to participating
institutions and publishes the statement to the public. The subscription statement includes major
terms of the bond being issued, the interest rate range of the bond, the subscription timeline and
procedure, placement and payment terms, and the designated payment account.

    On the book building day, a single-price auction is held, in which all participating institutions
submit sealed bids of rate-quantity pairs that specify the amount to be purchased at a specified
minimum yield to the underwriter. The clearing price is identified by equating the aggregate
demand submitted by all bidders to the total issuance amount. All winning bidders pay the same
price. The bond is settled on the following day. Secondary market trading starts on the first

                                                                                                       8
business day after the settlement is complete. The auction yield is disclosed to the market before
the first day of the secondary market trading.


                                   II.      Data and Overpricing Measures


A. Data sample


     Our data sample includes all commercial papers (CP) and mid-term notes (MTN) issued by
non-financial firms in China's interbank market from 2015 to 2018.6 Note from Figure 1 that the
volume of bond issuance was relatively low before 2015. For simplicity, we will use the term
"corporate bonds" to refer to these two types of debt securities throughout the paper. Bond
characteristics and issuer information, including issuance size, issuance date, maturity date, bond
rating, the issuer's credit rating, and the issuer's location, are from WIND, a data vendor, and the
China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS). Price data for bond trading in the secondary
market are obtained from WIND and Choice. 7 Information from various datasets are cross-
checked and verified. Taken together, our sample covers 14,310 bonds issued by 2,288 firms, with
a total issuance size of over 17 trillion RMB.

     To complement the above data, we also collect detailed book building data of 8,514 bonds
issued between January 2015 and February 2018 from NAFMII. 8 This dataset contains the
complete allocation of bond issuances to each winning bidder. In total, the sample includes 44,080
successful bids from 100 authorized institutional investors (the joint set of licensed underwriters
and qualified institutions). Specifically, this dataset covers the quantity of bonds acquired by the



6
  As shown in figure 2, CP and MTN account for about 90% of all non-financial corporate bonds issued in the
interbank market. The rest include either private placement notes (PPN) and asset-backed notes (ABS). We exclude
PPN and ABS from our analysis because PPN is not issued through auction process and ABS is fundamentally
different from CP and MTN.
7 Choice is a data platform operated by the East Money Information Co., Ltd, a leading financial and stock information

website provider in China.
8
  The data from NAFMII contain book building information for all CP and MTN issued during January 2016­
February 2018, and about 60% of the CP and MTN issued in 2015.
                                                                                                                    9
underwriter in each bond issuance.


B. Overpricing measure


     Following the bond literature, e.g. Lou, Yan and Zhang (2013), we use two measures of
issuance overpricing in this paper. The first is the spread change from issuance to the first trading
day, i.e., the first day that a trade occurs in the secondary market.9 The bond spread is defined as
the difference in yield between a given corporate bond and the risk-free rate of similar maturity.10
A bond's issuance spread change is then calculated as the spread difference between the first
trading day and the issuance as follows:

                            Spread = Spreadfirst trade ­ Spreadissuance                               (1)

As bond yield is negatively related to bond price, a positive spread change implies that the bond
is overpriced at issuance relative to the trading price in the secondary market.

     Similar to the U.S. corporate bond market, a bond's first secondary-market transaction may
not occur on its first trading day due to illiquidity of the secondary market. To alleviate the concern
about noise being induced by the potentially long delay in the first secondary-market trade, we
follow Cai, Helwege and Warga (2007) to require that the sample only includes bonds that have
at least one trade within seven calendar days from the first trading day, i.e., five trading days if
there is no holiday during the week. This requirement only modestly reduces our sample from
14,310 bonds to 13,787 bonds issued by 2,248 firms, among which 13,618 bonds are traded on
their first trading day.

     We also use a second measure of issuance overpricing by a bond's excess return from its
issuance to the first trading day. We first calculate the bond's raw return as


9  As the first trade may take place a few days later, the first trading day is not necessarily the first day after the issuance
that the market is open.
10
    The Chinese Treasury bond yield indices are used as the risk-free rate. We use spread change instead of yield change
to measure overpricing to alleviate the concern that overpricing could be driven by the risk-free rate change. In fact,
the magnitude of the risk-free rate drift is marginal. All our results hold if we use yield change.
                                                                                                                             10
                                  Reti = (Pi,T - Pi,t ) / Pi,t                            (2)

where Reti is the cumulative raw return of bond i that is issued on day  and then first traded on

day T. The price Pi,T is the sum of the flat price and accrued interest and Pi,t is the issuance price.

We then adjust the raw return by benchmarking it to the corresponding benchmark return of the
CSI Corporate Index with the same credit rating.

     These two measures are closely related to each other because bond price appreciation is equal,
by first-order approximation, to the negative yield change multiplied by bond duration.
Nevertheless, the values of the two measures offer different economic interpretations. As bond
yield often serves as an indicator of the issuer's cost of debt financing, the yield spread change
from issuance to the first secondary-market trade measures issuance overpricing through the
reduction in the issuer's cost of debt financing per year. The negative value of the excess bond
return from issuance to the first trade reflects the net loss to investors who acquire the bond at
issuance.11 The two measures provide similar results in our analysis.


C. Summary statistics


     Table 1 provides summary statistics of bond issuance in our sample. Panel A shows that the
bond issuance totals 16.4 trillion RMB (about 2.4 trillion USD) from 2015 to 2018. More than 36%
of the bonds are underwritten by the "big-four" state-owned commercial banks, while less than 9%
of bonds are underwritten by the security firms.12 Panel B reports characteristics of the bonds in



11
   Due to the limited availability of bond market indices in China, neither of these measures is perfect. Ideally, we
would like to benchmark each bond to a corporate bond market index with the same maturity and the same credit
rating so that the index controls for both the bond's term and credit premia. However, we are not able to match each
bond in our sample with such a precisely-matched index. Instead, we use a Treasury yield index with a similar maturity
to compute the yield spread change, and a corporate bond index with the same credit rating (albeit not necessarily the
same maturity) to calculate the excess return.
12
   In 1995, the Chinese government introduced the Commercial Bank Law to commercialize the operations of the
four state-owned banks: the Bank of China, the China Construction Bank, the Agricultural Bank of China, and the
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. These four banks are commonly referred as the "big-four," and their assets
account for 40% of China's banking sector. When a bond has more than one underwriters, we define the bond is
underwritten by the big-four banks (security firms) if at least one of the underwriters is a big-four bank (security firm).
                                                                                                                        11
our sample. These bonds have an average maturity of 1.69 years with an average issuance size of
1.2 billion RMB. Different from the U.S. bond market, debt securities issued in China's bond
market tend to have shorter maturities. Moreover, 84% of bonds are issued by firms that have
issued bonds in the previous year. All the bonds are rated as one of the following five categories:
AAA, AA+, AA, AA-, and A+. The median rating is AA+.13 Panel C reports characteristics of
bond issuers in our sample. Generally, the issuers are large firms with a mean (median) total asset
of 147 (23) billion RMB. They have an average leverage ratio of 0.65 and an average ROA of 3%.

     Panel D summarizes the share of newly issued bonds directly acquired by underwriters. Each
bond issuance usually has one to two underwriters. We construct a variable Underwriter Sharej by
aggregating the share purchased by all underwriters in the issuance of bond . An underwriter may
purchase the bond either for its own account or on behalf of its clients. This variable serves as a
proxy for the strength of underwriter support, as a larger share purchased by the underwriters
reflects a greater effort by underwriters to boost the issuance price. Interestingly, in our sample,
underwriters on average purchased 42% of the newly issued bonds. This large share makes
underwriters' direct bidding a potentially important channel for issuance overpricing, which we
will examine in section IV.B.


                                        III.     Issuance Overpricing


     We use the spread change, Spread, as the primary measure of bond issuance overpricing. In
Table 2, Panel A, we present summary statistics of Spread, which has an average of 5.35 bps and
is statistically significant. This positive spread change indicates that corporate bonds tend to be
overpriced at issuance relative to their secondary-market trading prices.

     We also examine the spread change in a longer period after the issuance to determine whether
there is any price reversal after the first secondary-market trade. We calculate the Spread15 days,


13
   See Amstad and He (2019) for a detailed discussion of heavy concentration of Chinese corporate bonds in these
highly-rated categories.
                                                                                                              12
which is the difference between the yield spread of a new bond on the fifteenth calendar day after
its issuance and its issuance spread. If the bond is not traded on the fifteenth calendar day, we use
the spread of the closest trading day within a five-day window centered on the fifteenth calendar
day. The mean of Spread15 days is 7.65 bps and is statistically significant. We further calculate the
difference between Spread15 days and Spread for each bond, which requires the existence of both
Spread15 days and Spread. The mean difference between Spread15 days and Spread is 1.73 bps,
which is statistically significant and indicates a further downward drift in the bond price after the
first trade. The lack of any reversal of the downward price drift after the first trade shows that
issuance overpricing measured by the spread change of the first trading day is robust.

    In Panel B, we further use the excess return as a measure of issuance overpricing. The average
first trading day excess return reaches -8.0 bps and is statistically significant. Meanwhile, the
fifteenth calendar day excess return is -11.26 bps. These negative excess returns are consistent
with the positive spread changes shown in Panel A and confirm overpricing of the bonds at
issuance.

    Next, we examine how the bond issuance overpricing varies across bonds and across issuers
with different characteristics. We report summary statistics of spread change in Table 3. In Panel
A, we group the bonds in our sample based on their credit ratings. Issuance overpricing is present
in all rating groups, with the AAA group having the highest overpricing of 6.38 bps and the AA+
group having the lowest overpricing of 4.26 bps, which is nevertheless highly significant.

    In Panel B, we group bonds according to their maturities within each rating group. The
summary statistics show that all maturity groups exhibit overpricing. For instance, among AAA
bonds, those with maturities less than one year have an average overpricing of 8.41 bps, while
those with maturities longer than two years have an average overpricing of 1.82 bps. Both are
statistically significant. In Panel C, we split each rating group into two equal subgroups based on
the bond issuer's total assets. Issuance overpricing is present in each subgroup with roughly the
same magnitude.
                                                                                                   13
     In Panel D, we explore how overpricing varies across the issuer's issuing history. If a firm has
not previously issued any bond in the interbank market, we denote the firm's bond issuance as an
IPO issuance. There is significant overpricing in both issuance groups. The non-IPO issuance
group has an average overpricing of 5.50 bps, while the IPO-issuance group has an average
overpricing of 3.41 bps.

     In Panel E, we partition bonds into two subgroups by whether the bond issuer is a state-owned
enterprise directly controlled by the central government (hereafter, central SOE).14 There are over
100 central SOEs, such as PetroChina, China Telecom, China National Cereals, Oils and
Foodstuffs Corporation. Central SOEs are often the largest and most strategically important firms
in China, which have implicit guarantees from the central government. In 2017, central SOEs had
a combined asset of 168.6 trillion RMB (24.4 trillion USD), and revenue of more than 23.4 trillion
RMB (3.6 trillion USD).15 Given the strength of these firms and their low credit risk, they are
often regarded as the most valued clients for underwriters. Interestingly, bonds issued by central
SOEs are associated with higher issuance overpricing. For instance, those issued by central SOEs
have an average overpricing of 9.94 bps, substantially higher than the overpricing of 4.88 bps in
bonds issued by other firms. This large difference is consistent with an argument that bond
underwriters compete hard for bond issuance of central SOEs, which we will further explore in
our subsequent analysis.

     In Panel F, we partition bonds into subgroups by whether the bond is underwritten by the big-
four banks, and whether the bond is underwritten by security firms. The big-four state banks are
the largest underwriters in the interbank market and have underwritten more than 36% of the bonds
in our sample. This panel does not show any significant difference between the overpricing of
bonds underwritten by the big-four state banks and other underwriters. However, our later analysis
will show that after controlling for bond rating, the overpricing of bonds underwritten by the big-

14
   The state-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, a special commission of the State Council,
oversees central SOEs.
15
   Sources: Xinhuanet "China's central SOEs deliver strong performance," March 9, 2017.
                                                                                                            14
four banks is lower than those underwritten by other institutions. This is because the majority of
bonds underwritten by the big-four state banks are AAA bonds and AAA bonds tend to be more
overpriced than other bonds. This panel also shows that bonds underwritten by security firms are
associated with lower issuance overpricing, which is consistent with the fact that security firms
tend to have less capital than banks to offer rebates and purchase bonds in bond issuance.

    Panel G presents the magnitude of overpricing in each year of our sample. The overpricing is
positive and significant in 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018, with an average value of 7.03 bps, 7.82
bps, 5.55 bps, and 1.72 bps, respectively. The sharp drop in issuance overpricing in 2018 is related
to a government regulation change regarding the use of underwriter rebates which occurred on
October 1, 2017, which we will discuss in detail in Section IV.

    Taken together, Table 3 shows there is significant overpricing in corporate bond issuance in
China and that this overpricing is robust across time, bonds, and issuers with different
characteristics. Table 4 reports summary statistics of issuance overpricing by using excess returns
of the first secondary-market trading day as the overpricing measure. The cross-sectional patterns
are fully consistent with those in Table 3.


                                    IV.       Economic Mechanisms


    What has caused overpricing in bond issuances? We focus on competition among underwriters
to form our main hypothesis.

        Main hypothesis: To compete for underwriting business, underwriters may engage
        in a game of driving up bond prices (i.e., driving down bond yields) at issuance
        relative to the secondary market prices.

Overpricing at issuance is beneficial to the issuer for at least two reasons. First, it directly reduces
the issuer's issuance cost. As shown by Table 2, the magnitude of issuance overpricing is in the
range of 5­10 bps. This issuance overpricing effectively reduces the underwriting fee, which is
                                                                                                      15
around 30 bps in China's bond market.16 Second, and perhaps more importantly, as bond yield at
issuance is often regarded by regulators and the public as a salient measure of the issuer's financing
cost, it serves as a performance measure of the issuer. Our interviews with the practitioners indicate
that the issuer can use the yield from its bond issuance to bargain with banks about the interest
rates of its future bank loans, the initial motivation for the Chinese government to develop the
interbank bond market. This latter reason makes a lower yield at issuance more desirable to the
issuer than simply a lower underwriting fee.

     A bond issuer usually taps into the bond market repeatedly. There are 55 licensed underwriters
competing for underwriting business. If a bond issuance does not meet the issuer's expectations,
the issuer could replace its current underwriter with another one for its future bond issuances.
Therefore, competitive pressure may drive underwriters to strive for lower issuance yields. We
first test this competition effect by exploring the connection between an underwriter's current
underwriting performance, measured by issuance overpricing, and its probability of being replaced
by the issuer in its next bond issuance.

     Specifically, we measure the performance of an underwriter in a bond issuance by comparing
the issuance spread to a benchmark spread--the average issuance spread of all comparable bonds
in the interbank market. 17 Intuitively, issuers prefer a lower issuance spread relative to the
benchmark spread. Thus, we construct an indicator variable Underperformedi,n, which equals 1 if
issuer i's nth bond issuance spread is larger than its benchmark spread, and 0 otherwise. We also
define an indicator variable Switchi,n+1 to measure a change of underwriter. Switchi,n+1 is equal to
1 if issuer i replaces all the underwriters for its n+1th issuance after the nth issuance, and 0 otherwise.
We run a logit regression with the underwriter switch dummy Switchi,n+1 as the dependent variable
and the indicator variable, Underperformedi,n, as the main explanatory variable. We use various
bond and issuer characteristics as controls. The bond-level controls include issuance amount,


16
   As the underwriting fee is not reported to the public, our data do not cover the underwriting fee for each issuance.
Our interview with the practitioners and regulators suggest that underwriters sometimes also compete by reducing
their underwriting fee, even though it is not encouraged by the regulators. The regulators tend to discourage excessive
competition in driving down underwriting fees.
17
   Comparable bonds must meet three conditions: (1) it must have the same rating as the referenced bond; (2) the
maturity difference between a comparable bond and the referenced bond must be less than one month; and (3) a
comparable bond must be issued within a one-month window before the issuance of the referenced bond.
                                                                                                                    16
subscription ratio, maturity, and secondary market liquidity, which is measured by the logarithm
of the total trading volume of the bond in the first month after issuance, an IPO dummy, whether
the issuer was issuing bond for the first time in the interbank market, and credit rating. The issuer-
level controls include leverage, ROA, and the logarithm of firm book asset, sales, and cash
holdings.


    In columns (1) and (2) of Table 5, the coefficient of Underperformedi,n is positive and
statistically significant, without and with the firm and bond characteristics being included as
controls. This coefficient is also economically significant. Taking column (1) for example, the
estimate for the coefficient of Underperformedi,n implies that if the current issuance underperforms
the comparable issuances, the probability of the underwriter being replaced will increase by about
7.8% in the next bond issuance. Column (3) adds the independent variable Underwriter Sharei,n,
the share of bonds acquired by the underwriter in issuer i's nth issuance, to the right-hand side of
the regression. The coefficient of Underperformedi,n remains positive and significant, while the
coefficient of Underwriter Sharei,n is negative, indicating that the underwriter's bond acquisition
reduces its chance of being replaced in the next issuance.

    Taken together, Table 5 shows that bidding up bond prices and acquiring larger bond positions
in issuance are associated with lower probability of the underwriter being replaced in the
subsequence bond issuance. This association is consistent with the competition effect posited by
our main hypothesis. However, one might argue that this association may be driven by omitted
variables unrelated to competition between underwriters. To address such a concern, we will
examine the cross-section of issuance overpricing and the channels through which underwriters
may drive issuance overpricing.

    Our main hypothesis implies that overpricing may vary across issuers and underwriters. As
underwriters have greater incentives to compete for more-valuable bond issuers, such as central
SOEs, our hypothesis predicts that issuance overpricing is greater for bonds issued by central SOEs,
as already shown by summary statistics reported in Panel E of Table 3. Furthermore, as more

                                                                                                    17
secured underwriters, such as the big-four state banks, are less exposed to competition from other
underwriters, our hypothesis predicts that issuance overpricing is smaller for bonds with more-
secured underwriters. We shall further explore these cross-sectional predictions of our hypothesis.

    There are two potential channels for an underwriter to drive up the issuance price: one is to
provide a rebate to other participants of the auction as compensation for their overbidding, and the
other is to directly overbid through its own account beyond its investment demand. We shall further
examine the relevance of these channels below.

    Since the goal of an underwriter is to drive down the issuance cost for the issuer, which is
directly measured by the spread change, we report regression results from using the spread change
as the primary measure of issuance overpricing in the subsequent analysis. We also report parallel
results from using the excess return as the secondary measure in the Internet Appendix.


A. The underwriter rebate channel


    Anecdotal evidence suggests that it is a common practice in the interbank market for
underwriters to provide rebates to successful bidders to attract more-qualified institutions to
participate in issuance auctions and bid more aggressively. Although underwriter rebate can
directly lead to overpricing in bond issuances, we face a data-availability challenge in that
underwriters do not have to report the rebates to either market participants or regulators. In addition,
we also face the usual identification concern that rebates might be correlated with unobserved
determinants of bond issuance pricing.

    On September 1, 2017, China's interbank market regulator, NAFMII, issued a new regulation
that requires underwriters to stop using any form of rebate in the book building process (NAFMII
2017). This regulation took effect on October 1, 2017. According to NAFMII, the purpose of this
regulation is to promote fair competition and transparency in the bond issuance process. This ban
on underwriter rebates provides a natural experiment, which is exogenous to any bond issuance,
yet has cross-sectional implications for issuance outcomes.
                                                                                                     18
    Figure 4 depicts quarterly bond issuance overpricing from 2015 to 2018. It shows that
overpricing dropped significantly after the ban on underwriter rebates, from roughly 6 bps in the
third quarter to 0 in the fourth quarter of 2017, before it bounced back to around 1­2 bps. The
sharp drop in issuance overpricing after the policy shock confirms the relevance of underwriter
rebates in driving issuance overpricing.

    Nevertheless, one may still argue that the drop in issuance overpricing might be caused by
unobservable factors other than underwriter rebates. To fully examine this issue, we adopt a
difference-in-difference method to examine how this policy shock affected issuance overpricing
across different bond issuers and across different underwriters. As implied by our main hypothesis,
we expect bonds issued by central SOEs, which are more valuable issuers to underwriters, to have
greater issuance overpricing before the policy shock and thus greater reductions in overpricing
after underwriter rebates were prohibited. Similarly, we also expect bonds with more-secured
underwriters, such as the big-four state banks, to have less issuance overpricing before the policy
shock and thus to have smaller reductions in overpricing after the underwriter rebate ban. We
specifically test each of these two predictions around the policy shock below.


Reduction in overpricing across issuers

    As discussed earlier, central SOEs are strategically important firms with implicit guarantees
from the central government and are thus underwriters' most valued clients. Consequently,
underwriters may compete harder for the underwriting businesses of central SOEs by offering
higher rebates to attract participants in auctions of bonds issued by central SOEs before the
underwriter rebate ban. We use central SOEs as the treatment group and other firms as the control
group. We expect the ban on underwriter rebates to generate a greater reduction in the overpricing
of bonds issued by central SOEs. To test this prediction, we conduct a difference-in-difference
analysis in a twelve-month window around the policy shock, controlling for a host of bond and
issuer-level characteristics, as specified below:


                                                                                                 19
         Spreadi,t = 0 + 1 Treati + 2 Postt + 3 Treati×Postt + m Controlm,i,t + i,t          (3)

where Treati is an indicator that equals 1 for bonds issued by central SOEs and 0 otherwise, while
Postt is an indicator that equals 1 in the months following the policy shock and 0 otherwise. Like
the regression analysis reported in Table 5, we use the same set of bond and issuer characteristics
as controls.

    Table 6 reports the results in columns (1) and (2), without and with the control variables,
respectively. The coefficient of Treati is positive, indicating that bond issuance by central SOEs is
associated with greater overpricing before the underwriter rebate ban. More important, the
difference-in-difference estimate, i.e. the coefficient of Treati×Postt, is significantly negative,
confirming that issuance overpricing of bonds issued by central SOEs dropped more after the ban
on underwriter rebates than bonds issued by the control group, by 7.2 bps without including the
controls and by 6.2 bps after including the controls. Also note that some of the control variables
are highly significant. For example, more subscription is associated with lower overpricing, while
issuers with larger size tend to have larger overpricing.

    One caveat of the analysis reported above is that bond issuance is endogenous and the
composition of issuers might have changed after the policy shock. As the control variables may
not be sufficient to measure the composition change, one might be concerned that the difference-
in-difference measure might be biased. To address this concern, we further take advantage of
another interesting feature of China's interbank market: bond issuers can register bond issuances
with NAFMII in multiple installments. These bonds usually have the same terms and ratings, along
with many other characteristics as stated in the registration documents. The change in the
overpricing of pre-registered sequential bond issuances by the same issuer allows us to control for
the potential change in the composition of bond issuers.

    Specifically, we construct a subsample of pre-registered sequential issuances that spanned the
ban on underwriter rebate. This subsample of sequential issuances is slightly less than half of the

                                                                                                   20
full sample, containing 1,481 or 1,445 bond issuances for the regressions without or with controls.
Columns (3) and (4) report the regression results from using this subsample. The difference-in-
difference estimate remains significantly negative with magnitudes very similar to when we use
the full sample. The control variables also have similar estimates as those of the full sample.


Reduction in overpricing across underwriters

    Next, we examine the different impacts of the ban on issuance overpricing across underwriters.
We use the big-four state banks as the treatment group. As discussed earlier, the big-four banks
are the largest underwriters in the interbank market and have underwritten more than 36% of the
bonds in our sample. Since these four banks have extensive connections with institutional investors,
they are less likely to resort to excessive rebates to compete for underwriting business. Therefore,
we expect the ban on underwriter rebate to have a smaller impact on the overpricing of bonds
underwritten by the big-four banks.

    We continue to use the regression specification in model (3) with the treatment group dummy
Treat being equal to 1 if the bond is underwritten by a big-four bank and 0 otherwise. Like before,
we conduct a difference-in-difference analysis in the twelve-month window around the policy
shock, using both the full sample and the subsample of sequential issuers. Table 7 reports the
results. The difference-in-difference estimate is significantly positive in all specifications,
confirming that the ban on underwriter rebates has a smaller impact on issuance overpricing of
bonds underwritten by the big-four banks. Taking the coefficient in column (4) for example, we
see the impact of the ban on issuance overpricing of bonds underwritten by the big-four state banks
is 2.3 bps smaller than that of bonds underwritten by other underwriters.

    Taken together, Tables 4 and 5 provide cross-sectional evidence from the ban on underwriter
rebate to support underwriter rebate as an important channel for underwriters to drive bond
issuance overpricing in China. Interestingly, Figure 4 and Table 3 show that even after the ban on
underwriter rebates, issuance overpricing, while largely reduced, remained significant in 2018,
suggesting that additional channels are at work. Thus, we examine another channel--underwriters'
                                                                                                  21
direct bidding--in the next subsection.


B. The underwriter bidding channel


    In addition to using rebates, underwriters can directly bid in the auction either for their own
accounts or for their clients who are not qualified to bid. As most of the underwriters are large
commercial banks, they have large amounts of capital to invest in corporate bonds. Thus, by
bidding aggressively, they may drive down the bond yield at issuance. This feature makes bond
issuance in China different from that in the United States, where underwriters are not allowed to
directly engage in buying securities in the book building process. Interestingly, in our sample,
underwriters on average purchased 42% of the newly issued bonds. This large share makes
underwriters' direct bidding a potentially important channel driving issuance overpricing.


Underwriter purchase

    We first summarize how overpricing varies across bonds acquired in issuance auctions by
qualified investors without an underwriting license and bonds acquired by licensed underwriters
for bonds. As underwriters may have an information advantage over other participants in the
auctions, the usual profit maximization motives would imply lower overpricing in their bond
acquisitions, especially in bonds they underwrite. In contrast, our main hypothesis implies that in
order to bid up issuance prices in bonds they underwrite, overpricing might be higher in bonds
acquired by licensed underwriters, especially in bonds they underwrite.

    Table 8 reports the average overpricing in three portfolios of newly issued bonds: 1) new
bonds acquired by qualified investors, 2) new bonds acquired by licensed underwriters but
underwritten by others, and 3) new bonds acquired by licensed underwriters that they underwrite.
We first calculate the average overpricing for each institution (qualified investor or licensed
underwriter) and then take the average across the institutions in each category. The first row uses
an equal-weighted average, while the second row uses a value-weighted average.


                                                                                                 22
    Interestingly, overpricing in Portfolio 3 is significantly higher than that in Portfolio 1 by 2.42
bps in the equal-weighted average and by 3.09 bps in the value-weighted average. This difference
contradicts the hypothesis that underwriters use their information advantage to acquire new bonds.
Instead, it supports our main hypothesis that underwriters bid in issuance auctions to drive up
prices. The overpricing in Portfolio 3 is also significantly higher than that in Portfolio 2 by 1.32
bps in the equal-weighted average and by 2.1 bps in the value-weighted average. This difference
further shows that underwriters do not profit from bidding in bonds they underwrite.

    We further explore the relationship between issuance overpricing in each bond issuance and
the share acquired by its underwriter in the auction. Underwriter Share serves as a proxy for the
strength of underwriter support, as a larger share purchased by underwriters reflects greater
underwriter effort to drive down the yield. Thus, our main hypothesis predicts a positive
correlation between underwriter share and issuance overpricing, while the alternative hypothesis
that underwriters bid to take advantage of their superior information predicts a negative correlation.


    We examine this relationship by using the following regression:

     Spreadj = 0 + 1 Underwriter Sharej or Underwriter Dummyj + m Controlm,i + j                    (4)

Table 9 reports the results. Columns (1) and (2) show that the coefficient of Underwriter Share is
positive and statistically significant, without and with controlling for the same list of bond and
issuer characteristics used in the earlier analysis. This positive relationship is inconsistent with the
information advantage hypothesis and instead supports our main hypothesis that underwriters may
bid up the issuance price by purchasing more in the auction. Given that Underwriter Share has an
average value of 42% and Spread has an average of 5.35 bps, the coefficient of 3.076 estimated
in column (2) implies that about 25% of issuance overpricing may be related to the underwriters'
purchases.

    One might argue that the magnitude of Underwriter Share is contaminated by underwriters
bidding for their clients. For robustness, we also construct an alternative indicator variable,
Underwriter Dummyj, which equals 1 if the underwriters engage in purchasing a positive amount
                                                                                                      23
in the auction (i.e., Underwriter Sharej is greater than 0) and 0 otherwise. Columns (3) and (4)
report regression results from using this alternative measure, Underwriter Dummyj, to replace
Underwriter Sharej. The coefficient of the alternative measure Underwriter Dummyj remains
positive and significant, again confirming a positive relationship between underwriter purchases
and issuance overpricing.


Difference-in-difference analysis

     Ten institutions obtained their underwriting licenses during our sample period,18 as shown in
Appendix I. We refer to these institutions as switchers. As the process of applying for an
underwriting license in China is long and uncertain, it is reasonable to treat the approval of a license
application as independent of a particular bond that the institution bids for its own account or its
clients. The changes in the bidding behavior of these ten institutions after obtaining their
underwriting licenses thus make a nice setting to further test our main hypothesis.

     We pool together a sample of bond issuances that are purchased by all institutional investors,
including the ten switchers during our sample period. This sample allows us to focus on the
changes in the bidding behavior of the switchers. As extensively discussed by Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2003), Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004), and Roberts and Whited (2012),
the following regression model with institution fixed effects and time indicators in staggered
license status is equivalent to the standard difference-in-difference research design:

     Spreadj or Share Purchasek,j                                                                           (5)

     = 1 Statusk,j + 2 Self-underwrittenk,j +k Controlk,i,j + Institution FE + Year-month FE + k,j


where Share Purchasek,j is defined as the share of bond j being acquired by institution k. We use
an indicator variable, Statusk,j, to denote the status of institution k during the issuance of bond j: it


18Shanghai Rural Commercial Bank, Bank of Dalian, Guangdong Shunde Rural Commercial Bank Company, Bank of Ningbo,
and Bank of Hangzhou obtained licenses at the very beginning of our sample period and therefore are viewed as qualified
underwriters throughout this study.
                                                                                                                     24
equals 1 if institution k has an underwriting license at the time of the bond issuance, and 0
otherwise. The coefficient of this variable measures the change in the dependent variable after an
institution obtains its underwriting license (regardless of whether it underwrites the bond). We
further construct a dummy variable, Self-underwrittenk,j, which is equal to 1 only if bond j is
underwritten by switcher k, and 0 otherwise. The coefficient of this variable is key as it measures
the change in the dependent variable after an institution obtains an underwriting license and
actually underwrites the bond. The regression includes institution fixed effects, year-month fixed
effects, and bond- and issuer-level controls.

    Table 10 presents the regression results. As shown by the coefficient of Self-underwritten in
columns (2) and (4), after an institution obtains its underwriting license, the share of its purchase
in a bond it underwrites is 23.6% more than in a bond another institution underwrites, and the
overpricing in a bond it underwrites is 1.47 bps higher than in a bond purchased by it but
underwritten by another institution. These changes are both statistically and economically
significant. Interestingly, the coefficient of Status in columns (2) and (4) also shows that after an
institution obtains its underwriting license, the share of its purchases and overpricing in bonds
unwritten by other institutions does not change significantly. These no-change results alleviate the
endogeniety concern that the changes in switchers' bidding for bonds they underwrite might be
driven by omitted variables, which prompt the switchers to become underwriters.

    Taken together, Table 10 shows that after an institution obtains its underwriting license, it
bids more aggressively in issuance auctions--it purchases more bonds than before, particularly
bonds underwritten by itself, despite that issuance overpricing is more pronounced for bonds that
are both underwritten and purchased by it than those bonds purchased but not underwritten by it.
This evidence lends additional support to our main hypothesis that underwriters purchase bonds at
issuance to drive up overpricing.


                                          V.      Conclusion


                                                                                                   25
    This paper documents robust evidence for overpricing in China's corporate bond issuances.
The spread in the first secondary-market trading day is on average higher than the issuance spread
by 5.35 bps. This issuance overpricing is present in different subsamples of bonds divided by bond
credit rating, maturity, firm size, issuing history, issuer and underwriter types, and issuance year.
Our analysis attributes issuance overpricing to competition among underwriters, through two
specific channels--either rebates to issuance auction participants or directly bidding by
underwriters.




                                                                                                   26
References:

Allen, F., Faulhaber, G., 1989. Signaling by underpricing in the IPO market. Journal of Financial
Economics 23, 303­323.
Amstad, M., Sun, G., Xiong, W., 2019. The Handbook of China's Financial System. Princeton
University Press, forthcoming.
Amstad, M., He, Z., 2019. Chinese Bond Market and Interbank Market. In: Amstad, M., Sun, G.,
Xiong, W. (Eds.), The Handbook of China's Financial System. Princeton University Press,
forthcoming.
Ang, A., Bai, J., Zhou, H., 2017. The great wall of debt: real estate, corruption, and Chinese local
government credit spreads. Unpublished working paper.
Benveniste, L., Spindt, P., 1989. How investment bankers determine the offer price and allocation
of new issues. Journal of Financial Economics 24, 343­361.
Benveniste, L., Busaba, W., Wilhelm, J., 2002. Information externalities and the role of
underwriters in primary equity markets. Journal of Financial Intermediation 11, 61­86.
Booth, J., Chua, L., 1996. Ownership dispersion, costly information and IPO underpricing, Journal
of Financial Economics 41, 291­310.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How much should we trust differences-in-
differences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1), 249­275.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2003. Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate governance and
managerial preferences. Journal of Political Economy 111 (5), 1043­1075.
Cai, N., Helwege, J., Warga, A., 2007. Underpricing in the corporate bond market. The Review of
Financial Studies 20, 2021­2046.
Chen, H., Chen, Z., He, Z., Liu, J., Xie, R., 2019. Pledgeability and asset prices: Evidence from
the Chinese corporate bond markets. Unpublished working paper.
Chen, Z., He, Z., Liu, C., 2018. The financing of local government in China: stimulus loan wanes
and shadow banking waxes. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Datta, S., Iskandar-Datta, M., Patel, A., 1997. The pricing of initial public offers of corporate
straight debt. Journal of Finance 52, 379­396.
Ellul, A., Pagano, M., 2006. IPO underpricing and after-market liquidity. Review of Financial
Studies 19, 381­421.
Grinblatt, M., Hwang, C., 1989. Signaling and the Pricing of Unseasoned New Issues. Journal of
Finance 44, 393­420.
Goldstein, M., Hotchkiss, E., 2007. Dealer behavior and the trading of newly issued corporate
bonds, AFA 2009 San Francisco meetings paper.
Hale, G., Santos, J. 2007. Evidence on the costs and benefits of bond IPOs. New York Federal
Reserve mimeo.
                                                                                                  27
Helwege, J., Kleiman, P., 1998. The pricing of high-yield debt IPOs, Journal of Fixed Income 8,
61­68.
Matsui, K., 2006. Overpricing of new issues in the Japanese straight bond market. Applied
Financial Economics Letters 2, 323­327.
Ljungqvist, A., 2007. IPO underpricing. In: Eckbo, E., (Ed.), Handbook of Empirical Corporate
Finance. Elsevier, pp. 375­422.
Lou, D., Yan, H., Zhang, J., 2013. Anticipated and repeated shocks in liquid markets. Review of
Financial Studies 26, 1891­1912.
Loughran, T., Ritter, J., 2002. Why don't issuers get upset about leaving money on the table in
IPOs? Review of Financial Studies 15, 413­443.
Ma, J., He, X., 2019. China's interest rate liberalization. In: Amstad, M., Sun, G., Xiong, W. (Eds.),
The Handbook of China's Financial System. Princeton University Press, forthcoming.
McKenzie, C., Takaoka, S., 2008. Mispricing in the Japanese corporate bond market. Unpublished
working paper.
NAFMII, Announcement of National Association of Financial Market Institutional Investors,
Sep.1, 2017, No. 23.
Ritter, J., 1987. The costs of going public. Journal of Financial Economics 19, 269­282.
Ritter, J., Welch, I., 2002. A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations. Journal of Finance
57, 1795­1828.
Roberts, M., Whited, T., 2012. Endogeneity in empirical corporate finance. Unpublished working
paper.
Rock, K., 1986. Why new issues are underpriced. Journal of Financial Economics 15, 187­212.
Sherman, A., Titman, S., 2002. Building the IPO order book: Underpricing and participation limits
with costly information. Journal of Financial Economics 65, 3­29.
Wasserfallen, W., Wydler, D., 1988. Underpricing of newly issued bonds: evidence from the Swiss
capital market. Journal of Finance 43, 1177­1191.
Zaremba, A., 2014. Underpricing of newly issued corporate bonds in the CEE markets. European
Journal of Economics and Management 1(1), 6­16.
Song, Z., Xiong, W., 2018. Risks in China's financial system. Annual Review of Financial
Economics 10, 261­286.
Zhu, N., 2016. China's Guaranteed Bubble: How implicit government support has propelled
China's economy while creating systemic risk. McGraw-Hill Education.




                                                                                                    28
Appendix 1. List of Licensed Underwriters in the Interbank Market (2018)

 Institution name                              License granted date    Institution name                                 License granted date
 Industrial and Commercial Bank of China          Prior to 2010        GF Securities Company                             November 28, 2012
 Agricultural Bank of China                       Prior to 2010        Huatai Securities Company                         November 28, 2012
 Bank of China                                    Prior to 2010        China Galaxy Securities Company                   November 28, 2012
 China Construction Bank                          Prior to 2010        Guosen Securities Company                         November 28, 2012
 Bank of Communications                           Prior to 2010        Orient Securities Company                         November 28, 2012
 China Development Bank                           Prior to 2010        Haitong Securities Company                        November 28, 2012
 The Import-Export Bank of China                  Prior to 2010        Bank of Jiangsu                                      March 3, 2014
 China Merchants Bank                             Prior to 2010        Huishang Bank                                        March 3, 2014
 China CITIC Bank                                 Prior to 2010        Bank of Tianjin                                      March 3, 2014
 Industrial Bank                                  Prior to 2010        Beijing Rural Commercial Bank                        March 3, 2014
 China Everbright Bank                            Prior to 2010        Shanghai Rural Commercial Bank                     January 15, 2015
 China Minsheng Bank                              Prior to 2010        Bank of Dalian                                     January 15, 2015
 Hua Xia Bank                                     Prior to 2010        Guangdong Shunde Rural Commercial Bank Company     January 15, 2015
 Shanghai Pudong Development Bank                 Prior to 2010        Bank of Ningbo                                     January 15, 2015
 China Guangfa Bank                               Prior to 2010        Bank of Hangzhou                                   January 15, 2015
 Ping An Bank                                     Prior to 2010        Postal Saving Bank of China                       December 31, 2015
 Hengfeng Bank                                    Prior to 2010        Bank of Chengdu                                      May 18, 2016
 China Bohai Bank                                 Prior to 2010        Bank of Zhengzhou                                    May 18, 2016
 Bank of Beijing                                  Prior to 2010        Chongqing Rural Commercial Bank                      May 18, 2016
 Bank of Shanghai                                 Prior to 2010        Bank of Qingdao                                      May 18, 2016
 Bank of Nanjing                                  Prior to 2010        Hankou Bank                                          May 18, 2016
 China Zheshang Bank                              Prior to 2010        Xiamen Bank                                          May 18, 2016
 CITIC Securities Company                         Prior to 2010        Bank of Changsha                                     May 18, 2016
 China International Capital Corporation          Prior to 2010        Agricultural Development Bank of China              August 7, 2017
 Guotai Junan Securities Company               November 28, 2012       HSBC Bank (China) Company                          October 27, 2017
 China Merchants Securities Company            November 28, 2012       Standard Chartered Bank (China) Company            January 31, 2018
 Everbright Securities Company                 November 28, 2012       BNP PARIBAS (China) Company                        December 7, 2018
 China Securities Company                      November 28, 2012




                                                                                                                                               29
                                                                          Figure 1. China's Bond Issuance

                                         45                                                                                                  100%

                                         40

                                         35                                                                                                  96%
           New issuance (Trillion RMN)




                                                                                                                                                    Interbank market share (%)
                                         30          Interbank Market
                                                     Exchange Market                                                                         92%
                                         25
                                                     Interbank Market %
                                         20
                                                                                                                                             88%
                                         15

                                         10                                                                                                  84%
                                          5

                                          0                                                                                                  80%
                                              2009      2010      2011      2012      2013          2014      2015     2016    2017   2018




                                                     Figure 2. Debt-financing instruments issuance by category

                                         6
                                                 Asset-backed Note
                                                 Private Placement Note
New Issuance (Trillion RMN)




                                         5       Commercial Paper
                                                 Mid-term Note
                                         4


                                         3


                                         2


                                         1


                                         0
                                              2009       2010        2011      2012          2013          2014      2015     2016    2017   2018




                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                            Figure 3. Issuance Timeline




                                                                       Figure 4. Overpricing Over Time

                                        10
First Trading Day Spread Change (bps)




                                         8


                                         6


                                         4


                                         2


                                         0


                                        -2
                                         15Q1   15Q2   15Q3   15Q4   16Q1   16Q2   16Q3   16Q4   17Q1   17Q2   17Q3   17Q4   18Q1   18Q2   18Q3   18Q4




                                                                                                                                                     31
Table 1. Summary Statistics: Bond- and Issuer-Level Information
This table provides summary statistics of the bond issuance on the interbank market from 2015 to 2018. Panel A
reports the number of bond issuances, issuing companies, and the total issuance amount for each year. Panels B and
C report the summary statistics of bond and issuer characteristics, respectively. The subscription ratio is calculated by
dividing the total subscription by the issue amount. We convert letter ratings into numerical values, i.e. AAA to 5,
AA+ to 4, AA to 3, AA- to 2, and A+ to 1. Panel D summarizes the share of newly issued bonds directly acquired by
underwriters. Number of observations, the mean, the standard deviation, the 25th percentile, the median, and the 75th
percentile are presented.


 Panel A: New Issues across Years: 2015­2018
 Year                                         2015               2016             2017               2018             Total
 No. of Issues                                3,379           3,441               2,880             4,087           13,787
  issued by the big-four banks                1,258           1,400                957              1,353            4,968
  issued by security firms                     186                218              295                522            1,221
 No. of Companies                             1,304           1,238               1,016             1,198            2,248
 Issue Amount (¥mil)                     4,457,040        4,301,615          3,197,455           4,487,525       16,443,635
 Panel B: Bond-Level Information
                                               N         Mean               SD            P25           P50            P75
 Coupon rate (%)                         13,787           4.67             1.22           3.72          4.65           5.45
 Maturity                                13,787           1.69             1.69           0.74          0.75           3.00
 Issue Amount (¥mil)                     13,787          1,193            1,246           500          1,000          1,500
 Subscription Ratio                      13,280           1.69             0.81           1.10          1.44           2.00
 IPO                                     13,787           0.08             0.26             0                0           0
 Recent Issuance                         13,787           0.84             0.37             1                1           1
 Rating                                  13,787           4.13             0.85           3.00          4.00           5.00
 Panel C: Issuer-Level Information
                                               N         Mean               SD            P25           P50            P75
 Leverage                                13,780           0.65             0.13           0.58          0.66           0.74
 ROA                                     13,695           0.03             0.03           0.01          0.02           0.04
 Asset (¥mil)                            13,780       146,812           378,466      23,215           52,052       144,973
 Sale (¥mil)                             13,778         57,480          155,963       4,620           14,935        52,173
 Cash (¥mil)                             13,730         12,549           35,988       2,166            5,242        13,222
 Trading Volume (¥mil)                   13,787          1,433            1,811           460            890          1,710
 Panel D: Bond Allocation
                                               N         Mean               SD            P25           P50            P75
 Underwriter Share                         8,198          0.42             0.30           0.17          0.40           0.66




                                                                                                                          32
Table 2. The Overpricing of Bond Issuances
This table reports the summary statistics of the spread change after issuance. Panel A reports the summary statistics of the spread difference between the first trading
day since issuance and the auction, Spread, the spread difference between the fifteenth calendar day since issuance and the auction, Spread15 days, and             the
difference between the Spread15 and Spread. The spread is calculated as the corporate bond yield minus the corresponding Chinese Treasury Bond Yield Index
of similar maturity. Panel B reports the summary statistics of the first-trade excess return, the fifteenth calendar day excess return, and the difference between the
Excess return 15 days and the Excess return. The excess return is calculated as described in Section II.

   Panel A: Spread change
                                                      N                 Mean             SD            t-Statistic         P25              P50             P75
   Spread                                          13,787             5.35***          10.71               58.62           -0.16           4.13             9.13
   Spread15 days                                    4,266             7.65***          42.67               11.71           -8.36           4.87            18.54
   Spread15 days -Spread                            4,266             1.73***          42.07               2.68           -13.12           -0.96           11.96


   Panel B: Excess return
                                                      N                 Mean             SD            t-Statistic         P25              P50             P75
   Excess return                                   13,787             -8.00***         10.64            -88.25            -12.59           -7.10           -2.29
   Excess return 15 days                            4,266            -11.26***         48.39            -15.20            -31.01          -12.01            8.92
   Excess return 15 days - Excess return            4,266             -2.65***         46.53               -3.72          -20.27           -3.09           13.67




                                                                                                                                                                     33
Table 3. Summary Statistics: Overpricing across Bond Characteristics, Issuer Characteristics, and Years
This table presents the summary statistics of the first trading day spread change, Spread, across different bond ratings,
maturities, issuers' total assets, issuing histories, issuer and underwriter types, and issuing years. Number of
observations, the mean, the standard deviation, the t-statistics, the 25th percentile, the median, and the 75th percentile
are presented.


 Panel A: By rating                              N      Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25        P50         P75
 AAA                                         5,752       6.38       12.75      37.95       -0.27        4.33      10.44
 AA+                                         4,301       4.26        8.82      31.68       -0.33        3.45        8.24
 AA                                          3,524       4.95        8.88      33.08        0.17        4.42        8.58
 AA- and A+                                   210        5.84       10.08        8.40       0.96        5.57        9.57
 Panel B: By rating and maturity                 N      Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25        P50         P75
                       Maturity
 AAA                   1 year                3,647       8.41       14.37      35.36        0.29        6.47      13.49
                       1­2 year               548        5.80       10.51      12.92        0.57        6.28      10.29
                       >2 year               1,557       1.82        6.90      10.42       -1.41        1.57        4.66
 AA+                   1 year                2,223       5.48        9.00      28.71        0.17        5.34        9.60
                       1­2 year               839        4.99        9.71      14.90        0.33        5.67        8.78
                       >2 year               1,239       1.59        7.15        7.80      -1.51        1.25        3.96
 AA, AA-, and A+       1 year                1,334       6.33        9.85      23.47        0.63        6.23      10.03
                       1­2 year              1,193       6.67        9.35      24.63        1.97        6.64      10.13
                       >2 year               1,207       1.88        6.32      10.31       -0.93        1.68        4.39
 Panel C: By rating and total assets             N      Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25        P50         P75
                       Total Assets
 AAA                   Larger                2,879       7.07       14.08      26.95       -0.33        4.39      11.16
                       Smaller               2,873       5.69       11.22      27.16       -0.22        4.25        9.78
 AA+                   Larger                2,152       4.27        8.83      22.40       -0.45        3.22        8.26
                       Smaller               2,149       4.26        8.82      22.39       -0.21        3.74        8.22
 AA, AA-, and A+       Larger                1,872       4.96        9.16      23.44        0.08        4.38        8.55
                       Smaller               1,862       5.03        8.74      24.86        0.37        4.68        8.79
 Panel D: By bond issuing history                N      Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25        P50         P75
 IPO issuance                                1,044       3.41        7.51      14.68       -0.50        2.47        6.94
 Non-IPO issuance                          12,743        5.50       10.91      56.93       -0.14        4.30        9.27
 Panel E: By issuer type                         N      Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25        P50         P75
 Central SOE                                 1,274       9.94       15.28      23.24        1.16        7.15      16.14
 Other                                     12,513        4.88       10.01      54.50       -0.25        3.88       8.71
 Panel F: By underwriter type                    N      Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25        P50         P75
 Big-four banks                              4,968       5.55       10.87      35.96        -0.12       4.25        9.46
 Other                                       8,819       5.23       10.62      46.29        -0.18       4.06        8.93
 Security firms                              1,221       3.10        8.99      12.04        -1.04       1.86        6.12


                                                                                                                       34
Other                      12,566   5.56   10.84   57.56     -0.08   4.39    9.34
Panel G: By issuing year       N    Mean     SD    t-Stat.    P25    P50     P75
2015                        3,379   7.03   11.14   36.67     1.45    5.96   10.88
2016                        3,441   7.82   10.80   42.48     3.27    7.37   10.66
2017                        2,880   5.55   11.31   26.31     -0.71   3.44    9.10
2018                        4,087   1.72    8.67   12.72     -1.88   0.61    4.35




                                                                                35
Table 4. Summary Statistics: Excess Return across Bond Characteristics, Issuer Characteristics, and Years
This table presents the summary statistics of the first trading day excess return across different bond ratings, maturities,
issuers' total assets, issuing histories, issuer and underwriter types, and issuing years. Number of observations, the
mean, the standard deviation, the t-statistics, the 25th percentile, the median, and the 75th percentile are presented.


 Panel A: By rating                              N       Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25         P50         P75
 AAA                                         5,752       -8.03       10.53      -57.89      -12.09       -6.72       -2.58
 AA+                                         4,301       -7.10       10.07      -46.24      -11.46       -6.25       -1.37
 AA                                          3,524       -8.78       11.33      -46.04      -13.87       -8.84       -3.24
 AA- and A+                                    210      -10.08       11.14      -13.10      -16.89     -10.46        -6.13
 Panel B: By rating and maturity                 N       Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25         P50         P75
                       Maturity
 AAA                   1 year                3,647       -7.77        8.88      -52.82      -12.07       -6.62       -2.41
                       1­2 year                548       -8.34       10.65      -18.33      -13.83       -7.36       -2.81
                       >2 year               1,557       -8.55       13.58      -24.85      -11.65       -6.66       -2.89
 AA+                   1 year                2,223       -6.20        7.81      -37.40      -10.17       -5.65       -1.12
                       1­2 year                839       -8.34        9.87      -24.46      -13.77       -8.16       -2.35
                       >2 year               1,239       -7.87       13.17      -21.04      -11.82       -6.46       -1.35
 AA, AA-, and A+       1 year                1,334       -7.67        9.17      -30.57      -12.78       -7.66       -2.34
                       1­2 year              1,193      -11.08        9.84      -38.89      -16.03     -10.76        -5.50
                       >2 year               1,207       -8.31       14.24      -20.29      -13.59       -8.69       -2.37
 Panel C: By rating and total asset              N       Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25         P50         P75
                       Total Asset
 AAA                   Larger                2,879       -8.21       10.86      -40.54      -12.30       -6.63       -2.41
                       Smaller               2,873       -7.86       10.18      -41.40      -11.90       -6.82       -2.77
 AA+                   Larger                2,152       -6.92       10.56      -30.38      -11.08       -5.95       -1.28
                       Smaller               2,149       -7.28        9.54      -35.36      -11.80       -6.61       -1.45
 AA, AA-, and A+       Larger                1,872       -8.59       12.49      -29.75      -13.71       -8.53       -3.21
                       Smaller               1,862       -9.35       10.04      -40.20      -14.53       -9.37       -3.51
 Panel D: By bond issuing history                N       Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25         P50         P75
 IPO issuance                                1,044       -8.46       12.75      -21.44      -13.77       -8.23       -2.59
 Non-IPO issuance                           12,743       -7.96       10.45      -85.99      -12.45       -7.04       -2.28
 Panel E: By issuer type                         N       Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25         P50         P75
 Central SOE                                 1,274      -10.64       12.07      -15.45       -9.03       -3.97      1,274
 Other                                      12,513       -7.73       10.44      -12.32       -6.93       -2.17     12,513
 Panel F: By underwriter type                    N       Mean          SD       t-Stat.       P25         P50         P75
 Big-four banks                              4,968       -8.21       10.06      -12.95       -7.29       -2.45      4,968
 Other                                       8,819       -7.87       10.95      -12.36       -7.02       -2.24      8,819
 Security firms                              1,221       -6.89        9.36      -11.53       -5.95       -1.73      1,221
 Other                                      12,566       -8.10       10.75      -12.69       -7.20       -2.37     12,566

                                                                                                                          36
Panel G: By issuing year      N    Mean       SD    t-Stat.     P25      P50     P75
2015                       3,379   -11.97   12.11   -57.47    -17.49   -11.13   -5.49
2016                       3,441   -11.03   11.19   -57.82    -15.18   -11.03   -6.94
2017                       2,880    -6.27    8.42   -39.96     -8.62    -4.91   -0.34
2018                       4,087    -3.38    8.00   -26.97     -7.20    -3.70   -0.90




                                                                                    37
Table 5. Logit Regression of Underwriters Switching
This table reports the logit regression results of an issuer's underwriter change on the outcome of the issuer's last bond
issuance. The dependent variable, Switchi,n+1, equals 1 if the issuing firm i changes all the underwriters on its n+1th
issuance as compared to its nth issuance, and 0 otherwise. The performance is measured by an indicator variable,
Underperformedi,n, which equals 1 if the spread of the issuer i's nth bond issuance is greater than the corresponding
benchmark spread. Underwriter Sharei,n is the percentage of the underwriter 's purchase on the issuer i' nth issuance.
Heteroscedasticity-consistent z-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     Dependent: Switchi,n+1                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)
     Underperformedi,n                                   0.246***              0.181***              0.217***
                                                           (6.18)                (4.00)                 (3.89)
     Underwriter Sharei,n                                                                           -0.297***
                                                                                                       (-3.36)
     Ln(Issue amount)                                                             0.045                 0.055
                                                                                  (0.85)                (0.83)
     Subscription Ratio                                                          -0.005                -0.036
                                                                                 (-0.18)               (-0.97)
     Maturity                                                                  -0.036**                -0.025
                                                                                 (-2.57)               (-1.49)
     Ln(Trading Volume)                                                          -0.020                 0.027
                                                                                 (-0.64)                (0.68)
     IPO                                                                         -0.115                -0.093
                                                                                 (-0.96)               (-0.63)
     Recent Issuance                                                           0.778***              0.730***
                                                                                  (9.26)                (6.93)
     DummyAAA                                                                  0.846***               1.081**
                                                                                  (3.01)                (2.26)
     DummyAA+                                                                   0.681**               1.007**
                                                                                  (2.49)                (2.14)
     DummyAA                                                                     0.498*                0.910*
                                                                                  (1.83)                (1.94)
     Leverage                                                                  0.924***              1.281***
                                                                                  (4.49)                (5.09)
     ROA                                                                      -2.641***               -2.062*
                                                                                 (-3.00)               (-1.96)
     Ln(Asset)                                                                 0.221***              0.216***
                                                                                  (4.92)                (3.85)
     Ln(Sales)                                                                 0.056***               0.063**
                                                                                  (2.63)                (2.35)
     Ln(Cash)                                                                 -0.146***             -0.160***
                                                                                 (-4.66)               (-4.09)
     Constant                                            0.370***             -3.359***             -4.073***
                                                          (14.89)                (-8.46)               (-6.90)
     Observations                                          11,244                10,790                 6,991
     Pseudo R-squared                                     0.00256                0.0564                0.0567
                                                                                                                       38
Table 6. Difference-in-Difference Analysis Using the Underwriter Rebate Ban: Evidence from the Issuers
This table reports results of the difference-in-difference tests on how exogenous changes in underwriter rebates due
to the policy shock affect bond issuance overpricing. Treat equals 1 if the bond is issued by a central SOE, and 0
otherwise. Post equals 1 in the months following the policy shock. Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample. Columns
(3) and (4) use the matched sample that includes only issuers with sequential bond issuances before and after the event.
Heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                Full sample                             Matched sample
      Dependent: Spread                    (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)
      Treat                           9.709***             6.441***            9.772***             6.545***
                                         (6.26)               (4.32)              (5.17)               (3.52)
      Post                           -6.043***            -6.273***           -7.043***            -7.139***
                                       (-19.89)             (-20.82)            (-13.78)             (-13.81)
      Treat ×Post                    -7.225***            -6.182***           -8.407***            -7.861***
                                        (-3.66)              (-3.29)             (-3.79)              (-3.85)
      Ln(Issue amount)                                        0.430                                   1.839*
                                                              (0.70)                                   (1.85)
      Subscription Ratio                                  -0.741***                                -0.950***
                                                             (-3.90)                                  (-2.64)
      Maturity                                            -1.206***                                -1.636***
                                                            (-13.40)                                  (-8.53)
      Ln(Trading Volume)                                     -0.071                                   -0.282
                                                             (-0.20)                                  (-0.46)
      IPO                                                     0.624                                    2.420
                                                              (1.03)                                   (0.99)
      Recent Issuance                                         0.113                                    0.197
                                                              (0.24)                                   (0.10)
      DummyAAA                                                0.068                                   -1.017
                                                              (0.10)                                  (-0.89)
      DummyAA+                                               -0.335                                   -0.912
                                                             (-0.82)                                  (-1.37)
      Leverage                                               -2.215                                   -4.098
                                                             (-1.36)                                  (-1.55)
      ROA                                                  12.641**                                   11.949
                                                              (2.05)                                   (1.08)
      Ln(Asset)                                            1.537***                                 1.861***
                                                              (3.59)                                   (2.74)
      Ln(Sales)                                              -0.067                                   -0.180
                                                             (-0.47)                                  (-0.84)
      Ln(Cash)                                            -1.078***                                -1.356***
                                                             (-3.59)                                  (-3.16)
      Constant                        6.203***                1.379            7.659***               -3.606
                                        (24.67)               (0.42)             (18.12)              (-0.65)
      Observations                       3,252                3,164               1,481                1,445
      R-squared                          0.153                0.210               0.182                0.246
                                                                                                                     39
Table 7. Difference-in-Difference Analysis Using the Underwriter Rebate Ban: Evidence from the Underwriters
This table reports results of the difference-in-difference tests on how exogenous changes in underwriter rebates due
to the policy shock affect bond spread change. Treat equals 1, if the bond is issued by one of the big-four banks in
China, and 0 otherwise. Post equals 1 in the months following the policy shock. Columns (1) and (2) use the full
sample. Columns (3) and (4) use the matched sample that includes only issuers with sequential bond issuances before
and after the event. Heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                              Full sample                             Matched sample
    Dependent: Spread                    (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
    Treat                              -0.791           -1.536***           -2.459***            -2.698***
                                      (-1.43)              (-2.98)             (-2.78)              (-3.31)
    Post                           -7.187***            -7.363***           -9.147***            -8.842***
                                     (-18.60)             (-19.32)            (-13.73)             (-13.80)
    Treat ×Post                      1.362**              1.616**             2.712**              2.316**
                                       (1.99)               (2.49)              (2.50)              (2.36)
    Ln(Issue amount)                                        0.763                                  2.375**
                                                            (1.25)                                  (2.45)
    Subscription Ratio                                  -0.681***                                 -0.753**
                                                           (-3.61)                                  (-2.14)
    Maturity                                            -1.216***                                -1.549***
                                                          (-13.48)                                  (-8.20)
    Ln(Trading Volume)                                     -0.110                                   -0.435
                                                           (-0.31)                                  (-0.72)
    IPO                                                     0.802                                    2.256
                                                            (1.32)                                  (0.95)
    Recent Issuance                                         0.137                                    0.384
                                                            (0.29)                                  (0.20)
    DummyAAA                                               -0.478                                  -1.977*
                                                           (-0.69)                                  (-1.77)
    DummyAA+                                               -0.639                                 -1.380**
                                                           (-1.58)                                  (-2.09)
    Leverage                                              -2.748*                                   -3.257
                                                           (-1.66)                                  (-1.19)
    ROA                                                  14.376**                                   17.900
                                                            (2.24)                                  (1.47)
    Ln(Asset)                                            2.167***                                 2.460***
                                                            (5.34)                                  (4.02)
    Ln(Sales)                                               0.097                                   -0.031
                                                            (0.69)                                  (-0.14)
    Ln(Cash)                                            -1.435***                                -1.703***
                                                           (-5.04)                                  (-4.24)
    Constant                        7.239***               -4.492            9.699***            -10.431**
                                      (21.29)              (-1.48)             (16.19)              (-2.05)
    Observations                       3,252                3,164               1,483                1,447
    R-squared                           0.119               0.200               0.149                0.232
                                                                                                                 40
Table 8. The Portfolio Overpricing Difference: Qualified Investor vs. Licensed Underwriter
This table reports the average spread change of different investor portfolios: each qualified investor 's bond portfolio (column 1), each licensed underwriter's bond
portfolio that includes only bonds that it does not underwrite (column 2), and each licensed underwriter investor's bond portfolio that includes only bonds it
underwrites (column 3). We first calculate both the equal-weighted average spread change and the value-weighted average spread change (using bond purchase
amount as the weight) for each institution and then take the average across the institutions in each category. The table also reports t-statistic for the mean difference
between (1) and (3) and between (2) and (3), with *, ** or *** indicating statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                                         Overpricing of bonds      Overpricing of bonds acquired       Overpricing of bonds acquired
                                        acquired by qualified       by licensed underwriters but       by licensed underwriters that
                                               investors               underwritten by others                 they underwrite              Difference      Difference
                                                  (1)                             (2)                                (3)                     (3)-(1)         (3)-(2)
 Equal-weighted portfolio average                 4.03                           5.13                               6.45                     2.42**           1.32*
                                                                                                                                             (2.45)           (1.92)
 Value-weighted portfolio average                 4.43                           5.42                               7.52                    3.09***          2.10**
                                                                                                                                             (2.98)           (2.42)
 No. of Institutions                               57                             50                                 50




                                                                                                                                                                       41
Table 9. Regressions of Overpricing on Underwriter's Purchase s
This table reports regressions of issuance overpricing on underwriters' purchase share. The dependent variable is the
overpricing measure, Spread. The independent variable Underwriter Share is the percentage of the underwriters'
purchase of the underlying bond. Underwriter Dummy is an indicator variable for the underwriter's purchase, which
is equal to 1, if Underwriter Share is positive, and 0 otherwise. Heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistics are reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


   Dependent: Spread                    (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
   Underwriter Share                 2.995***              3.076***
                                       (7.77)                (8.23)
   Underwriter Dummy                                                            1.665***               1.273***
                                                                                  (5.65)                  (4.41)
   Ln(Issue amount)                                          -0.320                                      -0.133
                                                             (-0.94)                                     (-0.39)
   Subscription Ratio                                     -0.415***                                   -0.646***
                                                             (-3.14)                                     (-4.87)
   Maturity                                               -1.557***                                   -1.533***
                                                            (-26.81)                                    (-26.48)
   Ln(Trading Volume)                                      0.879***                                    0.714***
                                                              (3.98)                                      (3.24)
   IPO                                                       -0.332                                      -0.204
                                                             (-0.70)                                     (-0.43)
   Recent Issuance                                           -0.320                                      -0.251
                                                             (-0.81)                                     (-0.64)
   DummyAAA                                                   1.398                                       0.938
                                                              (1.33)                                      (0.90)
   DummyAA+                                                   0.328                                      -0.131
                                                              (0.34)                                     (-0.14)
   DummyAA                                                    1.173                                       0.783
                                                              (1.27)                                      (0.85)
   Leverage                                                  -0.460                                      -0.597
                                                             (-0.43)                                     (-0.56)
   ROA                                                      8.067**                                     8.143**
                                                              (2.12)                                      (2.13)
   Ln(Asset)                                               1.464***                                    1.473***
                                                              (5.82)                                      (5.83)
   Ln(Sales)                                                  0.170                                      0.183*
                                                              (1.54)                                      (1.65)
   Ln(Cash)                                               -1.136***                                   -1.153***
                                                             (-6.38)                                     (-6.47)
   Constant                          5.346***              -3.722**             5.174***                 -2.930
                                      (29.76)                (-2.05)             (19.59)                 (-1.60)
   Observations                        8,198                  8,057               8,198                   8,057
   R-squared                           0.007                  0.104               0.003                   0.098
                                                                                                                      42
Table 10. Difference-in-Difference Analysis of the Overpricing with the Underwriting License Grant
This table reports the difference-in-difference tests on how the grant of an underwriting license affects institutions'
bidding behavior. The test contains bond issuances that are purchased by all institutional investors, including ten
institutions that obtained their underwriting licenses during our sample period. The observations include all the
successful bidders and bond pairs in each auction. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is Share Purchasek,j,
the shares of bond j's issue amount acquired by the successful bidder k in the auction. The dependent variable in
columns (3) and (4) is Spreadj, the issuance overpricing of bond j. The independent variable Statusk,j equals 1 if the
bidder k has received an underwriting license at the time of bond j's issuance, and 0 otherwise. The independent
variable Self-underwrittenk,j equals 1 if the bond j is underwritten by institution k, and 0 otherwise. Heteroscedasticity-
consistent t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.


                                                     Dependent:                              Dependent:
                                                 Share Purchasei, j                           Spreadj
                                              (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)
      Statusk, j                           0.016**                0.006            0.797*               0.729
                                            (2.06)              (0.73)              (1.78)              (1.58)
      Self-underwrittenk, j                                   0.236***                               1.472***
                                                                (7.36)                                  (2.05)
      Bond Controls                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Firm Controls                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Institution FE                          Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Year-month FE                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Observations                          42,686              42,686             42,686               42,686
      R-squared                              0.253                0.256             0.237               0.238




                                                                                                                        43
                                  Internet Appendix for
             "Overpricing in China's Corporate Bond Market"


                     Yi Ding            Wei Xiong             Jinfan Zhang


    In this Internet Appendix, we report regression results from using the excess bond return from
issuance to the first secondary-market trade, as defined in Section II.B of the main paper, as an
alternative measure of issuance overpricing in China's corporate bond market. The results are
similar to those reported in the main paper from using the yield spread change as the primary
measure of issuance overpricing. Tables IA1 to IA5 correspond to Tables 6­10, respectively.

    In Tables IA1 and IA2, we conduct difference-in-difference analyses to examine how the
underwriter rebate ban affects the excess return across different bond issuers and across different
underwriters. Consistent with results from using the yield-spread measure, these tables show that
after the ban, the drop in overpricing is significantly greater for bonds issued by central SOEs than
those issued by other firms, and the drop in overpricing is significantly smaller for bond issuances
underwritten by the top four banks.

    Table IA3 reports the average excess return in three portfolios of newly issued bonds: 1) new
bonds acquired by qualified investors, 2) new bonds acquired by licensed underwriters but
unwritten by others, and 3) new bonds acquired by licensed underwriters that they underwrite. The
table shows the average excess return in Portfolio 3 is significantly lower than that in Portfolios 1
and 2, consistent with Table 8 in the main paper.

    Table IA4 reports regression results of the initial excess return in each bond issuance on the
share acquired by its underwriter in the auction. The table shows that the excess return is negatively
associated with the share of the underwriters' purchase, consistent with Table 9 in the main paper.

    Table IA5 reports the results of difference-in-difference analyses on how institutions' bidding

                                                                                                    44
behavior in bond issuance auctions changes after obtaining a bond underwriting license. The table
shows that after an institution obtains an underwriting license it tends to buy more in bond
issuances it underwrites at higher overpricing, consistent with Table 10 in the main paper.




                                                                                               45
Table IA1. Difference-in-Difference Analysis Using the Underwriter Rebate Ban: Evidence from the Issuers
This table reports results of the difference-in-difference tests on how exogenous changes in underwriter rebates due
to the policy shock affect bond issuance overpricing. Treat equals 1 if the bond is issued by a central SOE, and 0
otherwise. Post equals 1 in the months following the policy shock. Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample. Columns
(3) and (4) use the matched sample that only includes issuers with sequential bond issuances before and after the event.
Heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                Full sample                             Matched sample
      Dependent: Excess Ret                (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)
      Treat                            -1.905*             -2.210**           -3.718***            -4.229***
                                        (-1.95)              (-2.10)             (-3.06)              (-3.31)
      Post                            5.500***             5.269***            4.948***             4.707***
                                        (22.25)             (21.63)              (13.40)             (12.90)
      Treat ×Post                      2.456**               2.191*            4.682***             4.553***
                                         (2.18)               (1.93)              (3.36)               (3.30)
      Ln(Issue amount)                                        0.263                                   -0.120
                                                              (0.62)                                  (-0.17)
      Subscription Ratio                                      0.121                                    0.178
                                                              (0.81)                                   (0.62)
      Maturity                                             -0.237**                                  -0.503*
                                                             (-2.51)                                  (-1.89)
      Ln(Trading Volume)                                    -0.421*                                   -0.197
                                                             (-1.67)                                  (-0.49)
      IPO                                                    -0.243                                   -2.597
                                                             (-0.46)                                  (-1.46)
      Recent Issuance                                         0.015                                   -0.544
                                                              (0.04)                                  (-0.35)
      DummyAAA                                                0.653                                   -0.102
                                                              (1.24)                                  (-0.12)
      DummyAA+                                                0.266                                   -0.168
                                                              (0.74)                                  (-0.29)
      Leverage                                                0.025                                   -0.176
                                                              (0.02)                                  (-0.10)
      ROA                                                     2.977                                    5.331
                                                              (0.55)                                   (0.67)
      Ln(Asset)                                              -0.098                                    0.433
                                                             (-0.28)                                   (0.85)
      Ln(Sales)                                              -0.045                                   -0.214
                                                             (-0.37)                                  (-1.12)
      Ln(Cash)                                                0.265                                    0.296
                                                              (1.21)                                   (0.99)
      Constant                       -6.646***            -6.414***           -6.012***             -8.059**
                                       (-32.78)              (-2.88)            (-20.61)              (-2.11)
      Observations                       3,252                3,164               1,483                1,447
      R-squared                          0.143                0.147               0.147                0.157
                                                                                                                     46
Table IA2. Difference-in-Difference Analysis Using the Underwriter Rebate Ban: Evidence from the Underwriters
This table reports results of the difference-in-difference tests on how exogenous changes in underwriter rebates due
to the policy shock affect the excess return. Treat equals 1 if the bond is issued by one of the big-four banks in China,
and 0 otherwise. Post equals 1 in the months following the policy shock. Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample.
Columns (3) and (4) use the matched sample that includes only issuers with sequential bond issuances before and after
the event. Heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                Full sample                               Matched sample
     Dependent: Excess Ret                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                 (4)
     Treat                              0.795*             1.127***                 0.835              1.275**
                                         (1.86)                (2.59)               (1.36)              (2.18)
     Post                             5.986***             5.873***              5.986***            5.791***
                                        (20.54)              (19.82)               (13.97)             (13.19)
     Treat ×Post                       -0.759*              -1.210**              -0.985*             -1.427**
                                        (-1.75)               (-2.42)              (-1.85)              (-2.03)
     Ln(Issue amount)                                          0.260                                    -0.142
                                                               (0.63)                                   (-0.22)
     Subscription Ratio                                        0.104                                     0.074
                                                               (0.69)                                   (0.26)
     Maturity                                                -0.168*                                    -0.295
                                                              (-1.87)                                   (-1.33)
     Ln(Trading Volume)                                   -0.569***                                    -0.498*
                                                              (-2.87)                                   (-1.96)
     IPO                                                      -0.315                                    -2.693
                                                              (-0.60)                                   (-1.56)
     Recent Issuance                                           0.180                                    -0.364
                                                               (0.50)                                   (-0.24)
     DummyAAA                                                  0.829                                     0.731
                                                               (1.63)                                   (0.95)
     DummyAA+                                                  0.434                                     0.295
                                                               (1.30)                                   (0.58)
     Leverage                                                  0.667                                    -0.692
                                                               (0.57)                                   (-0.38)
     ROA                                                       1.677                                    -1.716
                                                               (0.30)                                   (-0.20)
     Ln(Asset)                                                -0.341                                    -0.109
                                                              (-1.02)                                   (-0.23)
     Ln(Sales)                                                -0.135                                  -0.368**
                                                              (-1.16)                                   (-2.09)
     Ln(Cash)                                                 0.386*                                   0.581**
                                                               (1.79)                                   (2.02)
     Constant                        -7.064***               -4.176*            -6.752***               -1.854
                                       (-28.53)               (-1.94)             (-17.83)              (-0.50)
     Observations                        3,252                 3,164                1,481                1,445
     R-squared                           0.149                 0.155                0.156                0.169
                                                                                                                       47
Table IA3. The Portfolio Overpricing Difference: Qualified Investor vs. Underwriter Investor
This table reports the average excess return of different investor portfolios: each qualified investor's bond portfolio (column 1), each licensed underwriter's bond
portfolio that includes only bonds it does not underwrite (column 2), and each licensed underwriter's bond portfolio that includes only bonds it underwrites (column
3). We first calculate both the equal-weighted average excess return and the value-weighted average excess return (using bond purchase amount as the weight) for
each institution and then take the average across the institutions in each category. The table also reports t-statistics for the mean difference between (1) and (3) and
between (2) and (3), with *, ** or *** indicating statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                                         Overpricing of bonds      Overpricing of bonds acquired      Overpricing of bonds acquired
                                        acquired by qualified       by licensed underwriters but      by licensed underwriters that
                                              investors                underwritten by others                they underwrite              Difference      Difference
                                                  (1)                            (2)                                 (3)                    (3)­(1)         (3)­(2)
 Equal-weighted portfolio average                -5.04                          -7.39                              -8.48                   -3.45***         -1.10*
                                                                                                                                             (4.46)          (1.94)
 Value-weighted portfolio average                -5.09                          -7.82                              -8.89                   -3.80***         -1.07*
                                                                                                                                             (4.63)          (1.77)
 No. of Institutions                              57                              50                                 50




                                                                                                                                                                      48
Table IA4. Regressions of the Overpricing on Underwriter's Purchases
This table reports regressions of the issuance overpricing on underwriters' purchase share. The dependent variable is
the overpricing measure, Excess return. The independent variable Underwriter Share is the percentage of the
underwriters' purchase of the underlying bond. Underwriter Dummy is an indicator variable for the underwriter's
purchase, which is equal to 1, if Underwriter Share is positive, and 0 otherwise. Heteroscedasticity-consistent t-
statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
   Dependent: Excess Ret                (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
   Underwriter Share                 -3.233***             -3.670***
                                       (-8.07)               (-8.93)
   Underwriter Dummy                                                            -1.252***             -1.275***
                                                                                  (-3.78)                (-3.95)
   Ln(Issue amount)                                         1.040***                                    0.796**
                                                               (3.10)                                    (2.39)
   Subscription Ratio                                      -0.609***                                   -0.323**
                                                              (-4.31)                                    (-2.32)
   Maturity                                                -0.594***                                  -0.623***
                                                              (-5.55)                                    (-5.81)
   Ln(Trading Volume)                                      -1.533***                                  -1.328***
                                                              (-7.74)                                    (-6.78)
   IPO                                                         0.419                                      0.259
                                                               (0.76)                                    (0.47)
   Recent Issuance                                             0.312                                      0.233
                                                               (0.77)                                    (0.58)
   DummyAAA                                                  2.358**                                  2.918***
                                                               (2.35)                                    (2.94)
   DummyAA+                                                  2.371**                                  2.941***
                                                               (2.54)                                    (3.18)
   DummyAA                                                     0.685                                      1.166
                                                               (0.77)                                    (1.32)
   Leverage                                                   -1.361                                     -1.176
                                                              (-1.20)                                    (-1.03)
   ROA                                                        -2.540                                     -2.667
                                                              (-0.56)                                    (-0.58)
   Ln(Asset)                                                   0.130                                      0.126
                                                               (0.52)                                    (0.50)
   Ln(Sales)                                               -0.644***                                  -0.663***
                                                              (-5.29)                                    (-5.40)
   Ln(Cash)                                                 0.749***                                  0.770***
                                                               (4.46)                                    (4.59)
   Constant                          -7.321***              -4.408**            -7.603***             -5.565***
                                      (-38.78)                (-2.35)            (-24.79)                (-2.93)
   Observations                        8,198                   8,057              8,198                   8,057
   R-squared                           0.009                   0.036              0.002                   0.027


                                                                                                                      49
Table IA5. Difference-in-Difference Analysis of the Overpricing with the Grant of an Underwriting License
This table reports the difference-in-difference tests on how the grant of an underwriting license affects institutions'
bidding behavior. The test contains bond issuances that are purchased by all institutional investors, including ten
institutions that obtained their underwriting licenses during our sample period. The observations include all the
successful bidders and bond pairs in each auction. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is Share Purchasek,j,
the shares of the bond j's issue amount acquired by successful bidder k in the auction. The dependent variable in
columns (3) and (4) is Excess returnj, the issuance overpricing of bond j. The independent variable Statusk,j equals 1,
if the bidder k has received an underwriting license at the time of bond j's issuance, and 0 otherwise. The independent
variable Self-underwrittenk,j equals 1 if the bond j is underwritten by institution k, and 0 otherwise. Heteroscedasticity-
consistent t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.


                                                     Dependent:                              Dependent:
                                                 Share Purchasei, j                         Excess returnj
                                              (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)
      Statusk, j                           0.016**                0.006            -0.446               -0.370
                                            (2.06)              (0.73)             (-0.72)             (-0.59)
      Self-underwrittenk, j                                   0.236***                                -1.444**
                                                                (7.36)                                 (-2.08)
      Bond Controls                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Firm Controls                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Institution FE                          Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Year-month FE                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes
      Observations                          42,686              42,686             42,686              42,686
      R-squared                              0.253                0.256             0.248               0.248




                                                                                                                        50
