                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HUMAN CAPITAL AS ENGINE OF GROWTH ­ THE ROLE OF KNOWLEDGE
      TRANSFERS IN PROMOTING BALANCED GROWTH WITHIN AND ACROSS
                              COUNTRIES

                                         Isaac Ehrlich
                                            Yun Pei

                                      Working Paper 26810
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26810


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




This paper is based on lectures given at the Asian Development Bank's Distinguished Speakers
Program in Manila on August 2, 2019 and the Conference on Human Capital and Economic
Development in China, sponsored by the Center for Excellence on Human Capital, Technology
Transfer, and Economic Growth and Development, and the Confucius Institute at the University
at Buffalo on October 5, 2019. The authors are indebted to Yasuyuki Sawada for very helpful
comments on a previous draft and to Sungmin Park for dedicated assistance. The first author
acknowledges the financial support from the Asian Development Bank for his lecture and paper.
The usual ADB disclaimer applies The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Isaac Ehrlich and Yun Pei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Human Capital as Engine of Growth ­ The Role of Knowledge Transfers in Promoting Balanced
Growth Within and Across Countries
Isaac Ehrlich and Yun Pei
NBER Working Paper No. 26810
February 2020
JEL No. F22,F43,J11,J24,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

Unlike physical capital, human capital has both embodied and disembodied dimensions. It can be
perceived of as skill and acquired knowledge, but also as knowledge spillover effects between
overlapping generations and across different skill groups within and across countries. We
illustrate the roles these characteristics play in the process of economic development; the relation
between income growth and income and fertility distributions; and the relevance of human capital
in determining the skill distribution of immigrants in a balanced-growth global equilibrium
setting. In all three illustrations, knowledge spillover effects play a key role. The analysis offers
new insights for understanding the decline in fertility below population replacement rate in many
developed countries; the evolution of income and fertility distributions across developing and
developed countries; and the often asymmetric effects that endogenous immigration flows and
their skill composition exert on the long-term net benefits from immigration to natives in source
and destination countries.


Isaac Ehrlich
Department of Finance and
Department of Economics and
Center for Human Capital
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260-1520
and NBER
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu

Yun Pei
Department of Economics
University at Buffalo, SUNY
Buffalo, NY 14260
yunpei@buffalo.edu
I. Introduction


        In this paper we focus on an underlying aspect of human capital as engine of growth ­ the
role of knowledge transfers ­ which has received only a modest attention in the literature so far.
To introduce the subject matter, we start with an attempted definition of human capital, its distinct
characteristics, and its relevance for the process of economic growth and development as well as
the demographic changes that appear to accompany this process.
        Human capital is "an intangible asset, best thought of as a stock of embodied and
disembodied knowledge, comprising education, information, health, entrepreneurship, and
productive and innovative skills, that is formed through investments in schooling, job training, and
health, as well as through research and development projects and informal knowledge transfers"
(Ehrlich and Murphy, 2007). It is considered a "capital" asset because of its enduring impact on
the returns to knowledge. In this context, it resembles physical capital as well. Both capital assets
are subject to depreciation and obsolescence. And, like physical capital, human capital can also be
formed through investment. However, there are also important differences between the two. We
count 5 major distinctions:
        First, human capital is embodied in people. So unlike physical capital, it is controlled by
individuals with heterogeneous abilities and preferences who choose how and where to employ it
­ in different occupations, markets, non-market activities, or even countries in the case of
international migration.
        Second, being embodied in people, human capital formation cannot be separated from
population formation, by which we mean decisions about family formation, fertility, health, and
longevity.
        Third, unlike physical capital, human capital has limited opportunities to be monetized as
a stock, and cannot serve as a collateral, which imposes financing constraints on investment in its
formation.
        Fourth, unlike physical capital, human capital has both embodied and disembodied
dimensions. It can be manifested as personal knowledge or skill acquired via schooling, training,
and R&D, but also via knowledge spillover effects arising from publicly accessible books and
articles, interaction between people, and informal means of communication. Extant human capital
can thus be productive in creating new human capital, as well as social capital by forming networks


                                                 2
of people. Unlike physical capital, disembodied human capital is thus also likely to generate
positive externalities.
        Finally, because of its latter distinct property, we believe that John Maurice Clark (1923)
was right in proposing that human capital, or knowledge, as he put it, is the only instrument of
production that is not subject to diminishing returns.
        We consider the last two characteristics of human capital to be a key for understanding its
critical role in determining the level and distribution of per-capita income within and across
countries at a point in time, as well as income growth and income distribution within and across
countries over the long haul. We illustrate and defend this argument using three selected topics that
are based on our previous and current research, as we point out in the introduction to each of the
following sections. They include:
        The process of development ­ the shift from a stationary state, or "stagnant" economic
development regime to a persistent growth regime. In this section, we show that an exogenous
shock, such as a technological advance in health maintenance that raises sufficiently the life
expectancy of children, can increase the incentive of parents to make sufficient investments in the
human capital of their children that can trigger a takeoff to persistent and self-sustaining growth.
The underlying reason is that the disembodied human capital level accumulated by the parents'
generation and the knowledge spillover effects they generate, running from parents to their
offspring's generation, are not subject to diminishing returns.
        The relation between income growth and income and fertility inequality in a balanced-
growth, closed economy setting. In this section, disembodied human capital and its spillover
effects across different skill groups can explain the link between per-capita income growth and
income distribution over the transition from stagnant, or lower-growth equilibrium to a higher and
persistent growth equilibrium.
        The relevance of human capital in explaining the net benefits from immigration in a
balanced growth, global equilibrium setting. In this section, disembodied human capital and its
spillover effects can explain the long-term consequences of immigration on per-capita income
growth and income distribution across countries.
        In each of these sections we use an endogenous growth and development framework in
which human capital is the engine, or basic driver, of growth, and knowledge spillover effects are
essential for establishing the existence of balanced growth equilibrium solutions. This framework


                                                 3
enables us to derive the long-term effects of shifts in external triggers and underlying exogenous
factors which affect the equilibrium solutions via the relevant comparative dynamics analysis, and
evaluate their impact on the rate and direction of long-term income growth, income distribution,
and demographic changes within and across countries. It also enables us to assess their welfare
implications and some of their policy ramifications.


II. Human Capital and Long-Term Economic Development


A. From Sporadic to Perpetual Economic Growth


           The story of "growth" in many Western countries, which can be characterized as persistent,
self-sustaining growth in per-capita income, has been in existence for about 150-200 years
following the first industrial revolution, after being more or less stagnant during the Middle Ages.
The transition from stagnation to growth is one way to think about the historical pattern: what can
trigger such shift? And what is the underlying engine of growth that could explain not just the shift
from a low level of development into persistent growth in per-capita income, but also the
demographic transition that has accompanied such a growth pattern in many other parts of the
world in more recent decades?
           The neoclassical growth model mitigated the Malthusian population explosion threat by
showing how it could be balanced by a commensurate growth in physical capital that can produce
a constant level of per-capita income. But that model cannot assure growth in per-capita income
under an exogenously given and constant technology.
           This issue has been taken up by the endogenous growth literature, which recognizes
human capital as the "engine" or driver of growth that assures continuous productivity growth.1
There are alternative stories to explain endogenous growth through persisting R&D investments
(such as Romer, 1990), but one important reason to consider the human capital story is that it can
also explain the "demographic transition" - rising longevity and declining fertility, which is seen
to be an inseparable part of the endogenous growth story.
           In this section, we describe a model of endogenous growth where human capital is the


1 In this section we rely primarily on Ehrlich (1990), and Ehrlich and Lui (1991, 1998) as well as, indirectly, on the seminal human-
capital based approach to endogenous growth by Lucas (1988) and Becker, Murphy and Tamura (1990).

                                                                 4
only instrument of production and its knowledge spillover effects serve as both the engine of
growth and the source of the demographic transition. The model is drawn from Ehrlich and Lui
(1991).


B. Human Capital Formation Process


           In discreet time the human capital production process can be described as a function of
parental inputs augmented by parental transferrable knowledge and a transmission technology, as
follows:
           +1 = ( + 0 ) ,                                                                                                  (1)
where +1 denotes the human capital level of an offspring,  denotes the knowledge
transmission technology,  + 0 represent the parent's (generation) production capacity,
consisting of raw labor (0 ) and the parent's stock of human capital ( ), and  denotes the
share of the production capacity allocated to building knowledge in the offspring.
           Equation (1) formalizes the assumption that human capital is not subject to diminishing
returns since under any given transmission technology () and investment level () there is a linear
relation between parents' accumulated knowledge and what is transmitted to children via parental
knowledge spillover effects. This is a necessary condition for human capital accumulation.2
           Since human capital is the only capital asset in the economy, with a unitary rental cost,
and labor time is normalized at 1, representing all time available for both market and non-market
production, the growth rate of the offspring's potential income is given by
           [(+1 + 0 )/( + 0 )]  (1 +  ) =  ,    .                                                                          (2)
Persistent growth rate in potential income (production capacity), (1+), can thus be positive if,
and only if,  > 1. If   1, the economy will converge on a stagnant-equilibrium level of
development.
           The implication of this analysis is that for an economy to move from a state of "stagnation"
or periodic growth, to a state of endogenous growth, i.e., self-sustaining, persistent growth, it is
necessary for the economy to invest a sufficiently high proportion of its production capacity in


2 Lucas (1988) also incorporates spillover effects in his model, coming from the average agent, but this is neither a necessary nor
a sufficient condition for deriving a growth equilibrium in that model, which is based on an infinitely lived agent.



                                                                5
human capital formation.
        The sufficient investment rate must exceed (1/). Note that this requires a larger share
of productive capacity to be allocated toward human capital investments in the least developed
countries, where the technology level, , is well below that in the developed countries, which may
be a major reason why many of these countries remain in a stagnant equilibrium trap.


C. Endogenous Growth and the Demographic Transition


        By this approach, whether the economy is in a stagnant or a growth regime depends on
the principal objectives motivating parents (or their representative government) to invest in their
children, as well as on external shocks that can bring about a significant change in these incentives.
The study by Ehrlich and Lui (1991), for example, recognizes two major motivating forces
benefitting parents:
        The first is old age support, which can also be thought of as family insurance or
intergenerational trade.
        The second is altruism, or companionship: parents enjoy vicariously both the number of
children they have as well as the quality of the children ­ the human capital or potential income
they help produce in their offspring.
        These motives increase the demand for both the number and quality of children. Whether
parents can receive any of these benefits, however, depends on the children's probability of
survival, or life expectancy.
        Another important feature of the human-capital-based endogenous growth paradigm is
that it can explain the "demographic transition", which invariably accompanies a transition from
stagnation or a low level of "development" to self-sustaining "growth". This sets the model apart
from Lucas (1988), where the agent is infinitely lived, and Romer (1990), where human capital is
exogenous, so there is never any demographic transition.


D. Model Setup


        The decision maker is a representative agent ­ a young parent in an extended-family setup
­ where young parents bear and raise children and provide old-age support to their elderly parents.


                                                  6
Specifically, agents live through 3 periods: from childhood to adulthood, with survival probability
1 , and from adulthood to old age, with probability 2 . The unit costs to young parents of raising
children ( ) and investing in their human capital are  and  , respectively. The extended family
is assumed to be self-insured against the prospects of non-survival of children to adulthood and of
non-survival of adults to old age. Specifically old parents receive compensations from their
surviving adult children (1  ) at a rate +1 that is proportional to the children's attained human
capital (+1 ), so an old parent receives old-age material benefit in the amount 1  +1 +1 .
Each adult child, in turn, pays a premium to the family insurance pool that is adjusted by the old
parent's probability of survival, 2   . Parents are also altruistic toward their children and
derive psychic benefits, or "companionship" from the expected number of children surviving to
adulthood and the human capital stock they helped build in each child.3
           Under the extended family insurance setup, the representative adult's consumption flow
at adulthood (period ) is thus given by
           1
             = ( + 0 )(1 -  -   ) - 2   .                                                                                    (3)
The expected consumption flow parents derive at old age, funded by the earnings of the expected
number of surviving offspring, is given by
           2
           +1 = 1  +1 +1 ,                                                                                                   (4)
and the expected altruistic benefits ( ) the old parents derive from their surviving offspring is
given by
           +1 = (1  ) (+1 ) ,                                                                                                (5)
where  is an altruism, or "companionship" parameter, as termed in Ehrlich and Lui (1991). The
expected life time utility function which the parent maximizes by choosing optimal values of
fertility and investment in human capital is thus
                       1 )1-                       2 )1-
         = [1/(1 - )][(      - 1] + 2 [1/(1 - )]{[(+1    - 1] + [(+1 )1- - 1]}, (6)
where  < 1 is the inverse value of the elasticity of substitution in consumption and 0 <  < 1
is a generational discount factor. The representative parent is then maximizing this expected life-
time utility function with respect to fertility and investment in human capital, and thus the
consumption flows at young and old age, subject to the budget constraints specified in equations


3 Although the probabilities of survival 1 and 2 are in principle endogenously determined by parental investments in their
own, and children's health (see Ehrlich and Kim, 2005, and Ehrlich and Yin, 2013), in this analysis they are treated as funct ions of
the exogenously given state of the arts in medical science.

                                                                 7
(3) and (4) and the conditions assuring the concavity of equation (6). The latter is satisfied subject
to the following parametric restrictions,
         1/(1 - ) >  >   1  .                                                                    (7)
To assure that the choice variables have interior solutions, it is necessary that the elasticity of
substitution in consumption,  < 1 is large enough to exceed the elasticities of the marginal
psychic returns to the quantity of children ( ) and that the latter would exceed the elasticity of the
marginal psychic return to the "quality" of children (). This is because the assumed egalitarian
treatment of all children by altruistic parents implies that the opportunity cost of having another
child accounts for the desire to provide that child the same educational opportunities as those given
to her siblings.


E. Endogenous Growth and the Demographic Transition


         By integrating these elements of an endogenous growth model and solving the dynamic
maximization problem, it can be shown that an upward shock in the life expectancy of children
(1 ) due to technological breakthroughs in health science, like sanitation or pasteurization of milk,
can trigger a takeoff from stagnant to growth equilibrium by raising  sufficiently, so that the
growth rate of human capital ( 1 +  ) exceeds 1 (i.e.,  > 1 ). Put differently, a growth
equilibrium is possible if, and only if, investment in human capital as a fraction of parental
production capacity or potential income exceeds a critical value  > 1/. The model suggests
that this outcome can be facilitated by a technological shock that sufficiently raises life expectancy,
since a higher level of the latter raises one's potential lifetime earnings and thus the expected return
on investment in human capital.
         Initially both investment in children's human capital and fertility go up because of the
wealth effect generated by the shock. But as incomes go up, the net altruistic benefits of having
more children starts declining because the opportunity costs of having a larger number of children
rise relative to the option of having less children, but more educated ones. Put differently, a
substitution effect from "quantity" toward "quality" of children emerges, which can reduce fertility
quite sharply. In the Ehrlich-Lui (1991) model, this substitution effect is further reinforced by the
family-security system whereby children provide old-age support for their old parents. The paper
shows that this old-age support motive can be served more efficiently (i.e., at a lower cost to

                                                   8
parents) by having less children but investing more in their human capital.
           The following charts simulate these results. In Figure 1, a sufficiently large upward shock
in 1 (the probability of survival from childhood to adulthood) can raise the level and slope of
the stagnant equilibrium path of human capital formation (I) from its stagnant equilibrium regime
(point A on the 45 degree line) into a path of perpetual growth equilibrium regime (II). Figure 2
illustrates how this shift to perpetual growth affects the underlying time paths of fertility and
investment in human capital.4 While investment in human capital rises sharply in absolute value,
fertility declines continuously to the point where even a "corner solution" might arise. Technically,
this corner solution occurs only if the elasticity of marginal preference for "quality", as reflected
in the level of human capital attained by offspring, is less than 1 (i.e., if  < 1).5 This constrained
parameter implies that over time the marginal psychic net benefits from having children turns
negative, which justifies a corner solution. Figure 2 illustrates this solution by restricting the value
of fertility () to reach an arbitrarily small positive level (so countries do not disappear). A more
realistic restriction is  = 1, in which case, optimal fertility is always an interior solution and can
reach a level below population-replacement level.
                                                       [Insert Figure 1]
                                                       [Insert Figure 2]
           These results were considered to be harsh results in 1991 when total fertility rates (TFR)
in the most developed economies were above "replacement levels" (a TFR above 2.1 per family).
But today we have 80 countries out of 200 comprising the oldest countries in the world where TFR
is below 2. See Figures 3, 4 and 5.
                                                       [Insert Figure 3]
                                                       [Insert Figure 4]
                                                       [Insert Figure 5]
           What is notable about these figures is that in both the highly developed Western countries
­ the United States (the U.S.) and the United Kingdom (the U.K.), where takeoff to growth started


4
   The parameters used to simulate Figures 1 and 2 are:  = 5.5;  = 0.13;  = 0;  = 0.75;  = 0.5; 1 = 0.6; 2 = 0.6;
 = 0.45 ; 0 = 0.5 . The stationary equilibrium at point A produces optimal values of   = 0.292 and  = 2.793 . A
technological innovation shifting the value of 1 from 0.6 to 1 lifts the dynamic path I to II where   grows without bound while
 in Figure 2 falls to a corner solution set arbitrarily at  = 1.
5 In Figure 2, the declining fertility per family path ends arbitrarily at a rate of 1. An alternative explanation for the decline in

fertility below the replacement level is provided in Ehrlich and Kim (2007a) where fertility is modeled as a decision variable that
is determined jointly with a family formation decision. Fertility trends are shown to be the results of declining trends in the share
of married, relative to single households, as well as in fertility within these families.

                                                                 9
in the early 19th century, and in the fast-developing Asian countries, where takeoff to growth started
in the early 1960s, the evolution pattern of fertility ­ an initial rise followed by a continuing and
persistent decline - tend to be mirror images, as they occur around the same time period in which
the respective economies start taking off from a relatively stagnant equilibrium regime toward a
regime of a self-sustaining growth. And like some South European countries, the developing
countries in East Asia and the Pacific exhibit fertility levels that are below those in the most
developed Western countries (the U.S. and the U.K.), as shown in Figures 3 and 4. One reason for
this result is that the old-age support motive has traditionally played a stronger role in Asian culture
where the family-security system has been an important channel for providing old-age support
before the more recent establishment of a public social security system. This is consistent with the
implications of the family-security model addressed in this section which accentuates the
substitution of quantity for quality of children (see Figure 5). Another factor is that the more
developed Western countries attract a higher share of immigrants coming from sending countries
with high fertility rates, which offsets to some extent the declining fertility rates in the
immigration-receiving countries, whereas in the Asian countries immigration rates have remained
relatively low. This point will be further developed in Section IV of this paper.


F. From Positive to Higher Growth ­ the U.S. Ascendency as Economic Superpower


        Another example of a shock that started a new takeoff from a relatively low growth
equilibrium to a higher and persistent long-term growth regime is the Morrill Act of 1862 in the
U.S. that established for the first time ­ to our knowledge anywhere in the world ­ a public higher
education system. The act led to the formation of the Land Grant university system, which
established most of the major leading public universities in the U.S. (for example, Berkeley, UCLA,
Penn and Michigan State). Unlike the takeoff from a stagnant to a growth equilibrium we discussed
in the previous subsection, which was simulated from a theoretical model where the trigger was
assumed to be an upward shock in the probability of survival from childhood to adulthood, the
trigger implicit in the Morrill Act was the significant reduction in the financing costs of college
education. The land grants made enrollment in higher education possible for all students, especially
those from low and middle-income families, who could not previously afford the prohibitive
tuition costs of higher education in the few exclusive older private colleges in the U.S. that were


                                                  10
accessible primarily to students from wealthy families. A recent paper by Ehrlich, Cook and Yin
(2018) has developed and applied empirically a Lucas-type endogenous growth model of
institutional change indicating that this act may have been a major factor that promoted the rate of
growth of the U.S. in the latter part of the 19th century, and enabled the U.S. to overtake the U.K.
as an economic superpower in the 20th century. The U.K. lagged 50 years behind the U.S. in
launching a comparable system of public universities.


III. Income Growth and Income Distribution6


A. Linking Income Growth and Income and Fertility Distribution


          The homogeneous-agent, human-capital-based endogenous growth model generates
important and testable implications about intergenerational knowledge transfer, the transitional
development phase, and the demographic transition, leading to a balanced growth in per-capita
income. But the model is silent about how the distribution of income evolves over this transitional
phase. This issue has been of major interest in the more traditional development literature. In
particular, Kuznets (1955, 1963) proposed his "inverted-U curve" hypothesis to characterize the
behavior of income inequality in the transition from a lower to a higher development stage. The
ensuing literature, however, has offered conflicting evidence and inference about the Kuznets'
hypothesis and the direction of causality between income growth and income inequality.
          Any model dealing with the income distribution issue must start with a recognition of the
sources of income diversity and why they vary over the development process. While there is a vast
literature dealing with this topic, a major void in this literature is that it has largely overlooked the
endogeneity of not just the level and the distribution of income, but also the level and distribution
of demographic variables over the transition from a stagnant, or low development level to an
endogenous growth equilibrium regime. This is especially important when the Gini coefficient is
used as an inequality measure, since it is a function of both family income inequality and the
distribution of families across income brackets. The latter depends on the distribution of the
relative family group sizes and hence the fertility rates across different family groups.


6This section draws largely from Ehrlich and Kim (2007). See also, Kuznets (1955, 1963), Tamura (1991), Zhong (1998), and
De la Croix and Doepke (2003).

                                                            11
        Following Ehrlich and Kim (2007), we take a holistic approach to deal with this latter
issue, by attempting to explain income growth and income distribution as endogenous outcomes
of a paradigm that allows for heterogeneity across individuals or family groups, and accounts for
what separates these groups as well as what links them together. Human capital remains the engine
of growth and the sole instrument of production in this model, while labor time is normalized at 1,
as in Section II. However, we here assume the existence of different "skill groups" due to
differences in their inherited ability and family background. We recognize three sources of inherent
heterogeneity: (i) differences in learning or production abilities ( ); (ii) differences in income-
                       
yielding "endowments" (0 ) stemming from inherited social status, or wealth; and (iii) differences
in education-financing costs (  ). The latter can be affected by government educational policies
that enable the introduction of social mobility in the model. We abstract from differences in
preferences or external production technologies, since these need not be related to idiosyncratic
personal differences.
        The inherited sources of family differences are what separates the agents in the model.
What links them, however, are knowledge spillover effects across different skill groups. The role
of spillover effects from disembodied human capital thus becomes a central focus of this section.


B. Basic Elements of the Model


        To recognize inherent heterogeneities in the population, we assume for analytical
simplicity that the population is composed of two family types with varying skills, or earning
capacities ( = 1, 2) due to positive assortative mating. Family group 1 is identified as the higher
(initial) skill or leading group, while group 2 is the (initial) lower-skill, or follower group.
                                                                             
Specifically, the two skill groups differ in ability ( ), family endowments (0 ), and unit cost of
investment in human capital as a fraction of potential income (  ), but share same personal and
altruistic preferences. In addition, we also restrict the unit cost of rearing and raising offspring as
a fraction of potential income to be uniformly distributed among all agents to enable a stable
solution to the model, so   = . As in the model presented in the previous section, human capital
is the only productive capital asset in the economy. In this heterogeneous-agents model, however,
we abstract from any uncertainty of survival from childhood to adulthood and assume that agents'
lifespan includes just two effective periods: childhood and adulthood, so all agents live through

                                                  12
these two periods. We further abstract from any need for old age support, although the introduction
of savings in the model would not affect any of its qualitative implications. For analytical
simplicity, we also assume that altruism is the only motive for having children.
        The central assumption in the model is that while the human capital production function
of the top skill group ( = 1) remains the same as that specified in equation (1), the corresponding
production function for the lower skill group ( = 2) is augmented by the social interaction term
(2 )                                                           2
     reflecting the hierarchical knowledge spillover effects (   ) coming from the more
knowledgeable skill group 1:
        2      2 ( 2         1                             
        +1 = 2        2 1-
                  0 +  )   [(0 + 1 )( 1
                                      / )]
                 2 ( 2              2
               2        2  2 2  2 2    2   2 
                    0 +  )(  )    (0 +  )(S ) .                                               (8)
                
In equation (8)  measures investment rate per child as a fraction of the parent's earnings
          2   1   1    2   2
capacity;    (0 +   )/(0 +   ) measures relative production capacity and thus potential
"family income inequality"; 2  1
                                 /2 denotes the relative income-group size in the
population;  stands for the number of workers in the skill group  ; 2
                                                                       2 2
                                                                         is a measure
of the knowledge spillover effect, and  < 1 indicates the latter's intensity.
        The production function (8) expresses the role of two types of spillover effects or social
interactions in production. The first is within families ­ human capital formation crucially depends
on parental inputs, or transfer of knowledge from parents to children. The other is across families
or skill groups indicating the knowledge transmission or learning is also is a social process. The
                 2  2 2
rationale behind      serving as a spillover of knowledge from high- to low-skill groups
                        2   1   1    2   2
is that its first term,    (0 +   )/(0 +   ), measuring the relative earnings capacity of the
two, also indicates the relative gap in knowledge between the two groups and thus the potential
gain to skill group 2 from its social interaction with group 1, while the second term 2  1
                                                                                           /2
is a proxy for the odds of personal interaction between individual members of these skill groups,
which is proportional to their respective population sizes. An alternative interpretation is that 2
captures the interaction intensity, as it represents the ratio of "teachers" (leaders) to "students"
(followers), assuming that agents of type 1 are the effective source of knowledge transfer.
                  2                                                   2  2 2
        Note that   is a measure of "family-income inequality", while      is a
measure of "income-group" or "income-class" inequality, since 2  1
                                                                   /2 represents the
share of the total population () concentrated at the top relative to the bottom income brackets. A


                                                13
third measure of inequality used in the model is the Gini coefficient. In a population comprised of
just two income groups the Gini coefficient becomes   (2
                                                         2 )/[(1 + 2
                                                                     )(1 + 2 )], which
                             2
is monotonically rising with   and falling with 2 .


C. Objective Function and Optimization


        The representative family heads ( = 1, 2) in this model maximize their lifetime utility
comprised of the utility from their own life-time consumption as well as the altruistic benefits they
are assumed to derive from their offspring's potential lifetime income (production capacity):
                                             1-                                   1-
        ( , +1 ) = [1/(1 - )] [( )                - 1] + [1/(1 - )] [(+1 )             - 1],     (9)

with respect  and  , where
                               
         = (0 +  )(1 -    -     ),                                                              (10)
is the parent's own lifetime consumption benefits at adulthood (period 1), and
                                       
        +1  ( ) (0 + +1 ) ,   >    = 1,                                                         (11)
is the parent's altruistic benefits from having children. Note that equation (11) is similar to the
altruism function (5) in Section II, with two exceptions: the psychic benefits from offspring's well-
being are specified as a function of the latter's potential income, rather than just their human capital
attainments, since this specification can be shown to allow for the existence of equilibrium under
both stagnant and growth regimes. Also the restriction  = 1 is made in order to guarantee
interior solutions in fertility, which are necessary to preserve heterogeneity in the model. As in
equation (3),   and  are fractions of the parent  's production capacity that are spent on
raising and investing in the human capital of each child; and   is the unit cost of financing
educational investment per child. Savings can be added as a separate choice variable so that
earnings may stand for income.
        Solving the first-order conditions we can obtain optimal interior solutions for fertility,  ,
and human capital investments,  , over two possible stable equilibrium regimes and a transition
path connecting the two. Stability is guaranteed by the force of the knowledge spillover effects
      2
term,   , and the parameter restrictions assumed in this model:
        1/(1 - ) >  >  = 1.                                                                      (12)



                                                  14
D. Equilibrium Regimes7


            Recall that human capital is the sole productive asset in this model, and time at work is
normalized at 1 to reflect potential income in both market and non-market activities. In this case,
equilibrium depends on the way human capital evolves over the generations. Equations (10) and
(11) represent a recursive model, since the leading group 1 arrives at all of its choices
independently as a function of its own parameters, while the following group 2's fertility choices
                                                                        2 )
are affected by those of family 1 through the social interaction term, (    . From the human
capital formation function and the optimal investment condition for group 1, we derive an explicit,
linear law of motion of human capital for this group:
            1                                              1
            +1 = [1 (1 /1 )/( - 1)] 1
                                      + [1 (1 /1 )/( - 1)] 0 .                                          (13)
Since the economy is dictated by family 1, the equation of motion (13) indicates the existence of
two equilibrium regimes, depending on the magnitudes of the model's basic parameters: If the
      1
slope +1 /1
            =  1 (1 /1 )/(1) = 1 1           1
                                  exceeds 1,  grows exponentially without
                                                                                             1
bound and the economy is in a persistent growth equilibrium regime. If the slope is below 1, 
becomes constant and a stagnant-equilibrium regime ensues. The transitional development phase
connecting the regimes' steady states is supported by the same parameter set that sustains the
growth regime.


            1. Stagnant Equilibrium (SE) Steady State
            A stagnant equilibrium can be shown to exist when levels of the parameter set { /  ,   }
are sufficiently low, so the optimal value of investment in human capital of family group 1 (1 ) is
below the critical level enabling a takeoff to growth, while fertility rates are relatively high when
compared to their values at the growth equilibrium steady state, as shown in Section II. Except for
population size (  ), all control and state variables, including the equilibrium income and fertility
inequality measures are then constant over time.
            Figure 6 illustrates the conditions that must be satisfied in this equilibrium regime. A stable
stagnant equilibrium exists if the equation of motion ­ the evolution paths of the human capital of
                                      
each family group +1 as a function of  , intersects the 45-degree line from above at a slope


7   For a more detailed technical analysis of the equilibrium conditions, see Ehrlich and Kim (2007).

                                                                 15
 ()      
     +1 / < 1. This solution seems to reflect by and large the long historical period
known as the "middle ages". Note that the stagnant equilibrium regime is consistent with
occasional fluctuations in per-capital income and distribution as a result of changes in external
conditions. However, small parameter shifts are not sufficient to generate persistent growth in per-
capital income or the long-term distributions of income or fertility. This may explain the absence
of a continuous growth and distributional changes over the "Middle Ages."
                                          [Insert Figure 6]


        2. Transitional Development Phase
        An upward shock in { /  ,   } may trigger a takeoff into a growth equilibrium regime
by raising the slopes of the evolution paths of human capital for each family above 1, which is also
the condition for attaining a growth equilibrium regime. While the parameter values that may
trigger a takeoff guarantee the existence of a growth equilibrium steady state, however, the effects
on the pattern of the dynamic paths of income and fertility distributions will depend on the type of
shock that triggers the takeoff; whether the shock is uniform and occurs synchronously across the
family groups; whether it benefits one group more than the other; or whether it impacts one of the
family groups with a lag. A skill-biased technological change that generates an upward increase in
the technology of knowledge transfer ( ) and affects favorably the higher skill group can produce
an inverted-U pattern of the evolution of income inequality over the transition phase, while
government subsidization of education that affects favorably the lower-skill group can produce a
U-shaped pattern of the evolution of income over that phase. However, all takeoff triggers affect
the fertility distribution in the same direction (see below).


        3. Growth Equilibrium (GE) Steady State
        Here human capital formation grows continuously and without bound, as does per-capita
income, while fertility and fertility inequality are falling. The necessary condition for attaining a
growth equilibrium steady state is that the optimal investment in human capital must be sufficiently
     
high  > 1/. The necessary conditions for attaining a balanced growth equilibrium are opposite
to those for obtaining a stagnant equilibrium steady state: (i). the evolution path of human capital
                                        ()      
must have a slope higher than 1, i.e.,      +1 / > 1, as is the case in Figure 6; and (ii).
the fertility rate of a specific skill group ( ) cannot be increasing with the group size,   . Further

                                                  16
increases in the growth rate would again require an upward shock in one of the basic parameters
of the model ( /  and   ). The impact on the distribution of income and fertility generally
depends on the parameter effecting the change as well as the way it impacts the two family groups.


E. Some Testable Implications


        The model offers several propositions and insights concerning observed empirical
evidence about the pattern of long-run income growth and distribution as well as accompanying
demographic trends.


        1. Convergence in Marginal Growth Rates of Income and Fertility
        The analysis implies that both fertility rates and marginal rates of change of human capital
must converge over time across families in any stable steady state. Formally, the analysis implies:
        1  2
         =     ; 
            1               2
        1       1    1 1 2      2    2 2 2 
         = (+1 / ) =   =   (+1 / ) =   (S ) .                                                   (14)
The rationale follows partly from the definition of a stable steady state in which the distribution of
both income and fertility attains a stable level, but also from the role of knowledge spillover effects
which function like the glue or magnet that holds equal the rates of change of both the population
groups and their human capital growth, thus eliminating the prospect of a blowup in the distribution
of both. Figure 7 provides a graphical proof of equation (14). If there is an exogenous shock in the
economy that lowers the marginal rate of growth of human capital for the representative agent in
                                     2
group 2, the income inequality ratio   will rise in favor of group 2, which will then intensify the
                           2
knowledge spillover effect   flowing from group 1 to 2. The process would continue until the
marginal changes in the growth rates of human capital of the two groups equalize again. The same
                                                                            1
applies to the stability of the ratio of the populations of the two groups (  /2 ) in the steady state,
which can be maintained only if 1  2
                                 =  . Empirical evidence indicates that such convergence is

typically observed following an external shock, such as the digital revolution in the U.S. that
temporarily may raise significantly income inequality, despite the tendency of inequality to stay
constant over long periods of time. The secular decline in average fertility has also tended to reduce
substantially the coefficient of variation of fertility over time in the U.S.
                                           [Insert Figure 7]

                                                  17
          2. Income Inequality in Less Developed Countries
          In a stable stagnant-equilibrium steady state, family-income inequality, denoted by   (),
as well as the families' relative human capital attainments equal their relative inherited
endowments. This result can be shown to follow from equation (14), the solution for the optimal
values of investment in human capital, whereby 
                                                = [  /  (1)], and the need to restrict the
values of the unit cost of fertility as a proportion of income to be the same for both skill groups
( 1 =  2 ). This gives the following interesting result:
                         1  2
           2 () = 1
                    /2
                       = 0 /0 .                                                               (15)
This result implies that status differences are the key factor determining family-income inequality
in economies that are stagnant over long periods, an inference that seems compatible with
historical evidence, such as the pre-industrial revolution period in Europe. Equation (15) is also
                                                                       1  2
dynamically stable: If a parameter shock lowers 2 , raising 1
                                                              /2
                                                                 above 0 /0 , then  2 and
 2 would also rise initially. This would raise 2 and in turn increase 2
                                                                        and lower 1
                                                                                    /2
                                                                                       until
the initial equilibrium is restored.


          3. The Impact of Investment Efficiencies on Income-Group Distribution
          By combining equations (14) and (15) and using the optimal values of investments in
human capital and fertility (derived through the first-order optimality conditions) we can show that
the value of the income-group inequality measure in the stagnant equilibrium steady state is just a
function of the relative ratios (1 /1 )/(2 / 2 ) , which we term the relative "investment
efficiencies" of investing in the human capital of skill groups 1 and 2. Specifically, the group-
income distribution is found to be a function of the relative investment efficiencies of the two
groups:
          S 2 ()   2 ()2 () = [(1 /1 )/(2 / 2 )]1/  ( 1 / 2 )1/ .                             (16)
The same result is obtained for the value of the income-group inequality at the growth equilibrium
steady state, which converges on the same value this measure obtained in the stagnant growth
equilibrium steady state, provided the relative values of the parameters  and   associated with
the skill groups  = 1, 2 remain unchanged. This implies the strong result that if relative
investment efficiencies of the two groups ( 1 / 2 ) remain the same at the stagnant and growth
equilibria steady states, the income-group inequality measure would also become equal at these
steady states.

                                                 18
F. Main Takeaways


         The distribution of personal income is highly linked to the distribution of human capital
formation measures, not just at a point in time and over the lifecycle, as a vast literature in labor
economics has documented, but also under dynamic, long-term conditions that allow for the
process of development and sustainable growth as well as their accompanying demographic
changes. Our analysis suggests that both processes, and thus the pattern of the distribution of
human capital attainments and family income are driven not just by the heterogeneous conditions
separating the different population groups ­ what we term in this analysis as skill groups ­ but also
the effects of knowledge spillover effects generated by the disembodied component of human
capital that binds them.
         No general propositions can be established regarding the shape of the distribution of
income inequality over the transition from a stagnant to a growth equilibrium. The shape of the
dynamic path depends on the type of shock that triggers the transition and the way it impacts
different family groups. While a skill-biased technological shock can generate an inverted-U shape,
government educational policies favoring lower income groups can produce a U-shaped path.
However, in all cases the fertility distribution is expected to become attenuated over the transition
to a steady state.
         Moreover, the dynamic evolution of the level and distribution of family income over the
development process, and the distributional measures we use to quantify them, cannot be fully
understood without recognizing their linkage to the corresponding trends in the distribution of
fertility rates which are critical for understanding trends in income-group inequality or the Gini
coefficient over time. The underlying trends in the level and distribution of fertility affect
differently different measures of income distribution that are more sensitive to changes in the
population shares of different skill groups in the economy.


IV. Equilibrium Migration and Human Capital and Physical Capital Formation


A. Is Human Capital Relevant for Immigration?



                                                 19
             The relevance of human capital to immigration harkens back to our point in the
introductory section that human capital cannot be separated from people. People invest in this asset
in order to guarantee a larger earning capacity for both themselves and their offspring. But they
have the choice to do that in the place where they were born, or seek a higher return on their
investments by moving to even distant locations where they have opportunities for a better life.
             So migration, whether within or across countries, is itself a kind of investment in human
capital that has potential returns but also significant costs ­ financial and emotional ­ to individuals
who choose to migrate.
             There is one implication that immediately arises from this feature of immigration: those
who freely choose to migrate are expected to obtain a positive rate of return on migrating. But this
may not always be the consequence for the natives of the affected destination (receiving) or source
(sending) countries. So understanding the "equilibrium" properties of immigration is an economic
challenge which also has important policy implications. This is the topic of our current evolving
immigration study.8


B. International Migration ­ Common Features and Some Stylized Facts


             International migration has been a persisting phenomenon since the dawn of civilization.
Net migration is typically from source countries with high fertility and low human capital
formation to destination countries having lower fertility and persistently higher human capital and
per-capita income levels. While immigration has been growing dramatically in recent decades ­
by 50% worldwide from 2000 to 2017 ­ trends may shift, as the long-term share of immigrants in
the U.S. population indicates (see Figure 8). Immigration may also come in waves ­ there were 30
million asylum seekers in 2016 alone.
                                                        [Insert Figure 8]
             There are also significant variations in the volume of immigration within and across
different regions of the word. Asian and the Pacific countries are the largest region where
immigrants live, due to internal migration to destinations such as the Russian Federation and
Australia. Asia as a whole, however, is a net migration region with India and the People's Republic



8   This section builds on our working paper (Ehrlich and Pei, 2019) that is a sequel to an earlier study by Ehrlich and Kim (2015).

                                                                 20
of China being the largest source countries (see Figure 9). One would expect a useful model of
immigration to account for both the persistence of immigration and its variability across time and
space. This is the focus of our analysis in this section.
                                                        [Insert Figure 9]


C. The Approach We Take to Explain and Assess These Features


             There is a vast literature on immigration, most of which focuses on its short-term effects
in the context of a static model or the neoclassical growth model. The common feature of both
approaches is the treatment of immigration as an exogenous variable. This approach is evident
with some exceptions even in the recent authoritative report by the National Academy of Sciences'
panel on the economic and fiscal consequences of immigration (see NAS, 2017).9
             The basic innovation of the analysis in this section is treating both migration and economic
growth as endogenous variables ­ coming from individual and family choices that are subject to
external triggers ­ and accounting for the economic consequences of such triggers, especially in
the long term. We model immigration in an open-economy setting that explores its consequences
on income growth, income distribution within and across countries, and on the net benefits from
immigration to the native populations in both the source (S) and destination (D) countries ­ a term
known as "the immigration surplus" (IS).
             The following supply and demand analysis illustrates how to figure out the IS for the
destination and source countries in the short term, under static conditions.


             1. Why is the IS Expected to be Positive in Country D in the Short Term?
             In the short term, D's economy has a fixed quantity of technology and physical capital, so
its labor demand curve is downward sloping. Any rise in labor supply due to migration lowers
labor wages. Consequently labor income falls.
             But total output rises: more labor yields more output, so aggregate income rises. There are
therefore conflicting consequences for natives. The interesting implication of the conventional
literature on immigration is that the net effect on natives as a whole is positive ­ this is summarized



9   For fair disclosure, Isaac Ehrlich was a member of this panel.

                                                                     21
by the well-known result that the short-term immigration surplus is positive.
        The reason is that while labor income falls as a result of diminishing returns to labor, the
returns to physical capital rise. The higher return to physical capital outweighs the fall in labor
income because of the larger output generated by immigrants who increase the labor supply and
thus aggregate output in the economy. Immigrants are willing to accept the lower wages they
induce at the destination country, since these wages remain higher than those in their home
countries.
        The net effect is what the literature calls the "immigration surplus" (see e.g., Borjas, 1995).
This is the area E in Figure 10. Immigration thus creates a positive IS in the receiving country, D.
By the converse logic, however, the immigration surplus must be negative in the sending country,
S, in the short term, before any adjustments in the physical or human capital stocks take place.
                                          [Insert Figure 10]


        2. Limitations of the Static, Short-Term Immigration Surplus Measure
        The short-term IS has some limitations that need to be highlighted. First, it considers only
the net income benefits to the natives, not to the immigrants. This is the case in both D and S.
        Second, as Figure 10 shows, the immigration surplus in country D can be positive if, and
only if, labor wages fall. Immigration yields a net gain to capital owners but a loss to workers who
do not own capital. Put differently, IS ignores distributional effects.
        Third, a major limitation of the immigration surplus highlighted by our analysis is that it
treats immigration as an exogenous variable and ignores what has triggered it, as well as its
dynamic, long-term consequences. A major result of our study is that the long-term consequences
of immigration can be different from its short-term effects due to its influence on the average level
of human capital and its spillover effects across the destination and source countries.
        We also compute the immigration surplus after extending the concept to account for
interaction effects ­ a two-way knowledge transfer between natives and immigrants ­ as a result
of complementarities in knowledge formation ("diversity effects"), which enhance human capital
formation. This concept is a natural extension of knowledge transfer as an enhancer of human
capital formation and economic growth.


D. Elements of the Model


                                                  22
        Our story involves two countries ­ destination (D) and source (S) ­ which are both in a
growth equilibrium regime. As a point of reference we allow for free international mobility of
labor. We allow for two periods of life ­ childhood and parenthood. Each country ( = , ) also
has two segmented good-producing sectors (  = 1, 2 ) ­ high-tech and low-tech ­ which
exclusively employ high-skilled and low-skilled workers ( = 1, 2), respectively. In country D,
these workers include immigrants as well. Immigrants' children, however, are treated as natives.
        D is more developed technologically than S: both the technologies of knowledge transfer
() and the technologies of goods production () are higher in D relative to S ( >  and
 >  ,  = 1, 2), while, by definition, the corresponding technologies are higher for the high-
skilled relative to lower-skilled workers and the high-tech sector, relative to the low-tech sector,
(1 > 2 and 1 > 2 ,  = , ) respectively. At the same time we need to assume that the
unit costs of fertility as a fraction of potential income must be higher in D relative to S, but are the
same across the two skill groups within each country (  >   for all ). These are necessary
modeling conditions that must be imposed to obtain interior, balanced-growth, equilibrium
solutions that allow for the possibility of continuous migration across countries while also
preserving the populations of the different skill groups within countries.
        The global economy is thus comprised of 6 distinct population groups and representative
decision-makers: high- and low-skilled natives in two countries, including high- and low-skilled
immigrants. Parents are altruistic. They want better life for their children. So they make
consumption, bequest, fertility, and human-capital investment decisions, as well as migration
decisions. Children thus benefit from both parental human capital investment and any bequests
they receive in adulthood. Optimal immigration is determined at the point where the net utility
benefits to those who choose to migrate from S to D are equally productive on the margin as those
who choose to stay in S ­ an arbitrage condition.


        1. Human Capital Spillover Effects and Equilibrium Migration
        To derive a balanced growth equilibrium in D and S, we must allow for spillover effects
of human capital, not just between parents and offspring or across skill groups within each country
(including the immigrant groups in D), but also across countries. International spillover effects
may include financial remittances. But we focus especially on the role of knowledge transfers via

                                                  23
spillover effects. In our benchmark model they are one-sided and hierarchical: they flow from the
high-skill sector to the low-skill sector within countries, and from each sector in D to the
corresponding one in S, due to the superior technologies of producing both human capital and
industrial products in D relative to S. The magnitudes of these spillover effects are proportional to
the weighted average of human capital in D relative to S, where the weights are the relative
population sizes of the relevant skill groups. The larger the size of each skill group ­ including
immigrants ­ in D, the bigger the spillover effects on the corresponding groups in S.
        The one-sided spillovers are also gravitational: they pull all skill groups within and across
countries together into equilibrium growth paths that grow at the same rate over time. This assures
the existence of balanced growth global equilibrium that avoids "corner solutions".


        2. The Formal Setup in the Benchmark Model
        Formally, our specification of the human capital formation process and associated
spillover effects are given by the following 6 production functions of 6 skill groups of workers in
the global economy: 2 skill groups of natives in 2 countries ( = , ;  = 1, 2); and 2 skill groups
of immigrants ( = ;  = 1, 2). The corresponding production functions are:
          1            1   1
        +1 = 1                                         for skilled natives in D,               (17a)

                          1
        2         2 2 2 2
        +1    =      ( )                               for unskilled natives in D,             (17b)

          1            1    1
        +1 = 1                                         for skilled immigrants in D,            (17c)

                                      1
        2           2 2 2
        +1    =   2   ( )                              for unskilled immigrants in D,          (17d)

                                    2
          1            1   1    1
        +1 = 1   ( )                                   for skilled natives in S,               (17e)

                                    2         1
        2           2 2 2                2
        +1    =   2   ( )               ( )            for unskilled natives in S,             (17f)
                                                                               
where  is the attained level of human capital of the 6 skill groups;  is the share of earning
capacity that parents in these groups invest in each child, and  are the endowed knowledge
transfer technologies which augment the productivity of the corresponding investments in human
         
capital  . As indicated earlier, the knowledge-production-and-transfer technology is higher in D


                                                  24
relative to S,  >  , while it is also higher for the high-skilled relative to the lower-skilled
workers within each country, 1 > 2 .
          The spillover effects in equations (17b) and (17d)-(17f),  , are proportional to the
relative human capital attainments of the interacting groups, weighted by their corresponding
population shares ­ the equivalent of the knowledge spillover effect terms in equation (8).10 The
spillover effects flow from the higher to the lower skill group within D and S, and from skill  in
D to the respective skill  in S. These effects are subject to diminishing returns:   < 1.


          3. Optimization and Arbitrage Condition
          Each representative parent in country  = {, } and skill group  = {1, 2} is assumed to
maximize the utility of own consumption and the psychic returns from altruistic sentiments. Note
that the altruism function in this model is expanded to account for the utility to parents from the
bequest of physical capital they leave for their children, which becomes the physical capital
endowment inherited by the offspring's generation. Formally, the maximization problem for each
of the heads of the 6 population groups comprising the world's population is maximizing
                                1-                                     1-
            = [1/(1 - )]( )           + [1/(1 - )] (+1 )                    ,                (18)
where the altruism benefits are given by
                                                        1-
          +1 =  ( ) (+1 +1 ) (+1 +1 )                        ,                               (19)
                                                                                              
subject to the budget constraint on native parents' lifetime consumption ( ) and bequest (+1 ),
                                                                                   
           +  +1 =   + (1 -    -     )   ,                                                   (20)
and the production functions of human capital (17) and high-tech and low-tech goods:
                                 1-
           =   ( ) (  )                  ,                                                   (21)
                  
where  and  are the number of children and investment of human capital per child, and
  and   are the unit costs of raising and financing a child's educational investments,
respectively. In the goods production function (21),   denotes the productivity parameter, or
                                                                        
production technology augmenting goods production, and   stands for the effective labor


10   More Specifically, the relevant spillover effects are: 2
                                                               = (1 1
                                                                       + 1 1
                                                                            )/(2  2
                                                                                     +    ) ; 2
                                                                                        2 2
                                                                                                =
(1 1
     - 1 1 )/( 2 2
                   2 2
                -   )                       ;     1
                                                 = (  +   )1 1    1 1 /( 1 1
                                                                           -  
                                                                               1 1 )
                                                                                      ;  and  2
                                                                                                =
 2 2    2 2 /( 2 2 2 2
(  +   )         -   ).


                                                   25
input in production, which, in country D includes immigrants as well. While we assume that  
is higher in D relative to S (see Section IV.D), the ratio  1 / 2 must be equal across the high-
tech and low-tech sectors in each country.
           For migrants, the optimization problem is the same, except that the budget constraint is
given by
                                                                                                                     
           +  +1 = (1 -   )  + (1 -    -     -   )   , (22)
where   and   stand for migration costs in terms of foregone wage and nonwage income
(opportunity and transaction costs on assets), respectively. The arbitrage condition for the
representative migrant underlying the decision to migrate from S to D is given by
               1-                      1-            1-                   1-
           ( )          + (+1 )              = ( )             + (+1 )             .                                       (23)
As we showed in Section II, the necessary condition for attaining a balanced growth equilibrium
is that the rate of investment in human capital as a fraction of production capacity of the leading
skill group in country D must exceed a critical level, given by11
                    1                        
           +1/ = 1 (  ) = (  ) (1 / 1 )/( - 1) = (1 +  ) > 1.                                                              (24)
           This model is too complex to be solved analytically via any closed-form solutions. We
therefore resort to simulation analysis to solve for the key control and state variables of the model.
What facilitates the existence of general equilibrium interior solutions, which include an
equilibrium flow and stock of migrants are: (i) the knowledge spillover effects running from the
top skill group in the high-tech sector of country D (which includes high-skilled migrants as well)
to both its counterpart in country S and the lower skill group in the low-tech sector in country D
(which includes low-skilled migrants as well); and (ii) the similar knowledge spillover effects
running from the top skill group in the high-tech sector in country S to the lower skill group in the
low-tech sector in the same country. The global equilibrium, stabilized by hierarchical knowledge
spillover effects, is illustrated in Figure 11.
                                                     [Insert Figure 11]


           4. Extended Model: Recognizing Spillover Effects from Diversity
           Our baseline model is based on the premise that knowledge spillover effects are largely

11 Additional constraints must be imposed on the ratios of human capital investment efficiencies, and goods production efficiencies
to be equal across all skill groups within and across countries, i.e., (1 /1 )/(2 / 2 ), and  1 / 2 must be equal across countries
( = , ) in order for the required balanced growth equilibrium to exist.

                                                                26
hierarchical, running from the population group with the highest level of acquired knowledge to
groups with lesser attained knowledge, which can therefore benefit from knowledge spillover
effects. However, knowledge-transfers can also be two-sided, or interactive, as well as hierarchical.
The interaction between immigrants and natives can produce more human capital because of
complementarities in knowledge production, or two-way spillover effects, between the diverse
interacting groups, essentially because diversity in the process of knowledge formation is itself a
source of efficiency in knowledge creation.
             A formal way to express the benefits from diversity in knowledge formation is by
modifying the knowledge transfer technological parameter  in equation (1) to account for the
two-way interaction variable   , as follows:
                              
              (  ) =  (1 +   ) ,                                                                                         (25)
where   =  /(  +   ) represents the share of the immigrants' stock in country D's
population.
             While diverse workers may raise communication costs due to differences in language and
culture, the interaction between natives and immigrants of the same skill level raises the
productivity of knowledge-generation, especially across workers of the same skill level who
acquired their knowledge and skill in independent environments (the classical example being the
Manhattan project). We consider these diversity effects in our extended model, when estimating
the relevant immigration surplus implied by that model.12


E. Numerical Solutions of the Benchmark Model and the Impact of Parameter Shifts


             Table 1 presents numerical solutions of the global equilibrium system illustrated in Figure
11, generated by calibrated simulations using data associated with the average groups of source
and destination countries in Asia and the Pacific from 1962 to 2017. The group of destination
countries and economies include Australia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong,
China; while the group of source countries include the countries of origins of immigrants in these
destination countries and economies.
                                                        [Insert Table 1]


12   Some evidence on favorable productivity effects of diversity is provided in Alesina, Harnoss and Rapoport (2016).

                                                                27
        The top row records the steady-state solutions for the control and state variables of the
benchmark model ­ fertility, investment in human capital, the growth rate of human and physical
capital, the country- and skill-specific knowledge spillover effects, and the share of high-skilled
migrants in the total stock of migrants residing in the destination countries. The latter variable
exerts a critical influence on the long-term net benefits of immigration for the destination and
source countries, respectively. The lower rows of Table 1 indicate the way the equilibrium values
of the same control and state variables change as a consequence of exogenous shocks in some of
the basic parameters of the model. These shocks can also be thought of as representing two main
immigration-inducing factors:
        i. Pull Factors. For example, a skill-biased technological shock (SBTS) ­ the
digital/internet revolution starting in the late 1960s ­ which we interpret as shifting upward the
technology of knowledge generation and the technological prowess of the high-skilled workers in
both D and S ­ 1 and 1 . This shock is shown to increase the rate of growth of human and
physical capital, and thus income per-capita as well, in both D and S, as illustrated in the second
row of Table 1.
        Another pull factor illustrated in the third row of Table 1 is a sharp drop in the fertility
level in the destination country due to exogenous factors, such as a structural change in the
economy that induces a larger participation of women in the labor force, and thus raises the
opportunity costs of bearing and raising children,   . This latter effect also generates an upward
change in the growth rate of human and physical capital, largely because it induces a decline in
fertility, but a rise in parental investments in human capital per child (a quantity-quality
substitution effect) and thus in per-capita income in both D and S.
        ii. Push Factors. The one we illustrate in the fourth row of Table 1 is an adverse
productivity shock due to war, famine or political instability in the source country, captured by a
fall in the technological parameter affecting goods production in both sectors of the source country
­ a downward shift in the parameters   . This change initially raises aggregate income in D and
lowers it in S, but causes no growth effects in either D or S.


F. Long-Term Effects of Immigration Triggers on the IS under the Benchmark Model


        In the static context, the effects of any immigration triggers on the short-term immigration

                                                 28
surplus are always positive in D and negative in S, as predicted by the conventional, or neoclassical
models of immigration. In the context of our model, however, where both growth and immigration
as well as their basic determinants are endogenous variables, the static analysis cannot predict the
long-term evolution of the immigration surplus following a change in immigration generated by a
specific immigration trigger. To do that, we need to assess the level and direction of changes in the
immigration surplus by isolating from the total effect of the trigger on the economy, as summarized
in Table 1, the "pure" immigration effects induces by the rise in migration flows of high-skilled
and low-skilled workers from S to D. To do this, we assess the percentage difference between the
unrestricted total effects of any immigration trigger and the latter's hypothetical effects if
immigration flows were restricted to remain unchanged at their initial equilibrium levels. Table 2
summarizes the dynamic effects of these "pure" immigration effects in the context of our
benchmark model.
                                           [Insert Table 2]
         Generally, the long-term effects of immigration changes on the IS depend on type of the
external shock ­ the pull or push factors that have triggered them. Under a skilled-biased
technological shock, which is a pull factor, the IS rises in D and falls in S. This is essentially
because SBTS induces a rise in the skill composition of migrants ­ the share of high-skilled
migrants in the total flow and stock of skilled workers in the population. Some evidence supporting
the validity of this result is illustrated in Figure 12 showing that in four of the largest destination
countries ­ the U.K., France, Australia, and Canada, the weighted averages of the skill composition
of the migrant population have even exceeded those of the total domestic populations in the
corresponding countries over the period 1975-2010 ­ a period in which the digital revolution may
have triggered a SBTS shock in the destination countries. More importantly, this induced-
immigration effect raises the average human and physical capital stocks in the economy, and thus
the level of the per-capita income in D, which is the key determinant of the level and direction of
the change in the immigration surplus. The rise in the skill composition of emigration from S exerts
the opposite effects in S, which experiences a "brain drain". Consequently, the immigration surplus
in S falls, while that in D rises.
                                          [Insert Figure 12]
         Under a downward fertility shock in D or an adverse productivity shock in S, the
immigration surplus falls in D and rises in S. This is because both shocks raise the volume of


                                                  29
immigration flows from S to D, without any increase in their skill composition. Since immigrants
come from source countries where the average level of human and physical capital is lower by our
model, the corresponding immigration waves into D thus lower the average per-capita human and
physical capital levels in D, causing a decline in the immigration surplus in D. But the higher
population of skilled and unskilled workers in D raise the intensity of the knowledge spillover
effects running from D to S, which raises the average human capital in S. The immigration surplus
in S thus increases.
        In general, under the benchmark model, immigration triggers generally produce
asymmetric changes in the immigration surplus in the destination and source countries D and S.
The underlying reason is that individual migrants do not internalize the externalities generated by
the spillover effects of their decision to migrate on the native populations in both their home and
destination countries.


G. Long-Term Effects of Immigration Triggers on the IS under the Extended Model


        Allowing for spillover effects from diversity, which generate complementarities in
knowledge production between migrants and natives, alters to some extent the level and direction
of the induced immigration effects of the pull and push factors considered in the previous section.
        First, any external shock that increases immigration from S to D is expected to raise the
growth rate of human capital formation in D, and thus in per-capita income in D. The knowledge
spillover effects running from the increased levels of the skill groups in D assure that the growth
rate of per-capita income will rise in S as well, as the growth rates of all skill groups ultimately
converge on that of the top skill group in D. However, the net effects on the immigration surplus
also depend on the impact of the trigger on the skill composition of workers in the two countries,
as indicated by Table 3.
                                          [Insert Table 3]
        Under a skill-biased technological shock, the asymmetry in the consequences of the SBTS
trigger between D and S remains: while the gain in the immigration surplus becomes larger in D ­
it rises by 1.28% in D after 10 periods in the extended model relative to 1.14% in the benchmark
model ­ there is still a loss in the immigration surplus in S due to reduction in the population share
of high-skilled natives and thus in the average corresponding levels of human and physical levels


                                                 30
and per-capita income. Indeed, the loss level remains similar to that under the benchmark model:
-14.12% after 10 periods, relative to -14.11% in the benchmark model.
        Under a downward fertility shock in D, the immigration surplus now turns positive rather
than negative as it was in the benchmark model, while it continues to be positive in country S. This
is a win-win outcome due to the assumed interactive diversity effects of immigration in the
receiving country. This may provide some explanation to the receptiveness of a number of
European countries to immigration surges in recent decades.
        Under an adverse productivity shock in S, the immigration surplus is found to turn positive
in D for 3 consecutive periods, but it then slides down in a negative direction. The initial gain in
the immigration surplus is due to the interactive diversity effects, while the later loss is due to the
lower average human capital of migrants relative to those of the natives in D, which outweighs the
diversity benefits. The immigration surplus continues to be positive in the sending country, S.


H. Policy Implications


        1. Asymmetries in the Net Gain from Immigration across Destination and Source
Countries
        Our simulations, especially under the benchmark model, reveal that changes in the IS in
D and S tend to be asymmetrical in response to both pull and push factors not just in the short run,
but in the long run as well. This calls for an explanation, which we take up in the next subsection.
        For example, a SBTS raises IS in D and lowers it in S, while the adverse fertility shock in
D or productivity shock in S lower the IS in D and raise it in S. At the same time, we find that in
most cases, immigration lowers income inequality across D and S because of the spillover effects
running from skilled groups in D to their counterparts in S, which lower the percentage income
gap between the two.


        2. Externalities and the Political Stability of Immigration
        The essential reason for the asymmetry in the immigration surplus generated by both pull
and push forces may be related to the fact that free migration may inevitably impose negative
externalities on natives, since individual decisions to migrate do not consider any adverse
consequences to natives in either D or S. So while there exists a balanced growth equilibrium under


                                                  31
unrestricted immigration, it may be unstable politically. Note that in this analysis we consider only
the economic consequences of migration. We ignore the fiscal burdens of immigration in D, which
may worsen the IS for natives in D even in the short term.
        This explains why most independent countries resort to regulatory intervention in the form
of restrictive immigration policies, or to bargaining solutions; for example, the U.S. aid to Central
America when immigration waves were triggered by adverse productivity shocks in these sending
countries.
        A superior solution, however, would be more investments in human capital in the sending
countries ­ especially in higher education, which puts a check on the incentive to emigrate while
allowing higher education to produce higher growth in sending countries. But this solution works
if the economic policies promote competitive labor markets to provide an adequate rate of return
to investment in higher education. This may have been one of the reasons the Morrill Act had been
successful in raising the rate of productivity growth in the U.S. due to the dominant share of the
private sector in the U.S. in the 19th century.
        There is, of course, an altruistic solution as well: a special allowance, for example, for
asylum seekers and refugees.


V. Concluding Remarks ­ The Role of Knowledge Spillover Effects


        We began this paper by highlighting the role of disembodied human capital and its
spillover effects in enabling the attainment of a balanced growth equilibrium (BGE). Each of the
studies we covered in this paper relies at least on one of the following channels that play a critical
role in enabling a BGE:
        First, knowledge spillover effects across generations in models of homogeneous agents or
a representative agent.
        Second, knowledge spillover effects across different skill groups in models of
heterogeneous agents in a closed economy, which enable a BGE involving both income growth
and income distribution within an economy.
        Third, knowledge spillover effects across heterogeneous skill groups within and across
countries. These effects could be hierarchical, flowing from the group with greater knowledge to
the one with lesser knowledge, or two-sided because of complementary "diversity effects".


                                                  32
Equilibrium immigration flows under balanced growth regimes are enabled due to the spillover
effects operating through all of the abovementioned channels.
        Spillover effects by definition impart external effects on others, which in many cases may
also involve externalities, since not all the benefits from spillover effects can be internalized. The
extent of externality effects may be minor when spillover effects take place between parents and
offspring, but it may be more serious in the case of immigration for two reasons:
        First, cross-country externalities, like intellectual property, are more difficult to internalize.
Their presence generally leads to underinvestment in human capital and explains why destination
countries may be especially concerned about protecting technological property rights as part of
trade agreements. A case in point may be the current trade dispute between the U.S. and the
People's Republic of China.
        Second, the immigration decision by itself has an inherent externality problem because
individual decisions to migrate are motivated by the net benefit to the individual but they do not
account for their long-term consequences for natives in both destination and source countries. As
our paper points out, they generally result in opposite net benefits from immigration across
countries in the long term. The asymmetry leads to politically unstable equilibria, and explains
why in most economies, immigration is subject to some restrictive policies, especially in the case
of unskilled migration.
        Recognizing these externalities opens the door for policy interventions aiming at
maximizing the benefits from human capital as engine of national and global economic
development and balanced growth.




References


Alesina, Alberto, Johann Harnoss, and Hillel Rapoport. 2016. "Birthplace Diversity and Economic
        Prosperity." Journal of Economic Growth 21 (2): 101-138.
Barro, Robert J., and Jong Wha Lee. 2013. "A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
        World, 1950-2010." Journal of Development Economics 104 (C):184-198.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura. 1990. "Human Capital, Fertility, and
        Economic Growth." Journal of Political Economy 98 (5), Part 2: S12-S37.


                                                  33
Borjas, George J. 1995. "The Economic Benefits from Immigration." Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 9 (2): 3-22.
Brücker, Herbert, Stella Capuano, and Abdeslam Marfouk. 2013. "Education, Gender and
        International Migration: Insights from a Panel-Dataset 1980-2010." Institute for
        Employment Research, http://www.iab.de/en/daten/iab-brain-drain-data.aspx.
Clark, John Maurice. 1925. "Studies in the Economics of Overhead Costs." The Economic Journal
        35 (138): 245-250.
De la Croix, David, and Matthias Doepke. 2003. "Inequality and Growth: Why Differential
        Fertility Matters." American Economic Review 93 (4): 1091-1113.
Ehrlich, Isaac. 1990. "The Problem of Development: Introduction." Journal of Political Economy
        98 (5): S1-S11.
Ehrlich, Isaac, Adam Cook, and Yong Yin. 2018. "What Accounts for the US Ascendancy to
        Economic Superpower by the Early Twentieth Century? The Morrill Act-Human Capital
        Hypothesis." Journal of Human Capital 12 (2): 233-281.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Jinyoung Kim. 2005. "Endogenous Fertility, Mortality and Economic Growth:
        Can a Malthusian Framework Account for the Conflicting Historical Trends in
        Population?" Journal of Asian Economics 16 (5): 789-806.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Jinyoung Kim. 2007a. "Social Security and Demographic Trends: Theory and
        Evidence from the International Experience." Review of Economic Dynamics 10 (1): 55-
        77.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Jinyoung Kim. 2007. "The Evolution of Income and Fertility Inequalities over
        the Course of Economic Development: A Human Capita Perspective." Journal of Human
        Capital 1 (1): 137-174.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Jinyoung Kim. 2015. "Immigration, Human Capital Formation and
        Endogenous Growth." Journal of Human Capital 9 (4): 518-563.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Francis T. Lui. 1991. "Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, and Economic
        Growth." Journal of Political Economy 99 (5): 1029-59.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Francis T. Lui. 1998. "Social Security, the Family, and Economic Growth."
        Economic Inquiry 36 (3): 390-409.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Kevin M. Murphy. 2007. "Why Does Human Capital Need a Journal?" Journal
        of Human Capital 1 (1): 1-7.


                                              34
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Yun Pei. 2019. "Endogenous Immigration, Human and Physical Capital
        Formation, and the Immigration Surplus' Dynamic Path." Working Paper.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Yong Yin. 2013. "Equilibrium Health Spending and Population Aging in a
        Model of Endogenous Growth: Will the GDP Share of Health Spending Keep Rising?"
        Journal of Human Capital 7 (4): 411-447.
Kuznets, Simon. 1955. "Economic Growth and Income Inequality." American Economic Review
        45 (1): 1-28.
Kuznets, Simon. 1963. "Quantitative Aspect of the Economic Growth of Nations: VIII.
        Distribution of Income by Size." Economic Development and Cultural Change 11 (2),
        Part2: 1-80.
Lucas, Robert Jr. 1988. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." Journal of Monetary
        Economics 22 (1): 3-42.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NAS). 2017. The Economic and
        Fiscal Consequences of Immigration. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of Political Economy 98 (5),
        Part 2: S71-S102.
Schiff, Maurice, and Mirja C. Sjoblom. 2011. "World-Panel Data on International Migration 1975-
        2000." World Bank, Washington, DC.
Tamura, Robert. 1991. "Income Convergence in an Endogeneous Growth Model." Journal of
        Political Economy 99 (3): 522-40.
Zhong, Jianguo. 1998. "Income Growth and Income Inequality: Theory and Evidence." Ph.D
        dissertation, State University of New York at Buffalo.




                                               35
                                         Figure 1. Takeoff to Growth




Notes: The figure is reproduced from Ehrlich and Lui (1991). The figure shows possible dynamics after an exogenous
increase in longevity: A sufficient increase in longevity can shift the Human Capital phase line above the 45-degree
line. For parameter values see footnote 4.




                                                        36
                                     Figure 2. Demographic Transition




Notes: The figures are reproduced from Ehrlich and Lui (1991). The figures show the simulated paths of human capital
and fertility in response to an upward shock in the life expectancy of children that lifts Human Capital formation from
a stagnant to an endogenous growth regime, shown in Figure 1. For parameter values see footnote 4.




                                                          37
   Figure 3. Total Fertility Rates in the United Kingdom and the United States over Time




   Total Fertiltiy Rate
   8
                                                                     United Kingdom   United States
   7

   6

   5

   4

   3

   2

   1

   0
    1750             1800             1850            1900                1950    2000          2050




Source: Princeton European Fertility Project, http://www.gapminder.com.




                                                      38
 Figure 4. Total Fertility Rate of Developing Countries in East Asia and Pacific, 1960-2017




  Birth per Woman
   7


   6


   5


   4


   3


   2


   1


   0
       1960   1965    1970     1975    1980    1985      1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015


Source: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/SPDYNTFRTINEAP.




                                                    39
Figure 5. Total Fertility Rates of 5 Fast Developing East Asia-Pacific Economies, 1962-2017




  Total Fertility Rate

    7


    6


    5


    4


    3


    2


    1


    0
        1962   1967      1972     1977     1982     1987      1992     1997     2002         2007   2012   2017

                            Singapore                             Republic of Korea
                            Japan                                 Hong Kong, China
                            Australia                             Average of 5 Economies

Source: World Development Indicators, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sp.dyn.tfrt.in.




                                                        40
Figure 6. Stagnant and Growth Equilibrium




                   41
Figure 7. Equilibrium Solutions for Marginal Growth Rates (ai) and Spillover Effects (S2)




Notes: 1  1   1    1 1 2  2   2    2 2 2   2   1   1   2   2    1 2
         (+1 / ) =   ;   (+1 / ) =   ( ) ;   [(0 +  )/(0 +  )][( / )].




                                           42
             Figure 8. Immigrant Share of the United States Population, 1850-2000
                      (% of the United States population that is foreign born)




Source: The United States Census Bureau, "Historical Census Statistics on the Foreign-Born Population of the United
States: 1850-2000" and Pew Research Center tabulation of 2010 and 2016 American Community Survey (IPUMS) .




                                                        43
         Figure 9. Top 10 Countries of Origin and Destination in Asia and the Pacific


     Top 10 Countries of Origin in Asia and the Pacific, 2015 (Number of Migrants)




     Top 10 Countries of Destination in Asia and the Pacific, 2015 (Number of Migrants)




Source: United Nations, "Trends and drivers migration in Asia".

                                                       44
                           Figure 10. The Short-Term Immigration Surplus




         Pre-migration gross domestic product:               A+B+C
         Post-migration gross domestic product:              A+B+C+D+E
         Pre-migration natives' labor income:                B+C
         Post-migration natives' labor income:               C+E
         Immigrants (M) labor income:                        D
         Pre-migration natives' return on capital:           A
         Post-migration natives' return on capital:          A+B+E
         Immigration Surplus:                                E



Notes: The recent National Academy of Sciences Report on the economic and fiscal consequences of immigration
(see NAS, 2017) has estimated the immigration surplus in the United States to be 0.3% of its gross domestic product,
which amounts to $54.2 billion.




                                                        45
 Figure 11. Equilibrium Migration with Hierarchical and Gravitational Spillover Effects:
                                              A Global View




Notes: HC = human capital; HCPF = human capital production function; PF = production function.




                                                      46
Figure 12. Weighted averages of the skill composition of the migrant population (WB=World
Bank; IAB=Institute for Labor Research) vs. total domestic population (BL=Barro and Lee)
in major destination countries: population age 25+ with 13+ years of education




Source: WB data are from Schiff and Sjoblom (2011). IAB data are from Brücker, Capuano, and Marfouk (2013). BL
data are from Barro and Lee (2013).




                                                     47
                         Table 1. Comparative Dynamics under the Benchmark Model



                                                                                                  
Parameter Shift           1          1         1          1             1      1         +1 /         2        1             1 /
                         = 2        =  2       = 2        = 2          =  2    = 2        
                                                                                         =+1 /
                                                                                              
                                                                                                      = 2      = 2        (Ms1+Ms2)

1.Benchmark              0.9561 1.5530       1.2045      0.2969    0.1858     0.1858     2.9693      5.6569    5.6386       0.5


2. 1 = 12, 1 = 9.6       0.9630 1.5657       1.2155      0.2969    0.1858     0.1858     3.5632      8.9234    5.6386     0.5182

3.  = 0.1705             0.8645 1.5596       1.1939      0.3266    0.1858     0.1858     3.2663      5.6569    7.1558       0.5

4. 1 =  2 = 8.404        0.9591 1.5530       1.2059      0.2969    0.1858     0.1858     2.9693      5.6569    5.6386       0.5




Parameter Shift       1 / 1       1 / 1     1 / 1        1/ 1       1 / 1       1 / 1      1 / 1  1 / 1  1 / 2  1 / 2
                     = Ms2/Nd2   = 2 / 2   = Kd2/Hd2   =  2/ 2    =  2 / 2    =  2 / 2    = wd2/ws2 =  2 / 2 = Hs1/Hs2 = Ks1/Ks2


1. Benchmark         0.1517      0.2667    0.3230      0.1283      2.2004      5.5389     1.5753      0.6741     5.6569     5.6569


2. 1 = 12, 1 = 9.6   0.1780      0.2467    0.2472      0.0980      2.8863      7.2831     1.5791      0.6708     8.9234     8.9234

3.  = 0.1705         0.2878      0.2254    0.3256      0.1114      6.7921     19.8442     1.6622      0.6055     5.6569     5.6569

4. 1 =  2 = 8.404 0.0888         0.3135    0.3209      0.1278      1.0072      2.5280     1.5708      0.6828     5.6569     5.6569



     Benchmark parameters:  = 0.9 ,  = 0.7 ,  = 1 ,  = 1.3 ,  = 1/3 ,  = 2/3 ,  1 =  2 = 0.4 ,  1 =  2 =
     10,  1 =  2 = 8.424, 1 = 10, 2 = 5, 1 = 8 , 2 = 4,  1 =  2 =  1 =  2 = 1.16 ,   = 0.155,
       = 0.097, 1 =  2 = 0.052,  1 =  2 = 0.5.




                                                                  48
  Table 2. Benchmark Model: Immigration Surplus Changes due to Induced Migration by
                                                     Triggers


                                            Destination D                                          Source S
                        3rd generation      5th generation               10th generation        10th generation
 Trigger
                         after a shock       after a shock                after a shock          after a shock
 1. Skill-biased technological shock in D and S
 Human capital                0.04                0.25                         1.16                  -14.18
 Physical capital             0.06                0.25                         1.10                  -13.98
 Full income                  0.05                0.26                         1.14                  -14.11
 Utility                     0.007                0.04                         0.23                   -2.30
 2. Adverse fertility shock in D
 Human capital                 0                   0                             0                    67.96
 Physical capital            -0.20               -0.50                         -1.29                  54.48
 Full income                 -0.16               -0.35                         -0.77                  64.03
 Utility                    -0.004               -0.01                         -0.03                  10.76
 3. Adverse productivity shock in S
 Human capital                 0                   0                             0                    40.39
 Physical capital            -0.08               -0.26                         -0.42                  37.99
 Full income                 -0.10               -0.16                         -0.24                  39.61
 Utility                    -0.001              -0.005                        -0.009                   5.01

Notes: Values are percentage changes in welfare measures. Positive values mean loss from restricting migration, hence
gain from unrestricted migration.




                                                         49
   Table 3. Extended Model: Immigration Surplus Changes due to Induced Migration by
                                                     Triggers


                                            Destination D                                          Source S
                        3rd generation      5th generation               10th generation        10th generation
 Trigger
                         after a shock       after a shock                after a shock          after a shock
 1. Skill-biased technological shock in D and S
 Human capital                0.01                0.21                         1.35                  -13.99
 Physical capital             0.05                0.22                         1.17                  -14.43
 Full income                  0.03                0.22                         1.28                  -14.12
 Utility                     0.004                0.04                         0.25                   -2.40
 2. Adverse fertility shock in D
 Human capital                0.36                1.20                         5.15                   71.48
 Physical capital            -0.12                0.06                         2.51                   58.20
 Full income                  0.10                0.63                         3.95                   67.66
 Utility                      0.04                0.11                         0.50                   11.79
 3. Adverse productivity shock in S
 Human capital                0.40               -0.08                         -2.65                  39.33
 Physical capital             0.70                0.13                         -2.21                  37.27
 Full income                  0.40               -0.09                         -2.61                  38.65
 Utility                      0.05               -0.01                         -0.27                   4.84

Notes: Values are percentage changes in welfare measures. Positive values mean loss from restricting migration, hence
gain from unrestricted migration.




                                                         50
