                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CONTINGENT LINEAR FINANCIAL NETWORKS

                                         Bomin Jiang
                                       Roberto Rigobon
                                       Munther A. Dahleh

                                      Working Paper 26814
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26814


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2020, Revised November 2020




We thank Mila Getmansky, Andrew Lo, Loriana Pelizzon, and the participants of the USC
Dornsife Institute for New Economic Thinking seminar for their comments. For communication
contact us at bominj@mit.edu or rigobon@mit.edu. All remaining errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

Е 2020 by Bomin Jiang, Roberto Rigobon, and Munther A. Dahleh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including Е notice, is given to the source.
Contingent Linear Financial Networks
Bomin Jiang, Roberto Rigobon, and Munther A. Dahleh
NBER Working Paper No. 26814
March 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. E0,E44,G1,G21

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we develop a methodology to estimate hidden linear networks when only an
aggregate outcome is observed. The aggregate observable variable is a linear mixture of the
different networks and it is assumed that each network corresponds to the transmission
mechanism of different shocks. We implement the methodology to estimate financial networks
among US financial institutions. Credit Default Swap rates are the observable variable and we
show that more than one network is needed to understand the dynamic behavior exhibited in the
data.

Bomin Jiang                                    Munther A. Dahleh
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society       Dept. of Electrical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology          and Computer Science
77 Massachusetts Ave, 32D-758                  Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139                            77 Massachusetts Ave, 32D-616
bominj@mit.edu                                 Cambridge, MA 02139
                                               alinam@mit.edu
Roberto Rigobon
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-516
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu
              Contingent Linear Financial Networks

                                           Abstract

         In this paper, we develop a methodology to estimate hidden linear networks when
      only an aggregate outcome is observed. The aggregate observable variable is a linear
      mixture of the different networks and it is assumed that each network corresponds
      to the transmission mechanism of different shocks. We implement the methodology
      to estimate financial networks among US financial institutions. Credit Default Swap
      rates are the observable variable and we show that more than one network is needed to
      understand the dynamic behavior exhibited in the data.


    Keywords: Financial Network, Identification through Heteroskedasticity, Mixture Model,
EM Algorithm
    JEL Codes: C13, C61, E00, G21, G28




1    Introduction

The 2008 world financial crisis started in what was supposed to be a relatively small, and
segmented market. At that time the outstanding value of Sub-Prime debt was a tad below a
trillion dollars, while the market value of credits in both the formal and shadow US financial
sectors was higher than 23 trillion dollars. So, a default on 4 percent of an isolated market
(the high-risk mortgages) was expected to have an equal minuscule effect. Not surprisingly,
the Obama administration only requested 800+ billion dollars for the rescue package. It is
obvious, today, that the systemic consequences of the sub-prime crisis were unexpectedly
larger. The shock propagated to other financial sectors and countries. The world total losses
reached several trillion. This has spurred research on systemic risk, and in particular on the

                                               2
estimation of the underlying financial networks governing the propagation of shocks - or as
it is sometimes known as financial contagion.

       The estimation of systemic risk has been closely linked to the estimation of financial
networks. Banks can be interconnected through many different channels. One type of link
is related to the exposure banks have to similar microeconomic or industry shocks. For
example, two bank's balance sheets can be interconnected because both are lending to the
same firm or sector and it suffers a shock. The second type of channel is related to interbank
contracts. Two banks can be interrelated because one bank lends to the other, or they hold
each other's liabilities. Therefore, a deterioration in the balance sheet of the borrowing bank
affects the quality of the assets of the lending bank. Finally, banks can be exposed to similar
macroeconomic shocks such as exchange rate, inflation rate, interest rates, economic activity,
real estate, etc. In sum, there are many possible ways in which banks are linked to each
other.1 The objective of the empirical literature has been to estimate the "average" linkage
among banks, and to determine the contribution each bank has to the overall risk in the
economy -- a measure of systemic risk.

       Observing and understanding the contracts underlying the links between banks is some-
times challenging, however. Direct lending from one bank to the other of course is simple
to document. The relationship across other contracts -- sometimes complex and through
indirect channels -- implies that the information required to estimate the financial networks
is daunting. First, some trivial aspects, such as the currency of denomination of a contract,
is unclear. For example, a financial contract can specify all its flows and payments in US
   1
       See Allen and Gale (2000), Freixas et al. (2000) for earlier contributions, and Acemoglu et al. (2015),
Allen et al. (2012), Caballero and Simsek (2013), Cabrales et al. (2014), Elliott et al. (2014), Gai and Kapadia
(2010), and Gai et al. (2011) for recent theoretical papers. Empirical papers that estimate financial networks
include Billio et al. (2010), Merton et al. (2013), Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016), and Girardi and ErgЧn
(2013).



                                                       3
Dollars, but its return can be perfectly correlated with the Euro-Dollar rate. So, even though
this is a contract denominated in the local currency, it is actually a de-facto foreign exchange
contract. Contracts such as default swaps with tranches, or contracts that are indexed to
macroeconomic variables are complex and fully understanding the type of connection that
they generate across two financial institutions might be impossible. Second, most of the
times the contagion path is outside the regulatory or country jurisprudence. For example,
interconnections can occur through firms that might not even reside in the country of anal-
ysis. For instance, assume a bank lends to Intel, who sells to a South Korean firm, that
manufactures a monitor sold to a California firm, who gets a loan from a different bank.
In this setting, the two banks are related through the South Korean firm. However, the
requirements on reporting to be able to uncover such relationship are impossible -- i.e. the
US regulator can't force the South Korean company to reveal its clients and suppliers. The
complexity, number, and variety of contracts that can be used among financial institutions
have several implications in the estimation of networks. In principle, if every contract is
fully disclosed and documented the relation between banks could be described precisely. In
practice, however, the granularity and detail of the required information are unfeasible, even
to regulators and central banks. For this reason, the financial network literature tends to
simplify the information demands by approximating the underlying network using aggregate
data.

       In the literature, two main approaches have been taken. The first one uses information-
theoretic principles to fill in the blanks of pairwise data using aggregate data.2 For example,
one can read the total inter-bank debt from Form 10-Ks. After that, the worst-case scenario
can be evaluated by inferring the pair-wise debt structure using a maximum entropy principle.
Those methods, while used in some stress tests, only give a rough estimate of the debt
   2
       See Upper (2011); Elsinger et al. (2013) for maximum entropy and Anand et al. (2015) for minimal
density



                                                    4
structures and do not fully utilize the information from time-varying data.

      The second approach uses the correlation of prices of financial contracts (Onnela et al.,
2004) to construct interbank financial networks. The estimates based on correlations can be
biased in the presence of heteroskedastic shocks.3 Furthermore, both of these approaches,
do not take into account the possibility that the network between banks is asymmetric,
non-linear, and that there might be more than one network at play.

      First, for any given network, it is likely that the transmission of shocks between banks
is asymmetric and non-linear. In other words, the impact on the balance sheet of two
banks depends on the size of the shock -- a small shock might imply a small propagation,
but a large shock might produce a large propagation. The reason is that larger shocks
might trigger clauses in the financial contracts that smaller shocks do not cause.4 More
importantly, regulation of financial institutions is inherently non-linear -- bankruptcy for
instance, where the bank is allowed to operate freely within a capital requirement range,
but quite restrictively outside of it. This implies that the nature of the network might be
different depending on the size of the shock. In fact, the average correlation might severely
underestimate the transmission of shocks when a larger shock hits the system.

      Second, and equally importantly, it is likely that there is more than a single network
describing the system. Each type of shock is likely to be transmitted through different
contracts and the propagation would be conditional on the shock. For example, imagine
that there are three banks, and two are negatively exposed to real estate movements while
the third one is positively exposed to real estate, but all three banks are negatively exposed
to interest rate increases. If in the economy there is an increase in interest rates, all three
banks move together, but if there is a decline in the price of real estate, only two are affected.
The correlation structure, and therefore the network, changes with the shock.
  3
      See Forbes and Rigobon (2002) for the bias in assessing financial contagion when using correlations.
  4
      As in Acemoglu et al. (2015)


                                                      5
   Third, both of the previous mechanisms imply that the propagation of shocks between
banks is asymmetric. For example, assume there are two banks, a large national bank (such
as CitiBank) and a small regional bank such as (Watertown Savings Bank). A shock that
decreases the value of the large bank's assets by 10 percent might have an impact on the
small one that is very different from a shock that reduces the small bank's assets by the same
proportion. The shock to the large bank might be more meaningful to the small one than
vice-versa. When the measurement of systemic risk uses either stock market prices, or credit
default swaps, these interactions are contemporaneous. Therefore, the estimation of even a
single network is complicated by endogenous variable biases. A correlation is incapable of
capturing these differences.

   Consequently, the estimation of systemic risk in the financial system is complicated by
asymmetries, contemporaneous endogenous biases, and parameter instability. Our method-
ology makes several assumptions and simplifications to be able to solve the identification
problem. First, the underlying networks are unobservable, but the outcome of their in-
teractions is observable. In other words, the changes in bank balance sheets and financial
conditions are the outcomes that can be observed and it is the result of many interactions
acting jointly. Therefore, the estimation of the contingent financial networks is not only an
identification problem but also a computational challenge.

   The second assumption is the realization that non-linearity and multi-networks are empir-
ically intertwined. In fact, the non-linearity is tantamount to the network being contingent
to the size of shock: larger shocks imply different transmission mechanisms than smaller
ones. There are a number of papers modeling financial networks demonstrating the cause
of potential shifts in the transmission mechanism. Some insist on the change of risk trans-
mission mechanism is induced by monetary policies (Altunbas et al., 2010). That is because
monetary policy has a significant effect on company financial decisions, which in turn could
change the structure of financial contracts and result in discontinuities in risk transmission

                                              6
mechanisms. Others believe market volatility could result in a phase transition of non-linear
financial networks, which incurs new risk transmissions mechanism (Acemoglu et al., 2015).
Multiple networks can be a piecewise approximation of the non-linearity underlying these
papers. Therefore, we make two important assumptions about the structure of the network:
First, we estimate a collection of linear networks. In other words, in the case of non-linearity,
we approximate a non-linear network as a set of linear ones. In the case of different networks
for each type of shock, we approximate each one as a linear network. Second, we assume
that the overall outcome is a mixture of multiple underlying unobservable networks and the
shocks.

   Our model specification is flexible enough that allows for two possible interpretations.
The first interpretation is one in which idiosyncratic shocks hit each node, and propagate
through the different networks. This interpretation is akin to a structure where the shocks
are independent and specific to each firm, and the propagation occurs throughout the in-
terrelationships among them. The second interpretation assumes that all the shocks that
affect the network are aggregate shocks, but the effect on each firm is idiosyncratic. In other
words, firms are exposed to aggregate shocks in different degrees. Once the aggregate shock
occurs, all firms are affected. In this interpretation, we still allow the network to play a role
in the transmission of the shocks. There is an initial correlation, however, across firms that
comes from the exposure to the aggregate shock. This interpretation captures macroeco-
nomic circumstances where firms are exposed to interest rates, exchange rates, real estate,
inflation, etc. Their exposure to each of the shocks might be different. Once the shock
occurs, it will be propagated by a different network. The underlying assumption is that the
linkages between firms once an inflation shock occurs, might be different from the linkages
that exist once a real estate shock occurs. Our flexible interpretation, however, cannot dis-
tinguish between these two interpretations. We can estimate the underlying structure, but
which interpretation is the relevant one depends on the application. In our model, they are


                                               7
isomorphic.

      The identification problem is solved using the heteroskedasticity observed in the data.
The estimation imposes a maximum number of parameters that can be recovered from the
data; therefore, we limit the number of networks that can be estimated. This implies that
it is likely that in many circumstances we are still not capturing the full complexity in
the financial system. In this case, however, our estimation procedure captures the most
"dissimilar" networks describing the data. Furthermore, we can evaluate and discuss the
informational value gained by allowing an additional network. We implement the estimation
procedure through an intuitive EM algorithm. We derive identification assumptions for each
one of the network interpretations, either purely idiosyncratic or purely aggregate shocks.

      The main contribution of the paper is the estimation of a mixture model of multiple
endogenous asymmetric linear networks.5 The intuition behind the estimation comes from
the fact that in a linear network the correlation structure across banks is the result of a
linear mixture of the covariance implied by each network - where the weights are the relative
variances of each shock. When the variance of those shocks changes through the sample,
the weights change, leading to variation in the covariances. From that variation of the
second moment, the underlying structure of the networks can be recovered. Therefore, the
identification requires finding periods where the shocks experience different volatilities. There
are two ways to do so: first, statistical identification where the changes in the variance in the
observed data determine the regimes. This procedure is very similar to the one developed
by Sentana and Fiorentini (2001). The advantage of this methodology is that it allows
estimating the asymmetry of large versus small shocks - where the statistical identification
truly captures the differences in the propagation mechanisms. The second alternative is to
find periods where macroeconomic shocks experience different variances and use those as
heteroskedastic sources. The advantage of this procedure is that the identification is closer
  5
      The procedure follows Rigobon (2003).


                                               8
to economic events rather than statistical events. So, if the relationships are contingent
to the shocks this procedure allows us to estimate the networks that closely capture such
linkages.

   We apply our methodology to estimate the US financial network among the 10 largest
financial institutions in the country. The data collected are their credit default swaps (CDSs).
In this paper, a first pass to the problem, we concentrate on estimating a small network.

   The CDSs have been used widely in the literature studying risk contagion. Most notably,
the CDSs of sovereign debt has been examined by various papers to understand international
risk propagation. E.g., Kalbaska and Gtkowski (2012) investigates the eurozone contagion
via a regression on CDS spread changes. In general, if a risk contagion mechanism exists
among certain countries, their CDS spread will co-move. From the trend of CDS spread,
the author reaches a conclusion that Sovereign debt risk is mainly limited to EU countries.
Similarly, Caporin et al. (2018) also studies European debt crisis by examines the CDS
spread. Through a Bayesian quantile regression that incorporates shock heteroskedasticity,
they conclude that the increases in the correlation of CDS come from heteroskedasticity
instead of structural changes of risk propagation mechanism.

   The CDSs of banks have also been widely used in studying interbank risk propagation.
As pointed out by Eichengreen et al. (2012), the CDS spreads of major banks co-move
and reflects market economic prospects. Furthermore, during the Subprime Crisis and the
following crisis of Lehman Brothers, the common factor is more dominant, i.e., the absorption
ratio (as defined in (Kritzman et al., 2010)) is higher. The fact that major financial crises
are reflected by CDS regime changes is the exact characteristic we want to study. In our
contingent linear financial network model, a significant regime shift is required for unique
identification. As shown in (Eichengreen et al., 2012), the common factor accounted for 62%
of the variance of major bank CDSs before the 2007 breakout of Subprime Crisis and raised


                                               9
to 77% during the crisis, signaling a major regime shift. Apart from stronger co-movements,
we also want to discover whether the change of regime is a sole result of heteroskedasticity
of shocks, or a result of both the heteroskedasticity of shocks and the structural change of
risk propagation mechanisms.

   We study 9 different macroeconomic variables that try to capture different aggregate
shocks that typically afflict economies: (1) commodity price shocks (WTI Oil Prices), (2)
Inflation (PriceStats daily inflation index), (3) Economic Activity (Non-farm payroll), (4)
Stock Market Prices (S&P), (5) Risk (VIX), (6) Housing Prices (Case & Shiller index), (7)
liquidity provision (short term interest rates), (8) exchange rates (nominal trade-weighted
exchange rate), and (9) the yield curve (the difference between the long and short interest
rates). Of course in a finite sample, it is not clear that all shocks occur - for instance high
inflation has not happened in a long time in the US. This implies that not all networks can
be identified.

   In the case of a single network, the solution is established through GMM. On the other
hand, in the case of multiple networks, the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm, which
is commonly used for estimating mixture models, is adopted. The EM algorithm alternates
between an expectation (E) step, which updates the probability of a network dominating a
regime, and a maximization (M) step, which estimate each network through heteroskedas-
ticity based on the probability updated in the E step. A Wishart distribution is assumed
for sample variance-covairance matrices so that the log-likelihood function used in the EM
algorithm is well-defined.

   The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, a problem of the financial network is for-
mulated and the problem of identification is discussed. The section starts with a well-studied
two-bank case to provide some intuition of the identification problem, and then provides a
proof of solution uniqueness in the single network case. It also discusses the identification


                                              10
problem when the data generating process is explained by multiple networks. Section 3
discusses the case when a single network is estimated. We present both the statistical and
the macroeconomic strategies of identification. Section 4 presents a test for the number of
networks. In the 10 banks case, 3 networks is required to explain the data. The results of
the estimated networks is then discussed in this section. Finally, Section 5 concludes.




2     Modeling Financial Networks

The estimation of financial networks is not new. A significant proportion of papers, however,
concentrate on the estimation of symmetric single networks -- non-directional, and non-
contingent graphs. In this section, we present first, some preliminary evidence based on
correlations. We then introduce a linear financial network model, and show: 1. how the
network model can be uniquely identified with variance-covariance data; 2. together with
heteroskedastic shocks, how it can explain the volatility in correlation models, and 3. how
the heteroskedasticity of shocks can be identified through macroeconomic indices.



2.1    The Time-Varying Correlations

It is desired to find out how and why banks are related to each other, and which banks
are "crucial" in the risk transmission mechanisms, and which ones are less relevant. One
natural measure for those purposes is the correlation coefficients. In modern portfolio theory
(MPT), correlation coefficients also play an essential role. MPT quantitatively formalizes
the concept of diversification via the statistical notion of covariance, or correlation.

    However, most of those applications of linear correlation models make an oversimplified
assumption, that the correlation coefficients of any two given financial instruments are time-


                                               11
invariant, or at least time-invariant in the period of analysis.6 In practice, there are numerous
examples where such assumption does not apply. In this paper, we are concerned with the
systemic financial risks which primarily propagate through large banks, so we use the Credit
Default Swap (CDS) data of the top 10 US banks as an example.7                  8

   6
       Although most of the literature estimates the strength of the network transmission by using simple
correlations, there are notable exceptions that are worth highlighting. Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016)
proposes a new measure of comovement called CoVar -- which is defined as the value at risk conditional on
the bank being in distress. Girardi and ErgЧn (2013) extend that measurement to expand the definition of
distress. These types of measures are consistent with networks being contingent.
   7
     It is important to highlight that CDS might exhibit excessive comovement due to the presence of a
government guarantee. (Merton et al., 2013) uses a different approach to measure the credit risk of the banks.
They use contingent claims analysis instead of CDS. The CDS are partially guaranteed by government policy
-- for instance, deposit insurance. Future research should evaluate the robustness of the results presented
in this paper when different measures of financial performance are used.
   8
     See Appendix for details of the CDS data used.




                                                     12
          1

        0.8

        0.6

        0.4

        0.2

          0

       -0.2

       -0.4

       -0.6

       -0.8

         -1
              2010    2011     2012     2013        2014   2015     2016      2017



Figure 1: The 45 pairwise correlation coefficients of CDS of the top 10 US banks. The stock
exchange id numbers of the 10 banks are JPM, BAC, WFC, C, GS, MS, COF, HSBC, AXP,
and CSGN.


   The change of volatility could due to either time-varying linear regression coefficients
(a.k.a. linear financial networks, as we will define later in the paper), or heteroskedestistic
shocks. Figure 1 shows the 45 pairwise correlation coefficients of CDS of the top 10 US banks
calculated using a 200 days moving window. It is immediately notable that the correlation
cannot be considered time-invariant. At an extreme, the correlation coefficient rises from -0.1
to 0.8 within 100 days. Up to this point, it is unclear whether the time-varying correlation is a


                                               13
result of heteroskedasticity of shocks, or a result of the structural change of risk propagation
mechanisms, or both. The two-banks illustrative example we give in Section 2.3.1 shows
that all three cases are possible. To distinguish the three cases, we need to develop a linear
network model.



2.2    A Linear Network Model

Suppose there are N financial institutions (indexed by n = 1, 2, и и и , N ) in a contingent
financial network with M possible networks, which denoted by the directed graphs Gm =
{V , Em } for m  {1, 2, и и и , M }. V is the set of common nodes in all the graphs and each
node vn  V corresponds to a financial institution n. Furthermore, each edge eijm  Em
denotes the risk spillover through mth network between node i and node j .

   There are two possible -- simple -- assumptions on how to implement the contingent
networks. One in which the shocks are idiosyncratic and hit each bank individually and
then they are propagated in the network, or the second one where the shocks are hitting the
system as a whole. The first assumption is one in which the systemic risk of an individual
shock affects is determined by the propagation between one bank and the other, while in
the second assumption the relative importance of the aggregate shocks is what makes them
systemic.

   We assume that the system is affected by shocks denoted as        t,   a N -by-1 vector repre-
senting N shocks at time t. A simple framework when a market is hit by a shock as follows:
Assume that at each time instance t, each node in the contingent financial network receives
a shock. When a shock       t   transmits through network m, it has an impact on financial
institutions in the network, both directly and indirectly.

   The direct impact is due to the fact that institution i has some direct exposure in this


                                              14
market, and it is denoted by m t . Here m is a N -by-N matrix, where each entry i, j
represents the exposure of bank i to shock j in network m. We assume that m are invertable.
Note the structure of the exposure matrix m reflects on the nature of the shock: idiosyncratic
or aggregate. We will discuss those two cases in detail later this section.

   Assume that the impact of shocks propagating through network m is not observable but
the total risk measure, defined as the mixture of impact of different networks
                                              M
                                       Xt =         wmh Fm,t
                                              m=1

is observable, where Fm,t is the impact of shocks propagating through network m, and wmt
is an indicator random variable. wmt = 1 if network m dominates at time t, and wmt = 0
otherwise. Let h indicate different heteroskydastic regimes. Assume that the indicator
random variable wmh is 1 with probability pm . Note this pm is a fixed prior distribution in
the mixture model that does not depend on h.

   Suppose the impact of shocks propagating through network m satisfies

                                   Fm,t = fm (Fm,t ) + m t .                                   (1)

where fm : RN  RN is a vector valued function capturing the risk propagation mechanism.
A first order Taylor expansion gives

                                Fm,t = m + m Fm,t + m t .                                      (2)


   In equation (2) we can see the direct and indirect effects of the shock -- regardless if the
shock is aggregate or idiosyncratic. The indirect impact of    t   is through m ; which represents
the network on how financial institutions have exposure through the balance sheet of the
other financial institutions. We define m , m  {1, 2, и и и , M } as the weighted-directed
adjacency matrix of network m. We assume there cannot be self-loops in the network hence
all diagonal entries of m are zero.

                                               15
   For the rest of this paper, we assume that our data is demeaned, hence



                                    Fm,t = m Fm,t + m t .                                (3)


   This is a decomposition of any shock to the system as the exogenous part (m t ) and the
indigenous network part (m ). In this model, the time subscript is the same on both sides of
the equation, assuming we are at the equilibrium. This is a recursive assumption that was
first posed by Christiano et al. (1999).

   Note that rearranging (3) we obtain

                                   Fm,t = [I - m ]-1 m t .                               (4)


   Hence we observe
                                        M
                                 Xt =         wmt [I - m ]-1 m t ,                       (5)
                                        m=1


   This describes the observed variable (Xt ) as a linear mixture of different unobservable
networks (m ) and different shocks (m t ).

   This representation allows for two different interpretations. One is where all the shocks
affect every bank individually and then the effect is transmitted through the networks, and
m is identity matrix, while the second one assumes the shocks to be entirely aggregate and
each bank has a different exposure, and m is unconstrained. Column j of m represent the
exposure of banks to shock j .

   The estimation problem is to uncover the unobserved networks from the moments of the
observed variables.




                                                  16
2.2.1   Idiosyncratic Shocks' Network


This subsection first discusses the case where a network is hit only by idiosyncratic shock.
In this interpretation any correlation in the risk factors is purely explained by the structure
of the network. i.e., every financial institution is hit by an idiosyncratic shock, and all the
correlation comes from the network.

   Like before, we consider shocks propagate through a constant network (4). In this scenario
we assume that the each shock n in the shock vector    t   (an N -by-1 vector), is a idiosyncratic
shock that only affects financial institutions n, and those idiosyncratic shocks, as the name
suggested are independent of each other. In other words, the overall model can be described
as follows:




                                      Fm,t = (1 - m )-1 m        t                            (6)

                               E [ t [i] t [j ]] = 0                                          (7)

                                        m = I                                                 (8)

where i and j represent the index of shocks. In this case, m is always an identity matrix,
so we define observed networks
                                            m = m


2.2.2   Aggregate Shocks' Network


The second representation assumes that the shocks continue to be independent, but that
they affect all financial institutions through a constant propagation. Here all those shocks
are aggregate. The banks are all exposed to those shocks, and in addition, there are additional
indirect effects through the network. For each network m, the representation is similar to

                                                17
the previous one

                                            Fm,t = (1 - m )-1 m         t                              (9)

                                    E [ t [i] t [j ]] = 0                                             (10)

Define
                                       m = I - ((I - m )-1 m )-1                                      (11)

Then
                                           Fm,t = (I - m )-1     t                                    (12)

Here, the second interpretation has exactly the same observed network with the first one.
The difference is that the observed network does not directly equals the model network, as
it also encodes exposure information. However, understanding the observed network in the
second representation is as important as the first one, because the effect of a large exposure
to aggregate risk for banks with high centrality is more devastating.

       In the identification process, we cannot differentiate between these two models. The two
models are equivalent, that m is an over parametrization and for each network  hit by
aggregate shocks, we can always find a corresponding 9 . Klein and Vella (2009) used the
second interpretation, while ours uses the first interpretation. We use bank CDS data and
assumes that shock are idiosyncratic. For details of the two above interpretations, see the
summary in (Lewbel, 2012).

       As will become clear in the next section, the model as currently specified cannot be
estimated using standard methods. We rely on an method called identification through
heteroskedasticity to solve the problem of estimation.10 Next subsection discusses the so-
   9
       This is true as we assume that m is invertable.
  10
       See Rigobon (2003), Sentana and Fiorentini (2001). For the description of the original procedure see
Wright (1928). For further developments see Lewbel (2012), Lewbel (2018a), and Lewbel (2018b). For
applications on crises see Caporin et al. (2018) and for applications on monetary policy see Nakamura and
Steinsson (2018), Rigobon and Sack (2003), Rigobon and Sack (2004), and Rigobon and Sack (2008).

                                                     18
lution to the identification problem. A crucial ingredient is the presence of heteroskedas-
ticity. Therefore, we assume that there are regimes of economic environments, denoted by
h  {1, 2, и и и , H }. Let Rh be the set of time instances t that belongs to heteroskedastic
regime h. Furthermore, define nh = |Rh | as the number of samples in regime h. If time
t  Rh , then the shock at that time instance is distributed   t    N (0, h ).



2.3    The identification problem

The identification procedure we use in this paper is related to the identification through
heteroskedasticity developed in Rigobon (2003). The intuition of the identification can be
developed in a two by two endogenous system of equations, see Appendix A. In this section,
we focus on the identification of a multi-bank financial network.

   Suppose there are N banks and M types of shock (or networks). Suppose further that
the networks 1 , 2 , и и и , M are constant over time, but assume the variance of shock          is
time-varying, i.e., there is heteroskedasticity in the time series data. Let h , a diagonal
matrix, be the variance of shock   in regime h  {1, 2, и и и , H }, be unknown constants.

   The model parameters we need to identify are
                                                  
                                              M
                                        {m }m=1
                                =                 ,
                                        {h }H h=1


and the number of parameters for each network m is N (N - 1) + N                h   wmh . The first
term comes from the networks. There are N (N - 1) elements in each network (diagonal are
ones). The second tem comes from the variance of the structural shocks. The shock affects
N banks for each regime -- and there are       h   wmh regimes in which the specific network
dominates.

   In this section, we will start by assuming wmh is known. Later, we will show how it can

                                             19
be estimated. Then, observed moments (moment constraints) are given by the variance-
covariance matrix of Xi in each regime h. Without loss of generality, we can assume that
m, E [Fm,t ] = 0. The following constraints are obtained
                                       M
                   EtRh Xt Xt -                wmh (I - m )-1 h (I - m )-                     = 0,
                                       m=1

where EtRh Xt Xt denotes the expected value of the matrix Xt Xt given that t belongs to
regime h. Because wmh  {0, 1} and                 m   wmh = 1, the above constraints can be written as



                  EtRh Xt Xt - (I - m )-1 h (I - m )-                           = 0, wwh = 1.                (13)

                                                            M
      In the above, each matrix EtRh Xt Xt -                m=1    (I - m )-1 h (I - m )-            is a N -by-N
                                                                     N (N +1)
symmetric matrix, therefore each regime h provides                      2
                                                                                    moment constraints. In total,
                            N (N +1)
  h   wmh regimes implies      2           h   wmh moment constraints.

      The condition for an exact or over-identified model is


                                                                  N (N + 1)
                         N (N - 1) + N                    wmh                           wmh                  (14)
                                                  h
                                                                      2             h

which implies that the data must have at least

                                                          wmh  2                                             (15)
                                                      h

for just-identification and
                                                          wmh  3                                             (16)
                                                      h

for over-identification. i.e., we need each network to dominate in at least 3 regimes to achieve
over-identification. This identification is the order condition: how many equations are needed
for the system to have less unknowns than knowns. In the single network case, this is simple:
the single network will dominate all regimes, hence H =                         h   wmh . In the multiple network

                                                           20
case, we need to figure out how many different mixture of networks (M) present in the data,
and which network dominate which regimes. Those two questions are fundamental questions
for the identification of many mixture models, and we will discuss them in more detail later
in Section 4



2.4        Solution Uniqueness

When there is a single network, parameters in the above model can be estimated via the
Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). We define the score as a vector function

                    g (, h ) = Xt Xt - (I - )-1 h (I - )-                                               (17)
                                                                             tRh ,h=1,иии ,H

where {и}h=1,иии ,H denote the H -column vector whose entry are evaluated at h = 1, и и и H .
Estimation is achieved by solving the optimization problem11

                 min EtRh g (, h ) V -1 EtRh g (, h )
                 A,h

                  s.t. g (, h ) = Xt Xt - (I - )-1 h (I - )-                                            (18)
                                                                                tRh ,h=1,иии ,H

                       h are diagonal.

       GMM requires that the score function is zero iff the system parameters are correct. We
can prove that this requirement is satisfied when there is only one network, i.e. M = 1. To
prepare for the proof, we define  =             diag (1 ) diag (2 ) и и и diag (H ) , where diag (и)
denotes the diagonal entries of the matrix in the form of a column vector. In addition, define
h = EtRh Xt Xt

Definition 1. Kruskal rank (Stegeman and Sidiropoulos, 2007) Kruskal rank k of a matrix
A is the maximum value of k such that ANY k columns and rows of the matrix A are linearly
independent.
  11
       V is a weighting matrix in the GMM. The GMM is valid as long as V is positive definite, but an optimal
V is propotional to the variance-covariance matrix of the score.

                                                      21
Lemma 1. If (i). M = 1, (ii). I -  has full rank and (iii). The Kruskal rank of  is 2 or
higher, then h - (I - )-1 h (I - )-          = 0 has a unique solution.


    Note unlike regular matrix rank, which requires it exists K columns or rows that are
linearly independent, the Kruskal rank requires ANY k columns and rows are linearly inde-
pendent. In the context of our identification problem, this means that the variance of shocks
need to present enough heteroskedasticity to obtain a unique solution.

    Intuition of the proof:

    The identification problem is equivalent to a tensor decomposition problem (for details
of this equivalence, refer to the Appendix). According to the Kruskal's rank condition, if

                       Krank (ar ) + Krank (ar ) + Krank (r )  2R + 2

where Krank (и) stands for Kruskal rank, then the tensor decomposition problem has a
unique solution. In the above equation, given assumption (ii), we have Krank (ar ) = N .
Furthermore, R is the rank of the tensor in (36), which equals M N . Inserting the numbers
into the Kruskal's rank condition and considering assumption (i) and (iii), we obtain the
solution uniqueness.




3     Results: Single Network Estimation under Endogene-
      ity

Throughout this paper we use Credit Default Swap (CDS) as a measure of the risk of bank
bonds. The mechanism of CDS can partly justify the additivity assumption (5): suppose
Fm,t is a CDS that only covers one specific type of shocks (e.g. interest rate). Then to cover
all types of shocks (interest rate, GDP, stock index, etc.), one has to purchase multiple CDS

                                             22
for all those types of shocks, and the overall cost is the addition of each individual CDS, i.e.,
        M
Xt =    m=1   Fm,t .

   Suppose there is a set of shocks that we are interested in. A question arises whether
or not we can measure them directly rather than model them as exogenous variables. E.g.,
suppose we are interested in the risk propagation caused by the fluctuation of interest rate,
then we may use the time series of interest rates to fit the model. However, one should
note that it is not the interest rate at each time instant that affects CDS, but rather, it
is the expectation of interest rate over future time instances that does. Furthermore, it
is the change of expectation, rather than the change of interest rate itself, that acts as a
shock. Therefore, in the lack of a model for such expectation, it is better to model them as
exogenous shocks and obtain their variance through the identification process.

   Figure 2 shows the 100-day moving volatility of the 10 banks of interest. The first thing to
notice is that they exhibit a significant regime shift of heteroskedasticity over time. Around
the time of Nov. 2009, the volatilities of CDS of all 10 banks are high, while the volatilities
are significantly lower in mid-2010. In addition, their volatility co-move most of the time,
despite regime shifts. The fact that they co-move, allow us to identify a network that is
well connected. Apart from similarities in the overall trend, the CDS volatilities exhibit a
certain level of bank-specific movements. For example, in early-2016, the CDS of Capital One
Financial Corporation has very high volatility that is comparable with that around late 2009.
In contrast, the CDS of Morgen Stanley is at a relatively low historical level. That kind of
bank-specific characteristic could allow as explore the different risk propagation mechanisms
among different banks.




                                               23
              30                                                 120                                                   30



              25                                                 100                                                   25



              20                                                  80                                                   20



              15                                                  60                                                   15



              10                                                  40                                                   10



               5                                                  20                                                   5



               0                                                   0                                                   0
                Jan-2010   Jan-2012   Jan-2014   Jan-2016           Jan-2010     Jan-2012    Jan-2014   Jan-2016        Jan-2010   Jan-2012   Jan-2014   Jan-2016




                              (a) JPM                                              (b) BAC                                           (c) WFC
              60                                                 90                                                   120

                                                                 80
              50                                                                                                      100
                                                                 70

              40                                                 60                                                    80

                                                                 50
              30                                                                                                       60
                                                                 40

              20                                                 30                                                    40

                                                                 20
              10                                                                                                       20
                                                                 10

               0                                                  0                                                    0
                Jan-2010   Jan-2012   Jan-2014   Jan-2016          Jan-2010     Jan-2012     Jan-2014   Jan-2016        Jan-2010   Jan-2012   Jan-2014   Jan-2016




                                  (d) C                                               (e) GS                                            (f) MS
              30                                                 30                                                   45

                                                                                                                      40
                                                                 25
              25
                                                                                                                      35

                                                                 20                                                   30
              20
                                                                                                                      25
                                                                 15
                                                                                                                      20
              15
                                                                 10                                                   15

                                                                                                                      10
              10
                                                                  5
                                                                                                                       5

               5                                                  0                                                    0
                Jan-2010   Jan-2012   Jan-2014   Jan-2016          Jan-2010      Jan-2012    Jan-2014   Jan-2016        Jan-2010   Jan-2012   Jan-2014   Jan-2016




                              (g) COF                                             (h) HSBC                                            (i) AXP
                                                            40


                                                            35


                                                            30


                                                            25


                                                            20


                                                            15


                                                            10


                                                            5


                                                            0
                                                             Jan-2010          Jan-2012      Jan-2014      Jan-2016




                                                                                  (j) CSGN

Figure 2: 100 days moving volatility of the 10 banks of interest. CDS data of 10 largest
banks in US are collected from Sep. 1, 2009 to June. 20 2017. The stock exchange id tickers
of the 10 banks are JPM, BAC, WFC, C, GS, MS, COF, HSBC, AXP, and CSGN.


                                                                                            24
3.1    Selection of Regimes

As mentioned in previous sections, our model is not uniquely identifiable if the variance of
shock is constant. When the variance of shock is not constant, we can divide our data into
different heteroskedastic regimes. Because the network parameters are constant over regimes,
additional regimes could offer more additional constraints than additional unknowns. With
enough heteroskedastic regimes, our model can be uniquely identified (Rigobon, 2003). In
practice, however, dividing data into heteroskedastic regimes is not trivial. An effective
regime division method should achieve heteroskedasticity among regimes and maintaining
homogeneity within regimes. In addition, the divided regimes should have some reasonable
interpretations in macroeconomics. There are two broad categories of methods to identify
heteroskedastic regimes: regimes divided by statistical properties of the data itself, and
regimes divided by other exogenous variables (in our case, it makes sense to use macroe-
conomic factors). An identification process using regimes defined by statistical properties
is named statistical identification, and an identification process using regimes defined by
macroeconomic factors is named macroeconomic identification. In this section, we will intro-
duce those two categories of regime divisions in detail, and then apply both to our problem
of identifying contingent linear financial networks.

   The first category of regime dividing methods is by statistical properties of the data itself.
Because we want to separate the variance of shock, it makes sense to look at the quantile
level of CDS data volatility. To maximize the separation of unobserved networks, one could
use the quantile level of volatility of CDS to define regimes. For example, if there are two
banks A and B in the network, one can define four regimes: bank A's volatility is at top
20% quantile level while B is not; bank B's volatility is at top 20% quantile level while A
is not; both banks' volatility is at top 20% quantile level, and neither banks' volatility is
at top 20% quantile level. Regimes with insufficient number of samples are not used in the



                                              25
identification process. It is clear that the overall financial network cannot be the same in
different regimes.

   However, regimes divided by a fixed quantile level is usually very unbalanced, i.e., the
low volatility regimes have far more data points than the high volatility regimes. From an
economic perspective, this is fine because exceptionally high volatility only occurs during
crises. For identification purposes, however, this is not optimal, and many regimes have so
few data points to be used in the identification. Alternatively, we could use unsupervised
learning techniques, such as K-mean and Gaussian Mixture Model to divide data into groups
according to their volatility levels. Intuitively, a clustering algorithm group data points at
different time instances into subsets, and maximize the similarities of the volatility vector in
each subset. Due to the inherent limitation of most clustering algorithms, the global optimal
grouping is usually very difficult to find, and the algorithm is sometimes trapped at local
optimal solutions. If the dimension of the volatility vector is very high, i.e., we are identifying
the network for a large number of banks, then it is even harder for the algorithm to find the
global optimal solutions. In this case, we can reduce the dimension of the volatility vector
by applying PCA prior to clustering.

   The second category of regime dividing methods is by macroeconomic factors. While the
above selection of regimes could maximize the separation of unobserved networks, it does not
have any economic interpretation. To draw a connection with the macroeconomic environ-
ment, one could use the quantile level of macroeconomic factors instead of quantile levels of
CDS volatility. The macroeconomic factors we choose include inflation rate, oil/commodity
index, security index, market volatility indicators, currency index, and interest rate/yield.
Because the CDS data is available daily, ideally we would like all the above macroeconomic
factors to be daily as well. Daily inflation data, in particular, is available through the MIT
Billion Price Project (Cavallo and Rigobon, 2016) and the PriceStats data platform.



                                                26
3.2    Estimates: Statistical Identification

         JPM      BAC      WFC      C        GS       MS       COF      HSBC     AXP      CSGN
 JPM              -0.01    0.14     -0.08    0.26     0.03     -0.03    0.07     -0.02    0.04
                  (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.02)
 BAC     0.36              0.99     -0.11    0.53     0.06     0.11     0.09     0.04     0.02
         (0.18)            (0.05)   (0.04)   (0.1)    (0.07)   (0.06)   (0.1)    (0.03)   (0.07)
 WFC     0.2      0.13              0.08     -0.01    0.01     0.37     -0.02    0.03     -0.09
         (0.05)   (0.02)            (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.01)   (0.02)
 C       0.03     0.17     0.22              0.11     0.18     0.09     0.1      0.04     -0.06
         (0.16)   (0.04)   (0.25)            (0.14)   (0.09)   (0.1)    (0.08)   (0.04)   (0.03)
 GS      0.61     0.05     -0.03    0.01              0.47     0.02     0.1      -0.06    -0.03
         (0.08)   (0.03)   (0.08)   (0.03)            (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.03)
 MS      0.25     0.04     -0.11    0.2      1.0               -0.03    0.07     0.09     0.13
         (0.07)   (0.04)   (0.08)   (0.03)   (0.01)            (0.06)   (0.05)   (0.03)   (0.04)
 COF     -0.02    -0.02    0.76     0.22     0.04     -0.14             0.01     0.01     0.16
         (0.06)   (0.02)   (0.06)   (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.03)            (0.05)   (0.03)   (0.03)
 HSBC    0.14     0.02     -0.05    -0.01    0.1      0.06     0.02              -0.12    0.23
         (0.07)   (0.02)   (0.05)   (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.03)            (0.02)   (0.04)
 AXP     0.27     -0.01    0.12     0.53     -0.45    0.08     0.61     -0.24             0.04
         (0.12)   (0.03)   (0.1)    (0.05)   (0.09)   (0.06)   (0.08)   (0.11)            (0.06)
 CSGN    0.3      -0.01    -0.34    -0.02    -0.1     0.14     0.21     0.8      0.17
         (0.09)   (0.06)   (0.09)   (0.03)   (0.08)   (0.07)   (0.06)   (0.09)   (0.03)

Table 1: Estimates of the network structure. Standard deviations (in brackets) are obtained
by bootstrapping (2000 resamples) across regimes. In this case, regimes are decided by CDS
quantile. There are H = 20 regimes.



                                               27
        Figure 3: Visualization of the single network identified by statistical regimes


We now turn to the estimation results for our linear network model. As defined in Section 2,
we estimate the linear shock propagation channel among the top 10 US banks. In our esti-
mates, we assume that the linear structural parameters that we estimate is always between
-1 and 1. i.e.,
                                   i,j,m  [-1, 1], i, j, m.                               (19)

Mathematically, this constraint will remove any non-unique solutions due to columns per-
mutations. Economically, this means that the bank which receives a shock directly is most
affected. This approach of removing permutation solutions will be problematic if a lot of
the estimated structural parameters are on the boundary (i.e., the constraint (19) is binding

                                              28
for a lot of parameters). However, at least for the CDS spread dataset that we study, only
1 parameters is on the boundary in statistical identification, and 3 parameters are on the
boundary in macroeconomic identification.

       Table 1 shows the estimates of the 10-by-10 network structure using statistical identifi-
cation.12 Standard deviations (in brackets) are obtained by bootstrapping (2000 resamples)
across regimes. In this case, as the name "statistical identification" suggested, regimes are
decided by CDS quantile levels discussed in Section 3.1. The matrix in Table 1 can be re-
garded as a weighted directed graph. Each column shows where the shock is originated from,
and each row shows where the shock propagates to. For example, the structural parameter
in the 4th column (Citigroup) and the 1st row (JP Morgan) represents the channel where
shock propagates from Citigroup to JP Morgan. In an earlier example in Section 2.1, we used
the correlation between Citigroup to JP Morgan as an example to show that the correlation
between banks can be very volatile. Here the structural parameter, on the other hand, is
reliably estimated with bootstrapping standard deviation of only 0.02.

       The estimated matrix of structural parameters is asymmetric in general. However, this
does not mean any causal relationship between each pair of banks. In our original model,
without (19), any column permutation of  will give a new solution and change the direction
of edges of the weighted directional graph in Table 1. Now with constraint (19), the directions
of the edges of the graph are pinned down by the constraint, but not by any inherent causality
in the data.

       Figure 3 gives a visualization of the same network. The values of structural parameters
are represented by the color and size of the corresponding circles. Positive structural pa-
  12
       We do not use Lasso in this small scale estimation problem, because Lasso may introduce bias that affects
our statistical tests in the next section. Furthermore, in our identification using CDS data, a reasonable
amount of Lasso penalty will not change the result much. However, in a larger scale estimate (e.g., a banking
network with 1000+ nodes), Lasso will be very useful in obtaining sparse networks.


                                                        29
rameters are displayed in blue and negative structural parameters are displayed in red. In
addition, color intensity and the area of the circles are proportional to the absolute values of
the structural parameters. The visualization helps identify patterns in the risk transmission
mechanism. For example, Wells Fargo is exposed to a number of different shocks, while Bank
of America is more resilient to shocks transmitted from other banks.




                                              30
3.3    Estimates: Macro Identification

         JPM      BAC      WFC      C        GS       MS       COF      HSBC     AXP      CSGN
 JPM              -0.01    0.23     -0.06    0.19     0.04     -0.04    0.23     -0.02    0.05
                  (0.02)   (0.06)   (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.07)   (0.02)   (0.02)
 BAC     0.55              1.0      -0.04    0.34     0.29     -0.36    -0.28    -0.08    0.12
         (0.17)            (0.14)   (0.12)   (0.12)   (0.08)   (0.08)   (0.19)   (0.03)   (0.05)
 WFC     0.25     0.07              0.03     0.0      0.01     0.19     0.13     0.03     -0.06
         (0.05)   (0.02)            (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.02)
 C       -1.0     0.25     0.24              0.3      0.35     0.16     -0.6     0.08     -0.18
         (0.16)   (0.09)   (0.27)            (0.14)   (0.09)   (0.19)   (0.25)   (0.04)   (0.1)
 GS      0.37     0.01     -0.07    0.06              0.52     0.0      0.22     -0.05    -0.13
         (0.07)   (0.02)   (0.05)   (0.03)            (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.06)   (0.02)   (0.03)
 MS      0.41     -0.0     0.14     0.17     1.0               -0.26    0.01     0.06     0.2
         (0.13)   (0.04)   (0.11)   (0.04)   (0.03)            (0.06)   (0.1)    (0.04)   (0.04)
 COF     -0.13    0.14     0.57     0.08     0.01     -0.14             0.03     0.01     0.19
         (0.07)   (0.02)   (0.09)   (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.04)            (0.06)   (0.04)   (0.03)
 HSBC    0.4      0.02     0.17     -0.02    0.15     -0.05    0.01              -0.04    0.26
         (0.1)    (0.03)   (0.08)   (0.05)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.04)            (0.02)   (0.04)
 AXP     -0.03    0.02     -0.04    0.49     -0.55    0.17     0.38     0.14              -0.14
         (0.12)   (0.04)   (0.17)   (0.05)   (0.14)   (0.1)    (0.13)   (0.1)             (0.07)
 CSGN    0.38     0.1      -0.08    -0.02    -0.24    0.17     -0.04    0.78     0.14
         (0.1)    (0.03)   (0.07)   (0.03)   (0.07)   (0.04)   (0.05)   (0.08)   (0.02)

Table 2: Estimates of the network structure. Standard deviations (in brackets) are obtained
by bootstrapping (2000 resamples) across regimes. In this case, regimes are decided by
macroeconomic indicators. There are H = 20 regimes.



                                              31
    Figure 4: Visualization of the single network identified by macroeconomic regimes


If we select regimes by the quantile levels of macroeconomic factors rather than the quantile
levels of CDS spreads, we obtain estimates of the network by macro identification. Table 1
and Figure 3 shows the result of macro identification. Similarly to the statistical identifica-
tion, Table 2 shows the estimates of the 10-by-10 network structure. Standard deviations
(in brackets) are obtained by bootstrapping (2000 resamples) within regimes. Furthermore,
Figure 4 gives a visualization of the network. The values of structural parameters are repre-
sented by the color and size of the corresponding circles. Positive structural parameters are
displayed in blue and negative structural parameters are displayed in red.

   In macro identification, standard deviations of structural parameters are estimated by

                                              32
bootstrapping within each regime, as opposed to bootstrapping across regimes in the entire
dataset for statistical identification. This is because the regimes and networks are inter-
changeable. When we bootstrap the whole dataset, what constitutes network 1 changes.
and in fact, the computer has no way to pick network 1 always, and this will exacerbate the
standard errors. In the end, the estimates are the mixture of the networks.

    Comparing Figure 3 with Figure 4 we notice that the two networks are almost identical.
This is because the linear network identified using our approach is the same no matter how
regimes are selected. In the last subsection and this subsection, we are using the same
dataset, and the model we adopt is a linear model, hence the underlying linear financial
network is the same. The bootstrapping standard deviations, on the other hand, are very
different between statistical identification and macroeconomics identification. Both methods
give consistent estimators but the estimators converge at different rates as the number of
data points increases.




4    Multiple Contingent Network Estimation

This section presents a test for the multiple network assumption. In particular, we propose a
testing procedure that compares the consistency of the estimates of structural variables in a
single network case versus a multiple network case. In a point-wise test, one can obtain the
distribution of differences and carry out the test without any assumptions on distributions.
However, a point-wise test cannot provide a summary of the results. If we further assume that
structural variables follow independent but not necessarily identical Gaussian distributions,
we can test the sum of normalized residuals, which follows a Chi-squared distribution.




                                             33
4.1   F-test for Network Contingency and the Rejection of the Single
      Network Hypothesis

In this subsection, we construct an intuitive F-test that is used to reject the single net-
work hypothesis. Suppose one observes two sequences of data {Xt }tD1 and {Xt }tD2 , and
estimates structural parameters D1 and D2 . We want to know whether the two sets of
structural parameters are consistent. Let i,j,1 and i,j,2 denote the ith row, j th column
entry of the network estimated from data set D1 and D2 respectively.

   We begin with a number of assumptions
                                                                           
                                                                       
Asymptotic Assumptions: (a) The parameter space  of  =                      is a compact
                                                                   {h }H
                                                                       h=1
           d
subset of R , and the true value 0 lies in the interior of the parameter space . (b) The
moment function   g ( ) defined in (17) identifies 0 : g ( ) = 0 iff  = 0 . (c) The
empirical moment function   g
                            ^( ) converges uniformly in probability to the moment
function   g ( ), namely sup g                                           ^ ( ) =
                             ^( ) - g ( ) p 0 (d) The empirical Jacobian G
                                                                                    

 g
 ^( )   is continuous and is uniformly consistent for the Jacobian matrix, G( ) =   
                                                                                     g ( ),
          ^ ( ) - G( ) p 0 (e) The matrix G(0 ) G(0 ) is positive definite. (f) The
i.e., sup G
empirical moment function evaluated at the true parameter value obeys a central limit
theorem:
                                   
                                   ng
                                    ^(0 )  N (0, )

asymptotically, where n is the number of samples.

   Note those assumptions are inherently the same with the assumptions in the original
GMM paper by Hansen (1982). Note that the key to our single network test is the solu-
tion uniqueness assumption (b) of GMM summarized above. Failing to establish a result
for solution uniqueness will cause incorrect estimates of parameter distribution. Generally



                                            34
speaking, the bootstrap estimated parameter distribution will have a larger variance and
therefore fails to reject the hypothesis even if the hypothesis is incorrect. Lemma 1 in our
paper deals with this problem.

   Under the null hypothesis that

                                  H0 : i,j,1 and i,j,2 are the same

their difference
                                            i,j,1 - i,j,2                                     (20)

should follows a distribution with zero mean. If the estimated value of ^i,j,1 - ^i,j,2 lies in the
0.05 left or right quantiles of the bootstrapping distribution, we can reject the null hypothesis
and claim that with 90% confidence

                                  H1 : D1 and D2 are different


   The above point-wise test has the advantage of distribution-free. However, without a
summarizing statistic, one cannot draw conclusions on the overall network. Suppose further
                                                           2
that i,j,1 - i,j,2 follows Gaussian distribution N ( i,j , i,j ). Under the null hypothesis that

                                  H0 : D1 and D2 are the same                                 (21)

their squared difference (i,j,1 - i,j,2 )2 /i,j
                                            2
                                                follows a Chi-squared difference with degree of
freedom 1.

   In addition, under the independence assumption, the sum of squared differences

                                  (i,j,1 - i,j,2 )2 /i,j
                                                     2
                                                          K (N (N - 1))
                            i=j


where K denotes a Chi-squared distribution.



                                                 35
   If the estimated value of     i=j   (i,j,1 - i,j,2 )2 /i,j
                                                          2
                                                              lies in the 0.1 right quantiles of the
bootstrapping distribution, we can reject the null hypothesis and claim that with 90% con-
fidence
                                H1 : D1 and D2 are different



4.2       Estimates: the Sensitivity of Network Structures to Macroeco-
          nomic Environments

Using the statistical test derived in the last subsection, we are able to compare the network
contingency given any two sets of data. In this subsection, we divide our dataset according to
quantile levels of macroeconomic factors and test the network contingency to those factors.
This procedure is analogous to a sensitivity test of our model. For example, we first look at
the network contingency to the inflation rate.

   More specifically, let Xt , a 10-by-1 vector time series, denote the CDS spread of top 10
US banks, and St denote the time series of a macroeconomic factor. Similarly to Section 3,
macroeconomic factors in this paper include Price Index, WTI, S&P Index, VIX Volatility,
3-month Interest Rate, US Dollar Index, and 10-year minutes 3-month Interest Yield Curve.
The dataset is divided into two parts

                  D1 = {Xt |St  median[St ]}, D2 = {Xt |St > median[St ]}

and both the pointwise test and Chi-squared test in Section 4.2 is carried out on these two
sub-datasets. The result of tests are summarized in Table 3. In this table, we do not list the
corresponding p-values because the J-statistics is large enough to reject the null hypothesis
with p-value less than 0.01 in all scenarios.




                                                 36
                             Mean diff        Mean std   Num. rejections   J-stat
             WTI               0.212803       0.131362               23    373.41
             SP500             0.180177       0.138155               11    340.13
             VIX               0.156272       0.119048               23    256.89
             i_3M              0.158900       0.141999               15    315.09
             USD               0.188294       0.136103               19    375.21
             i_10Y-i_3M        0.185558       0.152019               20    279.12
             Inflation         0.143617       0.141792               22    176.85

             Table 3: Structural changes driven by macroeconomic indicators


   Among the seven macroeconomic factors, network structural changes are most significant
when asset prices are used to split the sample. Inflation and Volatility (as measured by the
VIX) have the least rejections. Nevertheless, in all seven cases we reject the hypothesis of
single network.



4.3    Estimating mixture models using EM-Algorithm

Although we build the model with a mixture of multiple networks, so far, the identification
process has mostly been with a single network. In the case of a single network, the mixture
random variable w := {wmh }M  ,H
                           m=1,h=1 is trivial, and the identification is through the GMM

algorithm. Because the last subsection showed that a single network is not sufficient to
describe the data, we move towards the model setup of a multi-network mixture.

   Recall the main characteristics of our mixture model as follows: the data Xt in each
regime t  Rh is generated by
                                          M
                                 Xt =         wmh (1 - m )-1   t                       (22)
                                        m=1


                                                 37
where
                                         t    N (0, h )

 := {m }M               H
        m=1 and  := {m }h=1 are parameters to be identified. In addition, wmh denote

the indicator
              random variable that equals to 1 if network m dominates in regime h. Assume
       1 w.p. pm
       
wmh =               . Because only one network dominates in each regime,
       0 o.w.
       

                                             M
                                                   pm = 1                               (23)
                                             m=1

Our objectives is to estimate parameters  and  by observing Xt .

   Similarly to the case of single network identification, we construct
                                              1
                                     h =                 X t Xt
                                              nh   tRh

the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of population variance of Xt in each heteroskedas-
ticity regimes h. As it will become clear later in this subsection, using h will allow us to
separate the identification of  and . Furthermore, it allows us to estimate each m sepa-
rately.

   The above mixture model is difficult to identify, because wmh is a random variable which
is not observed. In this case, the Expectation-Maximization (EM) Algorithm can be used to
make the problem tractable. Note that  := {h }H
                                              h=1 given w is Wishart distributed, even

though  itself is not. The EM Algorithm takes this advantage by iterating between the E
step and M step. In the E step, it computes the discrete distribution of wmh given current
parameter estimates, and calculate the function

           Q(,  | (current) , (current) ) = Ew|,(current) ,(current) [log L(, ; , w)]

where L(, ; , w) is the likelihood function assuming w is observable. In the M step, it
computes the optimal parameters  and  to maximize the Q(и) function. It is a general

                                                   38
result of EM that improving Q(и) improves the likelihood function of the mixture model
L(, ; ), see Little and Rubin (2019).

    A critical step of implementing the EM algorithm is to calculate the likelihood function
of  given w. Given wmh = 1, i.e. network m dominates in regime h, we have

                  vmh := nh (1 - m )h (1 - m ) =                              t t    Wishart(h , nh )                        (24)
                                                                       tRh


The Wishart distributed vmh has a probability density function (PDF)

                                                1                                                           -1
                 fV (vmh ) =                    L                     |vmh |(nh -N -1)/2 e-(1/2) tr(h            vmh )
                                                                                                                             (25)
                               2nh N/2 |h |nh /2 N           nh
                                                              2

where nh is the number of samples in regime h, N is the number of banks in the network,
                                         L
| и | is the determinant of a matrix, and N (и) is the multivariate Gamma function with
dimension N .

    Now we can write the likelihood function L(, ; , w) using the Wishart PDF
                                                                                     Iwmh =1
                                L(, ; , w) =                            fV (vmh )                                            (26)
                                                         m        h


    Recall that we can separate the estimation of the network matrices  with the shock
variances  in the single network case. Similarly, we can also do that in EM, but for a
different reason: the optimal diagonal h that maximize (25) equals to the diagonal entries
of vmh . i.e.,

Lemma 2. Let vmh be a given N -by-N positive semidefinite matrix. Also, define PD as the
set of positive semidefinite diagonal matrices. Then

                                       1                                                       -1                 1
   h := arg max
                                    nh /2   L            |vmh |(nh -N -1)/2 e-(1/2) tr(h            vmh )
                                                                                                            =        diag (vmh )
                 h PD 2nh N/2   |h |        N
                                                    nh                                                            nh
                                                     2
                                                                                                                              (27)



                                                             39
   The proof is given in Appendix C.

   The above Lemma means that we do not have to identify the join of  and . We can
just identify , and the optimal  can be obtained analytically. Now that we have separated
the identification of the network  with , we focus on a EM-algorithm that identifies . At
this point, we are looking at a mixture model with parameters , hidden random variables
w, and observed random variables . We define the function Q as follows
               Q( | (current) ) = Ew|,(current) [log L(; , w)]

                                      =              Ew|,(current) Iwmh =1 log fV| (vmh )
                                            m
                                                                                              (28)
                                                 h

                                      =              pmh log fV| (vmh )
                                            m    h

where fV| is the Wishart PDF given optimal , and pmh := P(wmh = 1|h ; ) is the
probability that network m dominates in a specific regime h. Inserting (27) into (25), we
have
                                   |vmh |(nh -N -1)/2
               fV| (vmh ) =                            и constant not depend on vmh
                                  |diag (vmh )|(nh /2)
hence
                                (current)   nh - N - 1              nh
Q( | (current) ) =             pmh                     log |vmh | -    log |diag (vmh )| + constant
                      m    h
                                                 2                  2
                                                                                               (29)
where vmh = nh (1 - m )h (1 - m ) .

   Another step that plays an important role in EM algorithm is the estimate of pmh and
pm . Note that pmh and pm are two different quantities: pmh is the posterior probability of
wmh = 1 for a specific h. On the other hand, pm is the prior distribution of wmh , which is
the same for all regimes. According to Bayes rule
             pmh := P wmh = 1|h ; (current)

                     = P(wmh = 1; (current) ) и P(h |wmh = 1; (current) ) и constant          (30)
                          current)   (current)
                     = p(
                        m          и fV          (vmh ) и constant

                                                       40
           (current)                               (current)       1   H     (current)
where pm               can be estimated by pm                  =   H   h=1   pmh         , fV is defined in (25) and
                                                       M
the normalizing constant is decided by                 m=1     pmh = 113 .

EM-Algorithm
Take an initial guess of , then iterate between the following E-step and M-step.
E-step:
Update pmh , the probability that network m dominates in regime h, given current estimates
of , according to (30). After that, we use the updated pmh to construct

                                       (current)   nh - N - 1              nh
Q( | (current) ) =                   pmh                      log |vmh | -    log |diag (vmh )| +constant
                             m   h
                                                        2                  2
                                                                                                     (31)
where vmh = nh (1 - m )h (1 - m ) .
M-step:
Update estimates of  by maximizing Q( | (current) ). It is sufficient to update m sepa-
rately by
                                 (current)    nh - N - 1              nh
                       max       pmh                     log |vmh | -    log |diag (vmh )|
                       m
                             h
                                                   2                  2
for each m.


4.4       The number of networks

To obtain the optimal number of networks, we apply the Bayesian information criterion.
The Bayesian information criterion is defined as

                                              BIC = ln(n)k - 2 ln(L).

where n is the number of samples, k is the number of parameters, and L is the maximum
mixture log-likelihood function, see Fraley and Raftery (1998).
 13
      This process is similar to the case of Gaussian mixture models, see Chapter 9 of Bishop (2006)



                                                           41
                    16000                             Negative log-likelihood -2log(L)
                                                      BIC log(n)k-2log(L)
                    15000

                    14000

                    13000

                    12000

                    11000

                    10000
                            1        2       3       4        5          6          7
                                             Number of Networks


                  Figure 5: Negative log-likelihood and BIC vs. No. of networks

       As shown in Figure 5, the optimal number of networks selected by Bayesian information
criteria is 3.



4.5       Network Centrality

In our macro-identification process, we divide regimes according to macroeconomic shocks.
According to the results of EM, it turns out some of those shocks play important roles in the
network switching process, while others only contribute to the network switching marginally.
In Table 4, regimes are grouped by networks in which they dominate. e.g., in regimes 1, 2,
3, 6, 14, 16, 17 and 18, network 1 dominates. On top of that, we list whether or not each
macroeconomic factor is active in each regime.14 Active factors are denoted by 1 and others
by 0.
  14
       By active macroeconomic factor, we mean that the specific macroeconomic factor is in its top 25%
quantile in that regime.


                                                   42
                        Inflation   WTI    S&P   VIX   i_3M   USD   i_10Y-i_3M
            regime 1    0           0      0     0     0      0     0
            regime 2    1           0      0     0     0      0     0
            regime 3    0           1      0     0     0      0     0
            regime 6    1           0      0     1     0      0     0
Network 1
            regime 14   0           0      0     1     1      1     0
            regime 16   1           0      0     0     0      0     1
            regime 17   0           1      0     0     0      0     1
            regime 18   1           1      0     0     0      0     1
            regime 4    0           0      1     0     0      0     0
            regime 8    1           0      1     0     1      0     0
            regime 9    0           0      1     0     0      1     0
Network 2   regime 10   1           0      1     0     0      1     0
            regime 11   0           0      0     1     0      1     0
            regime 12   0           0      1     0     1      1     0
            regime 13   1           0      1     0     1      1     0
            regime 5    0           0      0     1     0      0     0
            regime 7    0           1      0     1     0      0     0
Network 3   regime 15   0           0      0     0     0      0     1
            regime 19   0           0      0     1     0      0     1
            regime 20   1           0      0     1     0      0     1

                        Table 4: Network vs. Macro shocks




                                          43
   From Table 4, we can summarize what each network represents. Network 1, which
includes the regime where no macroeconomic factor is active, can be interpreted as normal
times. Network 2, on the other hand, is very likely to be an asset price shocks, because
S&P and exchange rates are both moving. Network 2 also reflects some short-run monetary
policy that is usually reflected in asset prices. Finally, Network 3 is clearly an uncertainty
shock, as it corresponds to VIX and yield curve activities. We also find that those shocks
have different transmission mechanisms within the networks as can be seen in Figure 7.

   Now that we know there are three networks in the interbank financial system, a systemic
risk measure, namely the Katz centrality, will be calculated for each of the networks. The
Katz centrality (Katz, 1953; Junker and Schreiber, 2008) of a network with adjacency matrix
 is defined as
                               -                          -
                               C Katz = ((I - AT )-1 - I ) I ,                            (32)

where  is a damping factor that satisfies 0   < 1/|max |. In our paper, we choose  = 0.5.

   The Katz centrality is a generalization of the degree centrality. Intuitively, a node in the
graph is more important if it more often receives shocks from other nodes. Furthermore, the
Katz centrality considers both the direct impact from other nodes as well as the cascade im-
pact many steps ago. It assumes that both direct and indirect impacts affect the importance
of a node, given that indirect impacts are discounted by a factor of  after each step. Apart
from original applications in social networks and biological networks, Katz centrality has
also been applied to evaluate systemic risk in financial networks, see (Thurner and Poledna,
2013; Temizsoy et al., 2017). The Katz centrality of the top 10 banks in the US in the three
estimated networks is shown in Table 5.

   To understand the economic intuition of the Katz centrality, we first look at an alternative
definition of it
                                                     N
                                 CKatz (i) =             k (k )ni
                                               k=1 n=1


                                                44
                                         10
     1
         2
             3
                 4
                     5
                         6
                             7
                                 8
                                     9
                                               1
1
                                              0.8
2
                                              0.6
3
                                              0.4
4
                                              0.2
5
                                               0
6
                                              -0.2
7
                                              -0.4
8
                                              -0.6
9
                                              -0.8
10
                                               -1




                                         10
     1
         2
             3
                 4
                     5
                         6
                             7
                                 8
                                     9
                                               1
1
                                              0.8
2
                                              0.6
3
                                              0.4
4
                                              0.2
5
                                               0
6
                                              -0.2
7
                                              -0.4
8
                                              -0.6
9
                                              -0.8
10
                                               -1
                                         10
     1
         2
             3
                 4
                     5
                         6
                             7
                                 8
                                     9




                                               1
1
                                              0.8
2
                                              0.6
3
                                              0.4
4
                                              0.2
5
                                               0
6
                                              -0.2
7
                                              -0.4
8
                                              -0.6
9
                                              -0.8
10                   45
                                               -1




     Figure 6: Estimated 3 networks
                           Network 1       Network 2       Network 3
                  JPM      0.041 (0.005)   0.008 (0.013)   0.055 (0.015)
                  BAC      0.150 (0.018)   0.176 (0.017)   0.195 (0.045)
                  WFC      0.059 (0.006)   0.046 (0.013)   0.066 (0.011)
                  C        0.124 (0.008)   0.152 (0.022)   0.054 (0.039)
                  GS       0.100 (0.012)   0.122 (0.017)   0.139 (0.021)
                  MS       0.181 (0.016)   0.188 (0.021)   0.221 (0.025)
                  COF      0.117 (0.018)   0.054 (0.039)   0.075 (0.032)
                  HSBC     0.037 (0.016)   0.066 (0.036)   0.075 (0.015)
                  AXP      0.084 (0.020)   0.144 (0.033)   0.027 (0.016)
                  CSGN     0.107 (0.012)   0.044 (0.050)   0.095 (0.036)

Table 5: Estimates of network Katz centrality. Centrality values are normalized to sum up
to 1. We use a discount factor  = 0.5. Standard deviations (in brackets) are obtained
by bootstrapping (2000 resamples) across regimes. In this case, regimes are decided by
macroeconomic indicators. There are H = 20 regimes.




                                           46
                                            10

                                            9

                                            8
                  Rank of Katz Centrality
                                            7

                                            6

                                            5

                                            4

                                            3

                                            2                                           Centrality rank in Normal Times
                                                                                        Centrality rank with Asset Pricing Shocks
                                            1                                           Centrality rank with Uncertainty Shocks

                                                 JPM   BAC   WFC   C   GS    MS   COF     HSBC       AXP     CSGN




     Figure 7: Rank of the estimated Katz centrality of in the 3 estimated networks.

From this definition, it is easy to see that the Katz centrality calculates the summation of
an infinite series of impacts given a uniform shock to each bank. In our estimates, centrality
                                                           ~i just means the portion of shock
values are normalized to sum up to 1, therefore each value C
that is transmitted through bank i.

   In summary, we find the data can be explained by 3 networks in the financial network
among the top 10 banks in the US with our criteria. We reject the hypothesis of 1 network
using an F-test and then use the Bayesian information criteria to conclude that 3 networks
are optimal. With 4 or more networks, the model complexity penalty term in the BIC
would standout and reject the models. We are only applying our identification method on
financial networks though, other applications of our identification method could give 4 or
more networks as the optimal solution.

   The three different networks we estimates imply different economic behaviors. The first
network represents normal time, the second network represents an equity market shock, and
the third network represents a VIX shock. Furthermore, the Katz centrality in different


                                                                        47
networks is not the same. Interestingly, some banks are always systemically important (i.e.,
Bank of America and Morgan Stanly), but depending on the type of shocks other banks
might change their rank of centrality.

    Without the multi-network assumption in this paper, we would have incorrectly estimated
a single network. In that case, the centrality rank assuming 1 network is given by JPM:
10, BAC: 2, WFC:9, C:7, GS:3, MS:1, COF:5, HSBC:8, AXP:6, CSGN:4. The resulting
centrality measures, or any other systemic risk measures, will only be the weighted average
of different scenarios in general. As a result, we lack the ability to identify banks that is
systematic with respect to some specific shocks. Furthermore, with WFC for example, the
centrality rank assuming 1 network is only 9th place, but it is actually more important in
all three networks. Such an incorrect estimate of systemic risks could result in suboptimal
decisions for financial practitioners, policymakers and regulators.




5    Conclusions

Understanding the interconnections within the financial system has been a first-order con-
cern in developed economies since the 2008 global financial crises. In fact, macroeconomic
prudential regulation needs to determine which banks and financial institutions are system-
ically important so they can be supervised closely. In the network language, it would mean
that such financial institutions have a large centrality. Most of this analysis has been done
either by concentrating on symmetric responses (computation based on correlations) or by
observing a subset of financial contracts. This approach has been quite fruitful. In our view,
however, both approaches might be incomplete.

    On the one hand, the estimation of networks tends to obviate the directionality of the
effects. In other words, Bank of America might have a large impact on American Express,


                                              48
but the opposite might not be true. Network analysis in the literature tends to obviate this
feature. The second approach, which concentrates on the detail description of the contingent
contracts across banks, could represent a solution to this problem. However, it is virtually
impossible to observe all possible contracts. Therefore, a market price of CDS is conceivably a
more reliable measure of the actual exposure. This ambivalence implies that each procedure
has a weakness that we have tried to address in the current paper. Furthermore, as has
been shown in the literature, the nature of the transmission mechanisms changes with the
shocks hitting the economy Г meaning that the network is contingent on the state of the
economy. We argue that the estimation of an asymmetric and contingent network requires a
different identification method. We develop a methodology based on identification through
heteroskedasticity. Applying this estimation method on CDS data of 10 large banks, we
construct a financial network model and find that the data generating the model is consistent
with three networks, each one contingent on one different macroeconomic shock.

   Our results indicate that the systemically important bank depends on the type of shock
that hits the economy Г which is ultimately transmitted through a different network. Without
our contingent financial network model, it is not possible to identify the importance of each
bank in the financial system when a specific type of shock hits the economy. Indeed, we reject
that the data is explained by a single network Г suggesting that a policy designed based on
that network would be inappropriate when a different transmission mechanism governs the
dynamics of the system.

   From the regulatory point of view, understanding the relative rankings on the financial
institutions and how such ranking shifts in the sample is important. Our data is short and
therefore we are limited in our ability to observe shocks that have not happened yet. For
instance, we have not observed large positive productivity shocks, or relatively high inflation
rates, or even high interest rates. Therefore, our conclusions are conditional to the sample
we have seen. Within that sample, though, it is easy to identify tranquil times, periods

                                              49
when there are shocks to asset prices, and times where uncertainty is high. In those settings,
which bank is systemically important changes. Central banks and regulators need to pay
attention to these changes if the proper macro-prudential regulation is to be designed. In
fact, regulators with misleading information about the financial network may not be able to
make the most appropriate policy decisions to minimize the impact of those shocks.

   Furthermore, the application of our identification method for contingent networks is not
limited to policymaking. For example, asset management practitioners could use our method
to estimate the contingent network and allocate assets according to the dominate shock in
a period of time, and macroeconomists could use our method to evaluate the impact of
macroeconomic interventions. In general, how to model, estimate and intervene in shock
contingent networks is still an open and important topic for future research.




                                             50
Appendices

A     A Single Network Endogenous Model

Assume two banks are related according to the following system of equations and shocks




                                        xt = yt +    t                                  (33)

                                        yt = xt + t                                     (34)

with reduced form,



                                             1
                                   xt =        (t + t )
                                          1 - 
                                             1
                                   yt   =      (t +  t )
                                          1 - 

where t and    t   are the structural shocks and  and  are describing the network.

    As it is, this model cannot be estimated from the data. Equations (33) and (34) describe
the behavior of the data entirely with 4 parameters/variables: two shocks     and  and two
parameters  and  . These four constitute the unknowns of the system. The problem of
identification arises because there are three equations in four unknowns. The observable
variables x and y have zero mean and in the data only three moments can be estimated;
all from the variance-covariance matrix. What are the solutions to the problem? In eco-
nomics, solutions tend to create circumstances in which an additional equation is added to
the system of equations. For instance, the exclusion restriction in the instrumental variable
approach boils down to assuming that one parameter is zero (the exclusion assumption).

                                              51
Randomized controlled trials assume that all the variation is due to the treatment -- again,
this is implicitly assuming that there is no feedback effect ( = 0). This is a very reason-
able assumption when the experiment is properly designed. All these solutions are making
a parameter assumption (usually that a parameter is equal to zero). The identification
through heteroskedasticity has a slightly different flavor. The easiest way to explain how
identification through heteroskedasticity works is to show the system of equation. Assume
that the parameters are stable and that the data has heteroskedasticity. For simplicity as-
sume that there are two heteroskedastic regimes. In this case, it is possible to estimate one
variance-covariance matrix in each regime.
                                                                                
                                                            2  2 2   2      2
                var(xt,1 ) covar(xt,1 , yt,1 )      1       +  ,1  ,1 + ,1
      1 =                                     =             ,1                  
                              var(yt,1 )        (1 -  )2           2  2,1 + ,
                                                                            2
                                                                              1
                                                                                
                                                            2  2 2   2      2
                var(xt,2 ) covar(xt,2 , yt,2 )      1       +  ,2  ,2 + ,2
      2 =                                     =             ,2                  
                              var(yt,2 )        (1 -  )2                    2
                                                                   2  2,2 + , 2


   There are six unknowns in the system. The two parameters ( and  ), and four variances
( 2,1 ,  2,2 , ,
               2         2
                 1 , and ,2 ). As can be seen, there are six equations in six unknowns. This

means that the system of equations is just identified.

   Notice that even though in each regime the system is under-identified (fewer equations
than unknowns) the system as a whole is identified. The key assumptions are two: that the
structural shocks are indeed structural (they are uncorrelated) and that the parameters are
stable. In the end, the parameter stability allows the heteroskedasticity to add additional
equations -- which helps solve the identification problem.

   The intuition of the two endogenous variables case is as follows. First, the graphical
representation of the joint residuals in this model always takes the form of a rotated ellipse.
Second, the rotation is summarized by the variance-covariance matrix.

   In equations (33) and (34), the only meaningful moment we can compute to estimate the

                                              52
degree of contagion is the covariance matrix. An important question is then, what does the
variance-covariance matrix represent? The errors in these models are distributed as a multi-
nomial and their contours are ellipses. To fix concepts, let us start with a simple endogenous
system of equations (33) and (34). The 95th percentile of the errors is distributed as a rotated
ellipse. We can solve for two independent normal distributions from the structural equations
as follows (with some abuse of notation)



                                     xt - yt
                                 1 =          N (0, 1)
                                        
                                     yt - xt
                                 2 =          N (0, 1)
                                        

   Because 1 and 2 are independent with mean zero and variance one, it is possible to
describe the  confidence interval as 2   2
                                     1 + 2 =  . This is exactly an ellipse. Substituting



                                           2                  2
                                xt - yt             yt - xt
                                               +                  =                        (35)
                                                       

   The two axes of the ellipse cannot be computed in closed-form solution, but they depend
on the slope of the curves (structural parameters) as well as the relative variances of the
shocks. In Figure A.1 a graphical representation is shown. Suppose that the blue curve
represents the supply and the red is the demand (when there are no shocks). Then xt
represent quantity and yt represent price. Furthermore, the points reflect some random
realization of structural shocks that leads to a point far from the depicted schedules. The
ellipse represents the 90th percentile. In this particular case  is assumed to be negative
(representing the "demand"), while  is positive. In Figure A.1, the variance of the demand
shocks is larger than the variance of the shocks to the supply, hence, the ellipse is closely
aligned with the supply curve. In the limit, if the variance of the demand is infinitely large,
the ellipse would coincide exactly with the supply curve.

                                               53
       yt




                                                                                  xt

                             Figure A.1: Distribution of Errors


   The form of the ellipse is also summarized by the variance-covariance matrix computed
in the reduced form. Additionally, most of the methodologies we study are based on the
variance-covariance matrix. Therefore, all the sources of bias can be tracked to it. Finally,
as mentioned previously, in this model the only statistic that can be computed from the data
-- that allows us to recover the structural parameters -- is the variance-covariance matrix.




                                             54
        yt




                                                                                    xt

                   Figure A.2: Identification Through Heteroskedasticity


   The intuition behind the identification through heteroskedasticity comes from the rota-
tion of the residual ellipses. When the variances change, for the same parameters, the ellipses
rotate. In Figure A.2, we show two cases: One when the shocks to the demand dominate
(red), and one when the shocks to the supply dominate (blue). In particular, when the
shocks to the demand dominate, then the ellipse approximates the supply curve. In fact,
it is identical to the supply curve if the variance of the demand is infinite relative to the
supply. Conversely, when the supply shocks are larger, then the long axis of the ellipse tilts
toward the demand curve. It is this rotation of the ellipses when the relative variances shift
that provides the identification.

   It is instructive to re-state the underlying assumptions: structural shocks are uncorrelated


                                              55
(quite uncontroversial) and parameters need to be stable across the regimes (so, this is a
good technique to measure spillovers).



B     Equivalent Formulation via Tensor Decomposition

We first show that the identification problem is equivalent to a tensor decomposition problem.

    In previous sections, we identify multiple layers by matching the second moments

                               h = (1 - 1 )-1 h (1 - 1 )-

We define a new N -by-M matrix
                                       A = (1 - 1 )-1


    Then we can write the moment matching equation as

                                         h = Ah A .

Because the matrix h is diagonal, we can further write
                                                N
                                    h =             -
                                                    a r rh -
                                                           ar
                                              r=1

where -
      a r is the rth column of A and rh is the rth diagonal entry of h . Because vector
outer products can be written as tensor products, we can also write
                                          N
                                  h =           (-
                                                 ar-
                                                   a r ) rh
                                          r=1

where  is the tensor product. Now if we stack all the second moments h along a third
dimension, we obtain a N -by-N -by-H tensor [h ] and it holds that
                                           N
                                 [h ] =         ar
                                                - ar
                                                  - -
                                                    r                                    (36)
                                          r=1


                                                    56
where -
      r =      r1 r2 и и и rH             .

    We can obtain estimates of 1 by taking the rank-N tensor decomposition of [h ].

    According to the Kruskal's rank condition, if

                      Krank (ar ) + Krank (ar ) + Krank (r )  2R + 2

then the tensor decomposition problem has a unique solution.



C     Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. First, constants are irrelevant, so we just have to prove

                              1                                               -1               1
           h = arg max
                               nh /2
                                       |vmh |(nh -N -1)/2 e-(1/2) tr(h             vmh )
                                                                                           =      diag (vmh )           (37)
                    h PD   |h |                                                                nh

Define D to be the new optimization variable with D = diag (vmh )/h . Note by definition,
D is a diagonal matrix. Now we insert h = D-1 О diag (vmh ) and change the optimization
variable to D. Now the optimization problem becomes

                                                1                                                        )
             D = arg max                                              |vmh |(nh -N -1)/2 e-(1/2) tr(D                   (38)
                       DPD   |D-1 |nh /2      |diag (vmh )|   nh /2


and we just have to prove that the optimal D is a diagonal matrix with all entries equal to
nh . At this step, we have already separated vmh from this optimization problem. vmh is just
a constant matrix that does not affect the optimal value of D . Leaving out all constants,
and let di be the diagonal entries of D. Note that |D| =                      i   di and tr(D) =             i   di . Now the
optimization problem becomes

                                                                          1
                               di = arg max (               di )nh /2 e- 2    i   di
                                                                                                                        (39)
                                               di >0
                                                       i

The solution of this optimization problem is given by di = nh .


                                                       57
D     Credit Default Swap Data Details and Data Retrieval
      Process

To better assist understanding our results or reproducing our results, we list carefully the
details of data we used in this paper.

    We obtain the par mid spread of the credit default swap of the 10 target banks through
the Thomson Reuters Eikon excel tool.

    Step 1: CDS Ticker search

    Due to the variety of CDS product exist in the market, we first need to decide which
CDS we use. Thomson Reuters has decided a primary CDS for each bank through the ticker
searching service. Input the command

    =@TR("JPM;BAC;WFC;C;GS;MS;COF;HSBC.K;AXP;CSGN.S",
"TR.CDSPrimaryCDSRic","CH=Fd RH=IN",B2)

    into the Eikon excel tool, then we have the tickers of primary CDS products of the target
companies. The obtained tickers are in Table A.1.

    Most of those produces are 5 years CDS contracts traded in US. For HSBC and CSGN,
they are 5 year CDS contracts traded in Euroupe.

    Step 2: Retrieve par mid spread data for CDS

    After obtaining those tickers, we request the actual par mid spread of those CDS products
in the target date range. The command for retrieving spread data is

    =@TR("JPM5YUSAX=R;BAC5YUSAX=R;WFC5YUSAX=R;C5YUSAX=R;
GS5YUSAX=R;MS5YUSAX=R;COF5YUSAX=R;HSBA5YEUAM=R;AXP5YUSAX=R;


                                             58
                              Bank RIC     Primary CDS RIC
                              JPM          JPM5YUSAX=R
                              BAC          BAC5YUSAX=R
                              WFC          WFC5YUSAX=R
                              C            C5YUSAX=R
                              GS           GS5YUSAX=R
                              MS           MS5YUSAX=R
                              COF          COF5YUSAX=R
                              HSBC.K       HSBA5YEUAM=R
                              AXP          AXP5YUSAX=R
                              CSGN.S       CSGN5YEUAM=R

            Table A.1: RIC tickers for primary CDS products of target banks.

CSGN5YEUAM=R","TR.PARMIDSPREAD","Frq=D SDate=20090901 EDate=20170630
CH=Fd;IN RH=date",B2)




References
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). Systemic risk and stability in
  financial networks. The american economic review 105 (2), 564Г608.

Adrian, T. and M. K. Brunnermeier (2016). Covar. American Economic Review 106 (7),
  1705Г1741. Predicting and measuring a financial institution's contribution to systemic risk
  that internalizes externalities and avoids procyclicality.

Allen, F., A. Babus, and E. Carletti (2012). Asset commonality, debt maturity and systemic
  risk. Journal of Financial Economics 104 (3), 519Г534.


                                              59
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000). Financial contagion. Journal of political economy 108 (1),
  1Г33.

Altunbas, Y., L. Gambacorta, and D. Marques-Ibanez (2010). Bank risk and monetary
  policy. Journal of Financial Stability 6 (3), 121Г129.

Anand, K., B. Craig, and G. Von Peter (2015). Filling in the blanks: Network structure and
  interbank contagion. Quantitative Finance 15 (4), 625Г636.

Billio, M., M. Getmansky, A. W. Lo, and L. Pelizzon (2010). Econometric measures of
  systemic risk in the finance and insurance sectors. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Bishop, C. M. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning. springer.

Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2013). Fire sales in a model of complexity. The Journal of
  Finance 68 (6), 2549Г2587.

Cabrales, A., P. Gottardi, and F. Vega-Redondo (2014). Risk-sharing and contagion in
  networks.

Caporin, M., L. Pelizzon, F. Ravazzolo, and R. Rigobon (2018). Measuring sovereign conta-
  gion in europe. Journal of Financial Stability 34, 150Г181.

Cavallo, A. and R. Rigobon (2016). The billion prices project: Using online prices for
  measurement and research. Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (2), 151Г78.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999). Monetary policy shocks: What
  have we learned and to what end? Handbook of macroeconomics 1, 65Г148.

Eichengreen, B., A. Mody, M. Nedeljkovic, and L. Sarno (2012). How the subprime crisis
  went global: evidence from bank credit default swap spreads. Journal of International
  Money and Finance 31 (5), 1299Г1318.

                                             60
Elliott, M., B. Golub, and M. O. Jackson (2014). Financial networks and contagion. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 104 (10), 3115Г53.

Elsinger, H., A. Lehar, and M. Summer (2013). Network models and systemic risk assessment.
  Handbook on Systemic Risk 1, 287Г305.

Forbes, K. J. and R. Rigobon (2002). No contagion, only interdependence: measuring stock
  market comovements. The journal of Finance 57 (5), 2223Г2261.

Fraley, C. and A. E. Raftery (1998). How many clusters? which clustering method? answers
  via model-based cluster analysis. The computer journal 41 (8), 578Г588.

Freixas, X., B. M. Parigi, and J.-C. Rochet (2000). Systemic risk, interbank relations, and
  liquidity provision by the central bank. Journal of money, credit and banking , 611Г638.

Gai, P., A. Haldane, and S. Kapadia (2011). Complexity, concentration and contagion.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (5), 453Г470.

Gai, P. and S. Kapadia (2010). Contagion in financial networks. Proceedings of the Royal
  Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 466 (2120), 2401Г2423.

Girardi, G. and A. T. ErgЧn (2013). Systemic risk measurement: Multivariate garch esti-
  mation of covar. Journal of Banking & Finance 37 (8), 3169Г3180.

Hansen, L. P. (1982). Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 1029Г1054.

Junker, B. H. and F. Schreiber (2008). Analysis of biological networks, Volume 2. Wiley
  Online Library.

Kalbaska, A. and M. Gtkowski (2012). Eurozone sovereign contagion: Evidence from the
  cds market (2005Г2010). Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83 (3), 657Г673.


                                            61
Katz, L. (1953). A new status index derived from sociometric analysis. Psychometrika 18 (1),
  39Г43.

Klein, R. and F. Vella (2009). Estimating the return to endogenous schooling decisions via
  conditional second moments. Journal of Human Resources 44 (4), 1047Г1065.

Kritzman, M., Y. Li, S. Page, and R. Rigobon (2010). Principal components as a measure
  of systemic risk.

Lewbel, A. (2012). Using heteroscedasticity to identify and estimate mismeasured and en-
  dogenous regressor models. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 30, 67Г80.

Lewbel, A. (2018a). Identification and estimation using heteroscedasticity without instru-
  ments: The binary endogenous regressor case. Economic Leters 165, 10Г12.

Lewbel, A. (2018b). The identification zoo - meanings of identification in econometrics.
  Journal of Economic Literature .

Little, R. J. and D. B. Rubin (2019). Statistical analysis with missing data, Volume 793.
  John Wiley & Sons.

Merton, R. C., M. Billio, M. Getmansky, D. Gray, A. W. Lo, and L. Pelizzon (2013). On
  a new approach for analyzing and managing macrofinancial risks (corrected). Financial
  Analysts Journal 69 (2), 22Г33.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2018). Identification in macroeconomics. NBER Working
  Paper 23968 .

Onnela, J.-P., K. Kaski, and J. Kertжsz (2004). Clustering and information in correlation
  based financial networks. The European Physical Journal B 38 (2), 353Г362.

Rigobon, R. (2003). Identification through heteroskedasticity. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 85 (4), 777Г792.

                                            62
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2003). Measuring the reaction of monetary policy to the stock
  market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2), 639Г669.

Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2004, February). The impact of monetary policy on asset prices.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1553Г75.

Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2008). Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, Chapter Noisy Macroeco-
  nomic Announcements, Monetary Policy, and Asset Prices, pp. 335Г370. National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Sentana, E. and G. Fiorentini (2001). Identification, estimation and testing of conditionally
  heteroskedastic factor models. Journal of econometrics 102 (2), 143Г164.

Stegeman, A. and N. D. Sidiropoulos (2007). On kruskalРs uniqueness condition for the
  candecomp/parafac decomposition. Linear Algebra and its applications 420 (2-3), 540Г552.

Temizsoy, A., G. Iori, and G. Montes-Rojas (2017). Network centrality and funding rates in
  the e-mid interbank market. Journal of Financial Stability 33, 346Г365.

Thurner, S. and S. Poledna (2013). Debtrank-transparency: Controlling systemic risk in
  financial networks. Scientific reports 3, 1888.

Upper, C. (2011). Simulation methods to assess the danger of contagion in interbank markets.
  Journal of Financial Stability 7 (3), 111Г125.

Wright, P. (1928). The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils. New York: Macmillan Company.




                                              63
