                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PERCEIVED PRECAUTIONARY SAVINGS MOTIVES:
                           EVIDENCE FROM FINTECH

                                    Francesco D'Acunto
                                       Thomas Rauter
                                    Christoph K. Scheuch
                                      Michael Weber

                                     Working Paper 26817
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26817


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank Fabian Nagel, Tom Kim, Hannah Amann, and especially Federica Ansbacher for
excellent research assistance. We appreciate helpful comments from Sumit Agarwal, Greg
Buchak, Indraneel Chakraborty, Francisco Gomes, Sabrina Howell, David Low, Amit Seru,
Wenlan Qian, and workshop participants at the Columbia "New Technologies in Finance"
Conference, the 2019 Red Rock Finance Conference, the 2019 Summer Finance Conference at
ISB, the 7th ABFER Annual Conference, the 2019 LBS Summer Finance Symposium, the 2019
CFPB Conference, and the 2020 AEA and AFA Annual Meeting. D'Acunto gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Rauter and
Weber gratefully acknowledge financial support from the IBM Corporation Faculty Fellowship
and the Fama Faculty Fellowship at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Scheuch gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF project
number DK W 1001-G16). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Francesco D'Acunto, Thomas Rauter, Christoph K. Scheuch, and Michael Weber. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Perceived Precautionary Savings Motives: Evidence from FinTech
Francesco D'Acunto, Thomas Rauter, Christoph K. Scheuch, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 26817
March 2020
JEL No. D14,E21,E51,G21,G51

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the spending response of first-time borrowers to an overdraft facility and elicit their
preferences, beliefs, and motives through a FinTech application. Users increase their spending
permanently, lower their savings rate, and reallocate spending from non-discretionary to
discretionary goods. Interestingly, liquid users react more than others but do not tap into negative
deposits. The credit line acts as a form of insurance. These results are not fully consistent with
models of financial constraints, buffer stock models, or present-bias preferences. We label this
channel perceived precautionary savings motives: Liquid users behave as if they faced strong
precautionary savings motives even though no observables, including elicited preferences and
beliefs, suggest they should.

Francesco D'Acunto                               Christoph K. Scheuch
Boston College                                   Vienna Graduate School of Finance
Carroll School of Management                     Welthandesplatz 1/D4
dacuntof@bc.edu                                  A-1020 Vienna
                                                 Austria
Thomas Rauter                                    christoph.scheuch@wu.ac.at
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business                         Michael Weber
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                       Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL 60637                                University of Chicago
thomas.rauter@chicagobooth.edu                   5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                 Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
                                                 michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
During recessions, monetary and fiscal policy aim to stimulate consumption through
credit, because household consumption comprises the largest share of gross domestic
product (Agarwal et al., 2017). At the same time, household credit growth has been a
major and often unforeseen driver of financial crises (Schularick and Taylor, 2012; Baron
and Xiong, 2017; Di Maggio and Kermani, 2017; Mian and Sufi, 2015; Mian et al., 2017).
Understanding the micro-level channels through which household credit affects consump-
tion and saving decisions is thus important to understand the dynamics of business cycles
and to inform the design of effective credit-based expansionary policies.
    In this paper, we introduce a unique FinTech setting in which we observe the exten-
sive margin of credit--initiation of overdraft facilities to first-time borrowers--combined
with the possibility to elicit directly a set of preferences, beliefs, and individual percep-
tions that theoretical and empirical research commonly relates to households' saving and
consumption behavior. These dimensions, which are typically unobserved in large-scale
micro data, include risk preferences, patience, expectations about future employment sta-
tus, future large expenses, medical expenses, bequest motives, subjective life expectancy,
as well as financial literacy and generalized trust in others. We use this setting to esti-
mate the consumption effects of providing first-time borrowers with a credit facility and
to test directly for a broad set of typically unobserved channels that, based on earlier
theoretical and empirical research, might explain the effects of credit on spending.
    In our baseline analysis, we estimate a set of double-differences specifications in which
we compare bank users' change in consumption spending after activating the overdraft
facility relative to before and relative to users whose overdraft facilities are not yet acti-
vated. The average user increases her spending by 4.5 percentage points of income inflows
after credit is available relative to before and relative to users whose overdraft facility is
not yet active. This positive effect on spending does not revert fully over time--we detect
permanent increases in spending and drops in savings for the average user.
    The surprising result is that the baseline effect is heterogeneous across users, but not
based on dimensions earlier research proposed, such as motives to smooth consumption
or liquidity constraints. Instead, Figure 1 shows the effect increases monotonically in the
liquidity of users. The higher the ratio of liquid deposits to income inflows, the stronger
is the spending reaction to the provision of credit. Moreover, the higher is this ratio, the
more permanent is the effect as we document below.
    Liquid users seem to behave as if they have strong precautionary savings motives

                                              1
      Figure 1: Consumption Response by Deposit-to-Income



                                  16%       12%
                      Consumption / Inflows
                         4%        8%
                                  0%
                                  -4%




                                                  Q1   Q2               Q3              Q4   Q5
                                                            Deposits / Inflows Quintile

Notes: This figure illustrates the cross-sectional heterogeneity in users' consumption response to the
mobile overdraft. To generate the plot, we take the cross-section of users at their treatment date and
assign them into non-overlapping quintiles of deposits to income from lowest to highest. We then interact
the resulting grouping variable with a binary indicator that equals 1 if a user has access to a mobile
overdraft in given month. Vertical bands represent 95% confidence intervals for the point estimates in
each quintile. We double cluster standard errors at the NUTS2 and year-month level.



and hence accumulate liquid savings before the overdraft facility is available. They have
inflows over the previous twelve months similar to other users but save a larger fraction
of their income by spending substantially less. Once the overdraft becomes available,
consistent with an insurance effect of the facility, liquid users start spending more of
their existing liquid savings and decrease their savings rate permanently. Interestingly,
liquid users do not use the overdraft facility, in the sense that only 10% of them ever tap
into negative deposits and make use of the credit line. The availability of an overdraft
facility makes these users dissave part of their existing liquidity but not more than that,
again consistent with strong precautionary savings motives that are reduced once the
facility is available.
    The spending response by liquidity is a robust feature of the data. First, we rule
out the amount or volatility of inflows into the account before the credit line is available
drives our results. Moreover, the results are similar if we only consider individuals who
consume large parts of their inflows, for alternative definitions of deposits-to-inflows, for
users in areas that have high versus low savings rates--and hence potentially different
social norms about the importance of savings--for urban versus rural users, or users living
in former communist countries and others. Thus, peculiar norms of saving or aversion to

                                                                    2
debt in specific European countries, such as Germany, do not drive our results.1
    Our results are puzzling to the extent the previous literature typically found that
liquidity constraints drive borrowers' reaction to the availability of credit. Hence, the
least liquid users should react the most in terms of spending--the opposite of our finding.
For instance, research that studied increases in the intensive margin of credit, such as
increasing existing credit card limits, finds users at the constraint (i.e., that maxed out
their previous limit) react more to the increase in credit lines (see, e.g., Aydin, 2015;
Agarwal et al., 2017; Gross and Souleles, 2002). The crucial difference of our setting is
that we study the provision of credit lines to borrowers who did not have access to credit
beforehand (extensive margin of credit).2 The insurance role of obtaining a credit facility
for the first time does not apply to borrowers who already had access to credit, and hence
the effect we document could not arise in earlier settings that vary the intensive margin
of credit. Another difference between our results and earlier research is that our liquid
users do not tap into negative deposits, but only consume out of their existing savings
and new inflows, which suggests that changes in credit limits or in the intensive margin
of credit would barely have any effects on them.
    To understand whether standard determinants of precautionary savings motives ex-
plain our results, we exploit the fact that our FinTech provider allows us to reach users
directly through their app and elicit their preferences, beliefs, and motives. First, risk
aversion and/or prudence are important potential drivers of savings behavior independent
of income volatility (Gomes and Michaelides, 2005). We detect no economic or statistical
differences in the levels of risk aversion and patience across users based on their liquid-
ity. Moreover, users who have high subjective beliefs about future large expenses, such
as medical expenses, or about future income uncertainty (Guiso et al., 1992; Ben-David
et al., 2018) might save a larger fraction of their income. Even here, we find no sys-
tematic differences in the cross section of deposit-to-inflows. We do not find systematic
differences in terms of subjective life expectancy, beliefs about future employment status,
health conditions, or bequest motives, either. Finally, we do not find any systematic
differences in terms of financial literacy or generalized trust--liquid users understand the
incentives to borrow and save similarly to other users.
    Ultimately, the majority of users--all those above the bottom 40% by liquidity--
behave as if they had precautionary savings motives before accessing the credit line.
   1
     We thank Amit Seru for suggesting sample splits based on areas with different norms about saving
and borrowing within and across European countries.
   2
     We discuss the institutional setting in detail in Section 2.



                                                 3
These motives disappeared with the activation of credit lines, which we could interpret
as a form of insurance against future negative states. At the same time, none of the
standard explanations for precautionary savings motives appear to have the potential to
explain our results, either individually or jointly. For this reason, we label our mechanism
"perceived precautionary savings"--users perceive strong precautionary savings motives,
but neither their preferences, subjective or objective beliefs, or other characteristics we
elicit directly based on earlier theoretical and empirical research, explain these motives.
     We argue that models of buffer stock consumption (Deaton, 1991; Carroll, 1997),
buffer stock consumption with durables (Guerrieri and Lorenzoni, 2017; Aydin, 2015),
the standard life-cycle permanent income model of Friedman (1957), or heterogeneous-
agents models with assets of different liquidity (Kaplan et al., 2014) cannot explain our
results in full. Non-standard preferences such as present-biased preferences are also un-
likely to explain all our results. If the users who react the most to overdraft activation
were present-biased, they would have consumed out of their higher deposits even before
activating the overdraft facility, which is not true in the data. Our results are closer to
Olafsson and Pagel (2018), who document that users of a FinTech app that hold wealth
in deposit accounts and use overdraft facilities at the same time increase consumption
spending on paydays. In our setting, we show that individuals with the highest ratio of
deposits to income react the most in terms of spending once they activate the overdraft
facility, whereas in Olafsson and Pagel (2018) individuals with lower amounts of deposits
spend more in response to income payments. Ultimately, our results call for further the-
oretical and empirical evidence on potential alternative drivers of precautionary savings
motives, either based on standard or non-standard beliefs. For instance, a promising di-
rection could be to allow heterogeneity in the extent to which agents have biased beliefs
regarding the occurrence of small-probability events, such as catastrophic states of the
world.
     A remaining concern with our baseline double-differences analysis is that users might
activate the overdraft facility endogenously when they know they are about to make a
large expense. The facts that the spending effect for liquid households is permanent and
that elicited expectations about upcoming large expenses do not differ across liquid and
illiquid users reduce this concern.
     To address this concern directly, we propose two tests. First, we repeat our double-
differences analysis restricting the sample only to users who activated their overdraft
facility in the first month in which the bank made it available.3 The rationale is that
  3
      We thank Greg Buchak and Michaela Pagel for suggesting this test.


                                                  4
the timing at which the bank decided to make the facility available can barely coincide
with the timing in which users would have endogenously decided to activate the facility,
because users did not know that the overdraft facility would have been made available
at that time. Although the sample size drops substantially in this test, we estimate the
same monotonic pattern in terms of change in spending by liquidity quintiles and we can
reject the null that the changes are zero at conventional levels of significance for the top
two quintiles.
    For the second test, we propose a sharp regression-discontinuity design (RDD) that
exploits the rule the FinTech provider uses to compute the limit of the overdraft facility.
This limit is a rounded function of users' income based on a set of pre-specified income
bandwidths of which users are not aware. The FinTech application computes the limits
automatically, with no role for bank officers to change the approved limits--this is why
the app allows users to open the approved line of credit automatically in just a few
seconds--and hence there is no scope for manipulating one's assignment to the high- or
low-treatment group.
    In this RDD, we compare users that are observationally indistinguishable, as we doc-
ument directly, but end up being assigned different overdraft limits based on small differ-
ences in their income inflows. This assignment combines the extensive margin of credit, so
that the insurance effect of the facility exists for everybody, with a higher or lower inten-
sive margin in terms of credit limit. The RDD confirms the consumption response to the
availability of credit. We cannot use this RDD for our baseline analysis and heterogeneity
tests, because by construction the RDD only uses a small subset of users who are close to
the sharp threshold. Heterogeneity in the RDD sample is minimal by construction given
that the treated and control users are almost identical in most characteristics.
    Ultimately, our results might provide novel insights about the effects of providing
credit to households over the business cycle. Providing insurance against potential neg-
ative future spending shocks appears to increase the spending of households with high
deposit-to-income ratios, but this policy intervention would not increase their debt posi-
tions or interest payments, because these users would not draw on the overdraft facilities.
If anything, providing insurance to these households at times of economic slumps might
increase aggregate demand swiftly, because households that hoard cash due to perceived
precautionary savings motives might end up spending parts of their savings. Also, pro-
viding insurance to perceived precautionary savers might be virtually costless based on
our results, because these individuals would not end up paying any interest and would
not accumulate debt over time.

                                             5
    The main challenge to policies based on our findings might be political in nature.
During times of economic crisis, policy-makers would provide virtually costless insurance
to wealthier households (in terms of liquid wealth) to nudge them to spend more instead
of providing subsidies to induce spending by all households, including those who might
become risky borrowers over time. Whether governments might find enough political
support for this type of policy is a matter for future research in political economy and
political sciences.
    Methodologically, the paper suggests a compelling reason for macroeconomists and
financial economists to use FinTech settings for research on household borrowing, sav-
ing, and spending. FinTech platforms allow the researcher to access users directly in a
logisitically simple way that barely involves any costs, because users can be contacted
interactively through apps. Easy direct access to users allows the elicitation of typically
unobserved characteristics, as in this paper, and has the potential for field experiments
to gauge the causal effects of theoretical channels that act through preferences, beliefs,
and perceptions on actual high-stake decision-making.


2       Institutional Setting
We cooperate with a leading European FinTech bank to test for the effects of introducing
a mobile overdraft facility on consumption spending. The digital-only bank does not
operate a branch network and provides all its services through an Android or iOS mobile
app. The bank currently operates under a European banking license in several countries
and has more than 1 million customers.
    Users can open a bank account within 10 minutes by entering their personal informa-
tion into the app. They are required to verify their identity by providing a copy of their
passport or personal identification through video conferencing before the bank confirms
the account and users obtain their debit card by mail. The free mobile checking account
is the bank's baseline product. Contrary to US banks, our FinTech lender does not offer
credit cards, which is common in the countries in which it operates. Moreover, note
EU legislation does not require banks to provide any credit facilities to their customers,
which is the reason why our setting allows to test for the effects of providing an overdraft
facility to users for the first time that allows borrowing for consumption spending.4
    4
    For instance, for the case of Germany, the largest European country, which en-
ters our sample, see the information sheet by the national bank regulator, BaFin:
https://www.bafin.de/DE/Verbraucher/Bank/Produkte/Dispokredit/dispokredit node.html.


                                             6
    In terms of day-to-day operations, customers manage their account entirely via the
bank's mobile app, which provides monthly consumption statistics and allows users to
set their daily payment and withdrawal limits, lock their card, or change their pin in real
time.
    In February 2015, the bank started to offer a mobile credit line to users across several
European countries. Residents of these countries with a sufficiently high credit score are
eligible for the mobile overdraft facility. Customers can activate the credit line directly
in their mobile app within one minute and receive a maximum overdraft amount that
ranges between 500 and 5,000 Euros depending on their credit score and other financial
and personal characteristics. The bank uses a fully automated algorithm to allocate
maximum credit amounts to users. In Section 6, we describe the bank's loan granting and
credit allocation process in detail. Users who are granted a mobile credit line specify their
desired credit amount, which they can change in real time via the mobile app depending
on their consumption needs. However, customers cannot select an amount that exceeds
the maximum overdraft limit granted to them by the bank. Users pay an annual interest
rate of approximately 10 percentage points on their used overdraft amount, which the
bank charges once per quarter. The mobile app provides daily updated information on
users' accrued interest costs. Customers can turn on push notifications that remind them
whenever their account balance turns negative and they start using the overdraft. The
bank cancels the mobile credit line if users default on their interest payments, receive
unemployment benefits, or experience direct debit reversals.


3     Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1    Data Sources and Sample Selection
Our sample consists of users who received an overdraft between February 2015 and
September 2017. We focus on individuals that the bank classifies as "main account users"
based on their consumption and inflow history to alleviate the concern that customers
might have additional accounts with other banks, which we cannot observe directly. Main
account users are individuals that receive a regular monthly salary or incoming stand-
ing order into their mobile checking account for at least two consecutive months. Prior
research shows that European bank clients satisfy approximately 70% of their daily con-
sumption needs through their primary salary account and that the majority of individuals
only have one bank account (Bain, 2017; ING, 2018). As a result, our consumption and

                                             7
overdraft data cover most if not all financial activities that main account users carry out
via their mobile bank account. In a set of robustness analysis, we show that our results
do not change if we use other thresholds or alternative filters to screen out users who are
unlikely to be main account users.
    For all the users in our sample, we first obtain detailed transaction-level consumption
data, credit line information, and personal user characteristics from the bank. Specifically,
we obtain information about the type, amount, and timestamp of all financial transactions
that pass through users' checking accounts between February 2015 and March 2019. To
protect users' identity, the bank rounded all transaction amounts to the nearest Euro
and only provided us with the day but not the exact time of each transaction. Our raw
dataset contains 58,310,004 individual financial transactions, which we aggregate into
user-month observations. Each within-user time series starts with the month in which
the user signed up on the mobile app, verified her identify, and the bank opened the
account, and ends with the closing of the account or the last month of our sample period
(March 2019). We code observations of our flow variables as zero if the user did not have
any corresponding financial transaction in the given month.
    An important feature of the transaction-level data is the classification of financial
transactions into categories, which the bank provides to us. The first classification con-
sists of six broad categories based on the transaction method: (i) cash deposits and
withdrawals, (ii) incoming or outgoing wire transfers within the Single Euro Payments
Area (SEPA), (iii) foreign wire transfers from or to non-SEPA countries, (iv ) direct debit
withdrawals (including reversals), (v ) bank-imposed fees, and (vi) card-based electronic
payments. In a second classification, which captures the scope of each transaction, the
bank categorizes each debit-card payment into one of seventeen merchant category code
(MCC) groups, based on the vendor that receives the payment. MCC groups specify the
vendor's industry and allow us to identify which type of good or service the account holder
purchased. The seventeen MCC groups cover a broad range of users' consumption spend-
ing and include both discretionary (e.g., entertainment, shopping, or gastronomy) and
non-discretionary consumption categories (e.g., groceries, family, or utilities/furniture).
    In addition to the transaction-level data, we obtain data on the activation and usage
of credit lines. This dataset contains granular information about the application date, the
granted overdraft amount, and activating users' financial characteristics. We observe all
user-specific input parameters that enter the bank's credit allocation algorithm, including
each individual's credit score, employment status, regular salary, and other credit-relevant
inflows.

                                             8
    Since the bank shared the precise inner workings of its overdraft granting process with
us, we are able to perfectly replicate the credit allocation decision for all mobile credit
line users in our sample. Moreover, the credit-line dataset contains the complete history
of all overdraft setting changes that users made once after activating the credit facility.
    Finally, the bank provides us with additional data on the demographic and personal
information of each main account user. We obtain data on users' gender, year of birth,
and residential zip code. To ensure data anonymity, the bank does not share the name,
address, or precise date of birth of account holders.


3.2     Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our main overdraft sample. We define all the
variables we use in the empirical analysis in Appendix Table A1. We trim all ratios
that involve consumption-related variables at the 5th and 95th percentile to mitigate the
impact of outliers due to data errors or extreme values.5
    Our final dataset contains 603,157 user-month observations for 36,005 unique indi-
viduals who obtained a mobile credit line between February 2015 and September 2017.
As is common in FinTech settings,6 the user base of the bank consists primarily of male
Millennials who live in urban areas. The average user in our sample is 34 years old,
has monthly inflows of 2,220 Euros, and opened the mobile bank account 1.6 years ago.
Female users represent about one fifth (21%) of the sample, and about half of the users
live in large cities with more than 500,000 inhabitants (53%).
    In terms of spending, all overdraft users combined spent a total of 441 million Euros
via their mobile checking account over our sample period. On average, these individuals
consume 48% of their monthly inflows, of which approximately two thirds are attributable
to electronic card transactions and the remainder is cash consumption. For each Euro
that users spend electronically on non-discretionary goods, they purchase 61 cents of
discretionary items. Main account users have access to the bank's mobile overdraft facility
in 91% of all user-months. The average maximum overdraft amount equals 1,561 Euros.
   5
     We obtain similar results when we instead winsorize our regression variables at the 5th and 95th
percentile or when we use alternative trimming approaches (e.g., trimming at the 1% level in each tail).
   6
     For instance, see D'Acunto et al. (2019a), Gargano and Rossi (2018), D'Acunto et al. (2019b), and
D'Acunto and Rossi (2020).




                                                   9
4     The Effect of Mobile Overdrafts on Users'
      Spending Behavior
In this section, we first assess how the average user changes her spending behavior once
she activates the overdraft facility on her mobile phone. We then move on to document a
set of heterogeneity results in users' response to the availability of the credit line. We find
that users with higher ratios of deposits to income flows are the ones reacting the most
in terms of increasing their spending after they obtain access to the overdraft facility.
    Our baseline analysis considers individuals' monthly consumption expenditures and
uses a double-differences (DD) design. The DD estimator compares changes in the level
of spending around the activation of mobile overdrafts between individuals that already
have and those that do not have access to the credit line yet. We restrict the analysis to
mobile overdraft users only to address the endogeneity of being eligible for the overdraft
facility, which by construction depends on a set of demographic characteristics that might
be correlated with changes in spending patterns over time. Moreover, the DD design al-
lows us to address the concern that individuals who never activate the overdraft despite
being eligible might differ systematically from active users based on unobserved charac-
teristics. These characteristics might also predict spending patterns over time, such as
users' inattention to their financial situation or the possibility that some individuals use
the bank account only for the purpose of depositing their money but do not use it for
regular consumption activities.
    The baseline DD design does not account for the possibility that unobserved shocks
at the individual level determine the timing of users' overdraft activation and spending
patterns over time. We tackle this concern directly later in the paper in two ways. First,
we repeat the analysis after restricting the sample to users who activated the overdraft
facility in the first month in which the bank made it available. The concern of endogenous
timing of activation is less compelling in this subsample, because these users could not
foresee this option well in advance before activation. Second, we propose a sharp RDD
that only compares users at the time they activate their facilities, relative to before.
    Despite the potential endogeneity of the timing of activation, we use the DD design
for the baseline analysis, because this design allows us to assess potential channels driving
the consumption response in the full sample. Instead, by construction, the RDD is based
on estimating local treatment effects among a restricted subsample of users in the overall
population, based on their closeness to the regression discontinuity we exploit.


                                              10
4.1    Overall Consumption Expenditure Response
For our DD analysis, we estimate the following OLS regression model:

   Consumption Spendingi,t =  × Overdraft Availablei,t + Fixed Effectsi,t + i,t .         (1)

The dependent variable is the sum of all cash withdrawals and debit-card transactions
by individual i in month t, divided by the amount of the user's account inflows in month
t - 1. Our main variable of interest, Overdraft Available, is an indicator variable that
equals 1 if the user has access to a mobile overdraft facility in the given month.
    We include user fixed effects to absorb time-invariant systematic differences in con-
sumption spending patterns across overdraft users, such as differences in occupation,
gender, cultural background, or education. We also include NUTS3×year-month fixed
effects to account for concurrent but unrelated time-varying economic or institutional
changes within local, sub-national districts, called NUTS3 in the European Union, which
correspond to US counties.
    We draw statistical inferences based on double clustered standard errors at the NUTS2
(region) and year-month levels because consumption patterns are likely correlated cross-
sectionally and over time within closeby locations. We use a broader geographic definition
for the spatial clustering of standard errors, because the NUTS2 level, which corresponds
roughly to the state level in the US, fully subsumes the NUTS3 level in the EU's admin-
istrative classification. This level of clustering is more conservative than NUTS3, because
it allows for correlation of unknown form across the residuals not only across users in the
same county, but also across users in neighboring counties that belong to the same region.
Because cross-sectional residuals of decision units are typically positively correlated across
space, the NUTS 2 level of clustering is also more conservative than clustering standard
errors at the individual level. We verify this claim directly by repeating our baseline
estimations separately using different levels of clustering, including different geographic
partitions and individual-level clustering, and indeed we find that the confidence intervals
around our point estimates are wider when we cluster at the NUTS 2 level than at the
individual level (see the bottom right panel of Figure 6).
    In Table 2, we present the estimated effects of mobile overdraft availability on con-
sumption behavior. Column (1) documents an average positive effect of mobile overdrafts
on users' monthly consumption expenditures. In terms of magnitude, overall cash and
card-based consumption normalized by the user's lagged account inflows increases by


                                             11
4.572 percentage points (t-statistic: 11.11), which corresponds to an increase of approx-
imately 9.5% relative to the pre-treatment sample mean (4.572/48.11). In Columns (2)
and (3), we differentiate between cash withdrawals, i.e. cash spending, and debit-card
spending. We find that account holders increase their spending significantly through
both payment types. In relative terms, the increase in card-based spending (coefficient:
3.152; t-statistic: 9.71) is larger than the increase in cash withdrawals (coefficient: 1.345;
t-statistic: 7.73), and accounts for approximately 70% of users' overall consumption re-
sponse. Finally, in Column (4), we study the change in the ratio between discretionary
and non-discretionary spending and find that users increase their discretionary spending
by 2.9% relative to their non-discretionary spending.
    Apart from users' timing to activate the overdraft, we can interpret our DD estimates
causally only subject to the assumption that the spending behavior of treated and control
users would have followed parallel trends in the absence of the activation of the credit
line. This parallel-trends assumption is untestable, but we can directly assess whether
the spending behavior of treated and control users followed parallel trends before the
shock. In Figure 2, we provide graphical evidence that treated and control users have
parallel and almost identical consumption patterns during the time period leading up to
the mobile overdraft activation. Treated users sharply increase their spending during the
first two months in which they have access to the credit line. Subsequently, the treatment
effect stabilizes at around 2% higher consumption relative to inflows and does not fully
revert in the long run. We can reject the null of no differences between the spending of
treated and control users throughout the sample period and at any horizons we observe
in the data after activation. As we discuss below, these baseline effects mask substantial
heterogeneity--some groups of users face a permanent spending effect of the overdraft
facility, whereas for other users the effect dissipates over time.


5     Heterogeneity and Perceived Precautionary
      Savings
Our results so far have focused on average effects across users. To investigate the economic
channels behind the baseline results and to assess the extent to which existing models
might explain them, we study the heterogeneity of the baseline consumption effect in the
cross section of users (Jappelli and Pistaferri, 2017).
   The observational data we have do not include direct information on a set of char-


                                             12
acteristics that are crucial to assess the relevance of different models, such as risk aver-
sion, bequests motives, and beliefs. This lack of information typically makes it hard for
empirical studies to pin down channels. To solve this problem, we exploit the unique
feature that our FinTech bank can communicate with users through the online app to
elicit preferences and beliefs directly through a survey instrument. This elicitation is
a methodological contribution of our paper and the main reason for why the FinTech
nature of the lender with which we cooperate is central to our analysis. Without the
FinTech app interface, accessing traditional bank users to elicit characteristics directly
would require either inviting these individuals to a human-subjects laboratory or sending
surveys via mail or phone call, which would limit substantially the scope and possibility
of the intervention. We see our paper as one of the very first papers that emphasize the
potential for using app-based online bank settings to elicit characteristics of borrowers
that would otherwise be barely observable in most real-time studies of borrowing and
spending.


5.1     Consumption Smoothing? Income Growth and Age
We start by assessing the heterogeneity of the baseline effect across two characteristics
we can observe in the field data, that is, (i) the growth of income inflows 6 months after
overdraft activation relative to 6 months before activation; and (ii) users' age.
    The permanent income hypothesis (PIH) suggests agents want to smooth their con-
sumption over time. Empirically, income paths are increasing early in life before flattening
out. Hence, the PIH predicts younger users and users with a steeply increasing income
path should be more likely to use the overdraft facility to smooth their consumption and
borrow against their higher future income to increase their spending on impact relative
to other users.7
    To assess this prediction, we split the sample into quintiles based on the two observable
characteristics listed above. We then repeat the baseline DD analysis of Equation (1)
adding a set of interactions between an indicator for whether the user belongs to the
quintile of the respective characteristic and our overdraft treatment variable. To make
the results easier to visualize, in Figure 3 we report the estimated coefficients and 95%
confidence intervals for each interaction term in graphical form.
    The top panel reports the effects across quintiles of income growth. The estimated
   7
     Not only the level, but also the uncertainty of the future income path might be relevant to predict
spending (Guiso et al., 1992). We tackle this point directly below using past income volatility as well as
with a survey instrument to elicit uncertainty about future income flows.


                                                   13
effect does not exhibit any systematic difference for users in the bottom two quintile
relative to users in the top two quintiles, and we do not reject the null hypothesis that
the effect is equal across all of the quintiles.
    In the bottom panel of Figure 3, we split the sample into quintiles by age. Despite the
fact that our users are on average younger than the broader population, we still detect
substantial differences in age between the bottom quintile and the top quintile, whose
averages are about 20 and 45 years. We can plausibly argue that users across these quin-
tiles are on different consumption life-cycle paths. The bottom panel of Figure 3, though,
shows vividly the lack of heterogeneity of the baseline effect across the age distribution.
In terms of magnitudes, we estimate coefficients that range between 3% and 4% in each
quintile. Moreover, we cannot reject the null that the effects are the same across all
quintiles at any plausible level of significance and, if anything, the point estimates are
slightly larger for older users, who plausibly face more stable income processes.


5.2    Liquidity Constraints? Deposits over Income Flows
Next, we consider the potential role of liquidity constraints in explaining our results
(Deaton, 1991). For this analysis, we split the sample by quintiles based on the deposits-
to-income ratio in the month before activation. We use deposits-to-income as a proxy for
liquidity constraints. If liquidity constraints explained our results, we would expect that
users with lower deposits-to-income ratios would increase their spending and tap into
negative deposits after accessing the overdraft facility, whereas otherwise similar users
with high deposits-to-income ratios would barely react.
    Figure 4 reports the results for estimating the interaction coefficients across quintiles
of deposits-to-income. We detect substantial heterogeneity, but the heterogeneity of the
effects goes in the opposite direction to what liquidity constraints would predict. In fact,
the effect of overdraft availability on spending is (insignificantly) negative for users in
the bottom quintile--the most liquidity-constrained users--and is zero for those in the
second quintile. The effect increases nonlinearly and is disproportionally higher the higher
the quintile. The estimated effect is about 2% for users in the third quintile, 5% in the
fourth quintile, and 12% in the top quintile. It is the least liquidity-constrained users who
increase their average spending more after having access to the overdraft facility relative
to before.
    This pattern is not an anomaly peculiar to users in the top quintile by liquidity:
the positive effect is economically and statistically significant for the median user, and


                                             14
is large also for users in the third and fourth quintiles, which suggests the effect we
uncover involves the majority of the sample. We also want to stress that while liquidity-
constrained users, the users in quintile 1, do not increase their consumption on average
after the activation, they do so on impact in the month post activation and decrease their
spending slightly in subsequent months (see Figure 5).
    In Figure 5, we report the estimated coefficients across the deposit-to-inflows quintiles
over time. The blue dashed line reports the estimated coefficients for users in the top
quintile by deposits-to-inflow, the red solid line refers to users in the first quintile, and grey
lines refer to users in other quintiles. Users in every quintile increase their consumption
spending on impact to the availability of the credit line. However, we also see that users
in the top quintile increase their spending more than others on impact and that these
users increase their spending permanently, i.e. their spending does not revert to the pre-
activation level over time. We do detect the same permanent effect for users in the fourth
quintile, whereas the increase in spending reverts to zero for other users. Importantly,
we detect no difference in spending patterns across users before the overdraft facility
becomes available.
    These consumption patterns suggest that the more liquid users might decrease their
savings rate after accessing the overdraft facility, and that this decrease is permanent
rather than transitory. We assess this mirroring conjecture by plotting the dynamics of
the savings rate across quintiles of liquidity (see Figure IA1 in the Internet Appendix).8
And, indeed, we find that the savings rate of the most liquid users drops permanently
after they get access to the overdraft facility. We do not observe the same permanent
pattern for the least liquid users, as well as for users in all other quintiles except for the
fourth liquidity quintile.

5.2.1   Robustness

At first sight, the results in Figures 4, 5, and IA1 are puzzling: The association between
users' pre-overdraft liquidity and their spending after overdraft activation seems to go
in the opposite direction of what we would have expected under a liquidity-constraints
explanation. Before digging deeper into the drivers of this empirical regularity, we perform
a large set of robustness tests to verify this pattern is a robust feature of the data.
    First, in Figure 6, we assess the robustness of the consumption pattern by liquidity
quintile across a set of relevant subsamples and specifications. In the top left panel, we
  8
    We thank Greg Buchak for suggesting that we directly compute the savings rate and examine its
evolution over time.


                                               15
compare the estimated coefficients and confidence intervals for the baseline specification
and a second specification in which we additionally include interaction terms for (i) user
age, (ii) inflow growth in the six months before and after overdraft availability, and
(iii) inflow volatility in the twelve months prior to the overdraft treatment. We cannot
reject the null that the coefficients are equal across specifications either economically or
statistically.
    In the top right panel of Figure 6, we compare the baseline effect in the full sample
of users to the results when we restrict the working sample only to users with an active
account for at least 12 months before the overdraft became available. This test is relevant
because one might be concerned that users who drive our effect were merely opening an
account to take advantage of the overdraft facility. These users might plan to make
larger purchases and moved money from other accounts into the online account resulting
in large savings-to-deposits and large spending responses. As expected, the estimates
are substantially noisier in the smaller sample of long-term users, but we replicate our
baseline results.
    The middle panels of Figure 6 consider two forms of measurement error that would
be problematic in our setting. First, we do not know whether the financial transactions
we observe are all the transactions of our sample users because we cannot rule out for
sure that these individuals have accounts at other banks. To alleviate this concern, we
repeat the analysis restricting our sample to users whose average spending with our bank
equals at least 40%, 50%, 60%, or 70% of their monthly income.9 Our point estimates
are similar and remain statistically significant when we increase this threshold despite
the drop in the number of observations.10
    Second, in the middle right panel of Figure 6, we consider the robustness of our
results to the definition of our sorting variable--deposits-over-inflows. Specifically, we
assess whether the consumption-liquidity pattern differs depending on whether we sort
users based on the ratio measured in the month before the overdraft treatment or the
one-month period starting 3 months before activation. We find no detectable difference
in the baseline results which ensures transfers into the account because of future spending
plans immediately before the activation cannot drive the patterns we document.
    In the bottom panels, we show (i) that the statistical significance of our results barely
changes across different levels of clustering and (ii) that our results remain robust when
  9
    We thank Greg Buchak for suggesting this robustness test.
  10
    As an additional (untabulated) test, we exclude all users who have any incoming or outgoing wire
transfers other than direct income deposits, which might capture individuals who have other accounts
at different institutions. Even in this case, the results barely change.


                                                16
we restrict the sample to users who activate the overdraft at the first introduction of the
overdraft product by the bank to alleviate the concern that users open accounts with the
intention to active the overdraft.11
    To further assess the robustness of the baseline consumption responses based on
deposits-to-inflows, in Figure 7 we compare the estimated coefficients by quintiles across
alternative demographic groups to check whether observables might drive the baseline
relationship. This test is relevant because it could still be the case that individuals in
the top quintiles by deposits-to-income might have characteristics that according to the
PIH would predict a larger consumption response to the availability of credit despite the
fact we do not observe that these characteristics matter unconditionally. Irrespective of
whether we compare users who (i) live in European regions (NUTS 1) with above or
below median savings rates (top left panel), (ii) reside in former Communist countries or
not (top right panel), (iii) live in rural versus urban areas (bottom left panel) 12 , or (iv )
are young versus old (bottom right panel), we fail to detect any systematic differences in
the baseline pattern.
    Overall, the fact that users with higher deposits-to-inflow ratios spend more after they
have access to the overdraft is a robust feature of the data.


5.3       Evidence on Objective Drivers of Precautionary Savings
In the standard life-cycle model, several individual characteristics, which are typically
unavailable in observational field data, could predict the spending reaction to overdraft
availability. For instance, systematic differences in users' risk aversion, time preferences,
beliefs about life expectancy, or bequest motives might drive these results. Moreover,
expecting imminent large expenses due to unobserved health reasons, other unobserved
reasons, as well as private information about the probability of becoming unemployed
and hence having more volatile income streams in the future might all contribute to the
observed consumption effects (Gomes and Michaelides, 2005; Chetty and Szeidl, 2007;
Carroll, 1997).
    These dimensions either predict larger precautionary savings motives due to preference
heterogeneity for a given level of objective uncertainty or might translate into differences
in precautionary savings due to subjective needs. Once the overdraft facility becomes
available to these users, it might act as a form of insurance and trigger higher spending,
 11
      We thank Michaela Pagel for suggesting these robustness tests.
 12
      We define "urban" users as those who live in cities with more than 500,000 inhabitants.



                                                   17
because users know they can now tap into negative deposits using the overdraft facility
if a shock occurs.
     In addition to these precautionary savings motives, one can think of other channels
that could explain users' willingness to spend liquid assets after they obtain access to the
overdraft. For instance, agents might have low financial literacy and might be unable to
optimize their allocation of resources over time. Alternatively, users might be distrustful
of others and hence display a precautionary savings motive that is not based on their
financial characteristics.
     In Figure 8, we consider two dimensions that might predict differential precautionary
savings motives across liquidity quintiles, which we can directly measure in our data.
First, we consider age in the top panel. Age increases monotonically with the bins by
deposits-to-income inflows, ranging from 31.4 to 35.1. Although the difference between
the fifth and first bin is statistically different from zero, the magnitude of this difference
is less that 10% of the average age in the top bin. More importantly, though, the typical
precautionary savings explanation would suggest that younger users have higher precau-
tionary savings motives, because these users are likely to have more uncertain income
paths, might expect higher future income growth, might face less employment stability,
and might still not be in the workforce at all.
     Second, we test whether income uncertainty drives our results in the bottom panel.
Specifically, we average the standard deviation of income inflows over the 12 months
before overdraft facility activation within bins. We do not detect any systematic pattern
or difference between the bottom and top bin by deposits-to-income. This fact is prima
facie evidence that differences in income uncertainty do not justify why users in the top
bin behave as if they have stronger precautionary savings motives.
     We also report descriptive statistics by bins of deposits-to-inflows in Panel A of Ta-
ble 3. We do not find large differences in demographics such as age or gender. Moreover,
we find that lower outflows drive the higher deposits of users with high liquidity rather
higher inflows or higher levels of deposits twelve months ago.


5.4    Eliciting Preferences, Beliefs, and Motivations
Considering the other dimensions we discuss above requires eliciting users' preferences,
beliefs, and motivations. To make progress on this front, in June and July 2019, we
fielded a survey intervention we designed to elicit users' risk and time preferences, a large
set of beliefs, motivations, perceptions, as well as financial literacy and generalized trust.


                                             18
    Users could answer the elicitation survey either when using the app on their desktop
or on their mobile phones. We sent 73,000 survey invitations, targeting a response rate
between 10% to 15%, based on other surveys the FinTech bank ran on the platform in
the recent past. Overall, we obtained 7,901 responses to the survey, which represents a
response rate of 11%, in line with survey-based studies. Of the 7,901 respondents, we
kept the survey outcomes of users for which we observe the activation of the overdraft
facility during our sample period. Overall, we obtain 597 survey responses from users
that belong to the baseline consumption sample and have activated the overdraft facility
within our time frame.13
    Importantly, when we approached users, we did not disclose that the aim of the
intervention was to link their answers to the spending behavior around the introduction
of the overdraft facility. Being silent about the overdraft facility was crucial to reduce
the concern of experimenter demand effects--the possibility that subjects guess the aim
of the experiment and align their answers and choices correspondingly.
    The issue of experimenter demand effects is one of the strongest concerns faced by
experimental economics and survey-based elicitation tools, as discussed recently, for in-
stance, by De Quidt et al. (2018). Because we did not refer to the overdraft facility in
any way within our survey, it is implausible that users would understand that the scope
of the experiment was to assess the drivers of their spending and borrowing behaviors
and hence could manipulate their answers to our questions. A drawback of the lack of
direct reference to the overdraft facility experience is that we could not ask users directly
for the motivations they had to activate and use the facility. Because of the issue of
demand effects, the answers to such a direct question would have anyway been barely
interpretable due to strategic motives in users' answers (see, e.g., D'Acunto, 2018, 2019).
    We designed the survey questions following earlier research. We elicited risk aversion
by asking users to rank their willingness to take on risks in financial matters on a scale
from 1 (very low) to 10 (very high) (see, e.g, Guiso et al., 2008; D'Acunto et al., 2019b,c).
For time preferences, we proposed users a hypothetical choice between a certain amount
at the time of the survey or increasing amounts one month later (see, e.g., Benjamin
et al., 2010; Coibion et al., 2019). To elicit expectations about upcoming large expenses,
we asked users to rank their probability of facing large consumption expenses or large
medical expenses over the following 12 months (D'Acunto et al., 2019a). We elicited
similar rankings for users' expectations about the possibility of losing their job over the
following 12 months--which aims to capture uncertainty about future income flows (Guiso
 13
      We report the original survey questions in Internet Appendix Table IA2.


                                                   19
et al., 1992)--users' satisfaction with their health conditions, and users' generalized trust
towards others (see, e.g., Dominitz and Manski, 2007; Guiso et al., 2004; D'Acunto et al.,
2018). To elicit users' financial literacy, we asked them to assess whether the amount
that would compound in their checking account at a certain interest rate would be above
or below a given value (see, e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011). Among the potential
questions the literature proposed to assess financial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014),
the ability to understand compounding is most relevant for our setting, in which we study
the borrowing and spending behavior of bank customers that consider the use of a credit
line.
    Panel B of Table 3 reports the results for the basic preferences, beliefs, and motivations
we elicited. We sort users into five quintiles based on their deposit-to-income ratio before
accessing the overdraft facility. We then compute the average quantitative response of
these users to the elicitation questions within each bin, which we plot together with the
95% confidence interval of the mean in each quintile in Figure 9.
    Across the dimensions we elicited, we fail to detect any systematic patterns in the
cross-section of liquidity. None of the dimensions we consider, which could have explained
the responses in Figure 4 in a standard life-cycle consumption­savings model, seems able
to capture such patterns. Not only are the averages within quintiles not different from
each other statistically, but they are also similar in terms of economic magnitude, which
suggests that low statistical power in the small survey sample is unlikely to drive the lack
of variation across quintiles.
    Overall, our evidence based on elicited preferences, beliefs, and motivations directly
dismisses the most compelling standard channels that would justify a spending increase
by liquid users, but not illiquid users, once the overdraft facility becomes available to
them.


5.5    The Perceived Precautionary Savings Mechanism
The heterogeneity results suggest a pattern whereby users with higher liquidity (cash
deposits) over income react more than others to the activation of the overdraft facility in
terms of spending. This pattern is intriguing, because we might have expected the most
liquid users to be those that had the least need of an overdraft facility if they wanted
to spend more before activation. In contrast, if the overdraft facility is mainly used to
smooth spending and alleviate liquidity constraints, users in the bottom liquidity quintile
should react most.


                                             20
    Alternatively, users might accumulate liquidity over time because of the perception
of possible future needs. Therefore, sorting users at the time of the overdraft activation
corresponds to sorting users based on their perceived need of precautionary savings.
So far, comparing bins by deposits-to-income ratios does not suggest that users in the
top bin have any objective reason to have stronger precautionary savings motives than
users in the lower bins. We now assess whether, apart from increasing consumption
spending after activating the overdraft facility, users in the top bin also behave in line
with precautionary savers in terms of using the overdraft. Precautionary savers, contrary
to liquidity-constrained individuals, would likely not tap into negative deposits and would
not increase their debt levels through the overdraft facility. Instead, they should view
the facility as a form of insurance against negative income shocks or unexpected expenses
and would thus spend some of the existing liquidity they had accumulated before the
overdraft facility was available once they know they can tap into negative deposits if
needed. Hence, we would expect a permanent increase in the consumption spending of
these high deposit-to-income users and a decrease in the savings rate as we indeed observe
in the data.
    The results in Figure 4 are broadly consistent with users in the top liquidity bin
behaving as if they had strong precautionary-savings motives. First, these users are sub-
stantially less likely than users in lower bins to tap into negative deposits after activation,
despite increasing their consumption spending relative to the pre-period substantially
more than these other users. The probability of tapping into negative deposits in the
three months after activation ranges from 67% for users in the bottom bin to 10% for
users in the top bin. Moreover, it is unlikely that a large fraction of the individuals in
our sample have objective precautionary savings motives due to potentially unexpected
large medical bills or other medical-related expenses, because the 75th percentile of age
in our sample equals 38.7 years.
    A potential concern with our interpretation is that users decide they want to purchase
big ticket items and move cash to the deposit account at our bank before they activate
the overdraft facility. However, in the data we do not observe heterogeneity in the cumu-
lative inflows at our bank in the three months before activation by deposits-to-income.
Moreover, we test directly for this potential alternative interpretation by comparing the
change in the ratio of spending on big ticket items over total spending before and after
activation of the overdraft facility and across users by liquidity quintiles.14 Figure IA2
  14
   For this test, we define as big ticket items purchases of goods and services which cost above 5,000
Euros. The results are similar if we change this threshold.


                                                 21
in the Internet Appendix reports the change in this ratio across liquidity quintiles, and
unveils that, in fact, the ratio has barely changed economically and statistically for most
users. In particular, the change does not display the monotonic pattern by liquidity that
we should observe if this explanation was relevant to our results.
    Overall, users with a high share of deposits to income and hence high liquidity behave
as if they had precautionary savings motives and hence accumulated savings and saved a
larger share of their income before the overdraft facility became available to them. Once
they have access to the overdraft facility which acts like an insurance for additional future
spending needs, possibly due to unexpected expenses or income shortfalls, they increase
consumption spending. These users, though, do not display any of the characteristics
that are typically associated with individuals that have precautionary savings motives,
such as high income volatility or higher risk aversion. Based on these considerations, we
label the mechanism we document in this paper as perceived precautionary savings.


5.6    Alternative Explanations and Channels
We move on to consider a set of additional potential alternative interpretations of our
results. First, the facility might free up liquid resources users were keeping in their bank
accounts because of private information about upcoming individual income shocks. In this
vein, even models of buffer-stock savings that allow for both impatience and precautionary
savings motives might explain our results at least in part. Our heterogeneity results do
not seem fully consistent with this interpretation for a set of reasons. Income uncertainty
decreases with age and the heterogeneity results by age we discuss above are not consistent
with this form of precautionary-savings motive. Moreover, we find the pre-activation
volatility of income flows does not predict the reaction to the availability of credit. Also,
as discussed above, users close to the liquidity constraint do not react on average post
activation, whereas those farther away from the constraint react the most, and the buffer-
stock interpretation predicts the opposite pattern.
    A second potential explanation is a buffer-stock model with durable consumption
similar to the one Aydin (2015) studies. However, a set of results suggests this interpre-
tation cannot fully explain the results in our setting. In addition to the facts that the
least liquidity-constrained users react the most and that we do not see any differential
reaction based on pre-activation income volatility, we find users that react the most on
average do not tap into negative deposits and hence de facto never use the facility.
    A third interpretation we consider is present-biased preferences--the fact individuals


                                             22
discount the distant future by more than they discount the immediate future (Meier and
Sprenger, 2010). This interpretation by itself is unlikely to explain all our results, because
if the individuals that react the most to overdraft activation were present-biased, they
would have consumed out of their higher deposits even before activating the overdraft
facility, which we do not observe in the data.
    Contrary to the alternative explanations we have discussed in this section, the per-
ceived precautionary savings channel is consistent with the baseline facts we document
as well as with the fact that users at the top of the distribution by deposits over income
flows react the most to the activation of the overdraft facility.
    At first, our results might appear inconsistent with a large literature documenting
users that are ex-ante most constrained react the most to the extension of credit (see,
e.g., Agarwal et al., 2017; Aydin, 2015; Gross and Souleles, 2002). The major difference
between these studies and our paper is that earlier studies exploited changes in the inten-
sive margin of credit, that is, changing the extent of credit for agents who were already
borrowing. We, instead, focus on the extensive margin of credit, that is, providing users
with a borrowing facility for the first time. The insurance effect of first-time borrowing
facilities could not be detected in earlier research even if this effect was true, because
all the agents in earlier work were already provided with insurance around the change
in credit limits. The insurance mechanism did not change within agents over time in
intensive-margin studies reconciling our work with previous findings in the literature.
    In our setting, users that previously were most concerned about future unexpected
expenses or had higher precautionary savings demands for other reasons that we capture
by sorting on deposits-to-income seem to react the most to the provision of a downside
insurance mechanism--the overdraft facility.


6     Regression Discontinuity Analysis
An important identification concern with our analysis so far is the endogenous timing at
which users open their accounts. One might worry that users activate the account only
when they foresee the need for an overdraft facility, for instance when they plan to have
larger-than-usual upcoming expenses.
    We provide tentative evidence that this endogeneity concern might not be as relevant
in our setting as one might worry. To do so, we repeat our tests by restricting the sample
only to users who activated their overdraft facility within one month after the online



                                             23
bank made it available.15 The rationale for this test is that users who activate the facility
as soon as it is available might be less likely to have planned to activate it in view of
large upcoming expenses, because they could not know the fact that the bank would
have provided such facility, nor the timing. We report the results for this test in Figure
6 (bottom left panel). Although this test restricts the baseline sample substantially, and
hence increases our estimated standard errors, the baseline spending patterns by liquidity
quintiles are quite similar to the baseline analysis in terms of economic magnitudes, and
the coefficients for the two top quintiles, as in the baseline analysis, are statistically
different from zero.
    Despite this evidence, one might worry that other omitted variables might simul-
taneously impact users' consumption behavior and overdraft activation decision, giving
rise to a spurious relation between the two. One example for such a correlated omitted
variable might be time-varying, user-specific exposure to television commercials that in-
dependently advertise the bank's overdraft and various consumer products, even for users
who have been banking with our provider for quite some time and hence do not open
new accounts.
    To directly address these endogeneity concerns, in this last part of the paper we
estimate the causal effects of the availability of the mobile overdraft on spending in a
sharp RDD that exploits variation in users' overdraft limits based on thresholds embedded
in the bank's credit allocation algorithm. Our sharp RDD conditions the analysis on
users' (possibly endogenous) selection into the mobile overdraft and relies on exogenous
variation in the size of the credit line along the intensive margin.
    We do not implement this design for the baseline analysis of the paper because we can
only exploit a limited number of users in the sample for the RDD setting. By construction,
as we discuss in more detail below, the RDD only uses users who are close to pre-specified
thresholds based on the algorithm that assigns the overdraft amount to those activating
an overdraft facility. Because of the limited sample, any meaningful statistical analysis
of heterogeneity and variation across subgroups of users would be impossible.


6.1       Credit Allocation Algorithm
The bank's credit allocation process consists of two steps. First, the bank determines
whether users pass all exclusion criteria and are thus eligible for a mobile credit line.
Overdraft applicants receive a credit line if they (i) are employed, (ii) live in countries
 15
      We thank Michaela Pagel and Greg Buchak for suggesting this test.


                                                  24
where the bank offers a mobile overdraft, (iii) have a minimum credit score of F , and
(iv ) their checking account did not trigger any direct debit reversals. The bank obtains
credit scores from consumer credit bureaus, which collect information on users' credit
histories to estimate default probabilities and assign individual credit ratings from A
(lowest default risk) to M (highest default risk). A credit score of F implies that the
individual has an estimated default probability of less than 10 percent.
     Second, the bank determines the maximum overdraft amount for each eligible user
based on the applicant's credit score and average account income according to the fol-
lowing formula:
                           
                            Max Limit                 if 2 × Income  Max Limit
                           
         Overdraft Amount = Min Limit                 if 2 × Income  Min Limit          (2)
                           
                           250 × 2×·Income
                           
                                                      otherwise,
                                            250


where x rounds the number x to the nearest integer.
    For each rating notch between A and F, the bank specifies a lower (Min Limit ) and
upper limit (Max Limit ) for each user's allocated credit amount. Income is a linear func-
tion of the user's different inflow types in the months prior to the overdraft application.
Our data sharing agreement with the bank does not allow us to report the rating-specific
overdraft limits or the precise formula that transforms users' account inflows into income.
However, we can disclose that the bank differentiates between regular salary and non-
salary related inflows (e.g., pensions, child benefits, study support from parents etc.) and
puts a higher weight on the former. The lower and upper overdraft limits monotonically
increase in the customer's credit rating and range between 500 and 5,000 Euros.
    To determine each user's maximum available overdraft amount, the bank's fully au-
tomated credit allocation algorithm multiplies the Income variable by 2. If the resulting
value exceeds (falls below) the upper (lower) credit limit, the maximum overdraft amount
is bounded from above (below) by the rating-specific limit. If the doubled income falls in
between the upper and lower limit, the amount is rounded to the closest 250 Euro multi-
ple at the midpoint. Panel A of Figure 10 illustrates the rounding convention embedded
in the credit algorithm. For example, if overdraft applicant A has a salary of 2,100 Euros
and no additional account inflows, her implied overdraft amount after multiplying the
income by 2 equals 4,200 Euros, which, if rounded to the closest 250 Euro threshold,
translates into a maximum available overdraft amount of 4,250 Euros (assuming that the
upper and lower credit limits do not bite). The bank's credit allocation process gives

                                            25
rise to 18 unique thresholds in the interval between 500 and 5,000 Euros, at which the
maximum overdraft amount jumps discontinuously by 250 Euros. At these thresholds,
users with almost identical income that find themselves on opposite sides of the rounding
threshold receive different overdraft limits for plausibly exogenous reasons. Crucially,
users are not aware of the algorithm and the algorithm is fully automated leaving no
room for human intervention.


6.2    Empirical Implementation
We limit our analysis to users whose maximum overdraft amount equals the individual's
income multiplied by two and rounded to the nearest multiple of 250. That is, we drop
all users whose transformed income exceeds or falls below the upper or lower credit limit
(within the given rating notch) such that the rounding thresholds embedded in the bank's
credit allocation algorithm do not affect the maximum overdraft amount. For each user
in our RDD sample, we compute the forcing variable Xi , which quantifies the individual's
distance (in Euros) to the nearest rounding threshold. Xi removes differences in absolute
rounding thresholds across individuals and is centered around zero. Users with Xi  0
are treated and receive a maximum overdraft amount that is 250 Euros higher than those
of control users for whom Xi < 0. The probability that a user's overdraft limit gets
rounded up by 250 Euros changes discontinuously from 0 to 1 at the rounding threshold.
Panel B of Figure 10 illustrates the exact treatment rule of our sharp RDD and plots
users' treatment assignment for different values of the forcing variable Xi . In areas close
to the rounding threshold (where Xi = 0), treated and control users have almost identical
income profiles.
    To examine the causal effect of mobile credit lines on users' consumption behavior,
we implement the following sharp RDD:

                          E (Ci (1)|Xi = 0) - E (Ci (0)|Xi = 0) .                       (3)

 is the RD treatment effect and Ci (1/0) is the change in treated (1) or control (0)
user's average consumption three months before and after the credit allocation decision,
divided by the individual's average inflows in the three months prior to the overdraft
application. To estimate this model, we fit a weighted least squares regression of the
observed consumption change on a constant and polynomials of Xi on both sides of the
rounding threshold. The RD treatment effect is the difference in estimated intercepts
from these two local weighted regressions. Formally, each user's consumption change

                                            26
equals:                                
                                       C (0)
                                         i            if Xi  0
                                Ci =                                                   (4)
                                       C (1)          if Xi < 0.
                                         i

We focus on observations within the interval [-h, h] around the rounding threshold, where
h > 0 denotes our bandwidth. The kernel function K (·) specifies our regression weights.
^+/- is the estimate of E (Ci (1/0)|Xi = 0) for observations above or below the threshold,
µ
which we define as:
                                                p
                               ^i = µ
                               C    ^+/- +            ^+/-,j Xij .
                                                      µ                                (5)
                                               j =1


p denotes to the order of the local polynomial. The RD treatment effect then equals:

                                         ^+ - µ
                                       ^=µ    ^- .                                     (6)

    To operationalize the RD estimator, we need to specify (i) the order of polynomial p,
(ii) the kernel function K (·), and (iii) the bandwidth h. We follow Gelman and Imbens
(2018) and only use polynomials of order 1 and 2 to avoid overfitting issues. We apply
weights from a triangular kernel because it is the mean squared error (MSE) minimizing
choice for point estimation in our context (Cheng et al., 1997). Finally, we employ the
MSE-optimal bandwidth selection procedure recommended by Calonico et al. (2014),
which corrects for the bias resulting from subjective bandwidth choices. We residualize
the outcome variables of our RD analysis with NUTS3×year-month fixed effects to ensure
that we compare treated and control users from the same European country at a similar
point in time.


6.3       Assessing Identification Assumptions: Treatment
          Manipulation and Balancing Tests
Our sharp RDD critically relies on the assumption that the forcing variable for individ-
uals just below the threshold is similar to those just above the threshold. If users can
manipulate the forcing variable and thereby their assignment to treatment and control
groups, this local continuity assumption is violated, which results in biased RD estimates
(Roberts and Whited, 2013).
   Conceptually, it is unlikely users can control their treatment assignment in our set-


                                             27
ting. Most importantly, the bank's credit allocation algorithm is proprietary information
and overdraft users do not know it. Even if individuals were informed about the precise
inner workings of the overdraft allocation formula (in particular its rounding thresholds),
it seems implausible they could precisely manipulate their income, for example, by nego-
tiating a higher wage with their employer (Lee and Lemieux, 2010).
    To formally assess the validity of the local continuity assumption, we test for the
presence of a discontinuity in the density of Xi at the rounding threshold. If users sys-
tematically inflate their income to receive a higher overdraft limit, we should observe a
kink in the distribution of our forcing variable to the right of the threshold. We use the
local polynomial density estimator of Cattaneo et al. (2017) to test whether overdraft
users manipulate their assignment into treatment and control group. In Appendix Fig-
ure IA3, we plot both the frequency distribution (Panel A) and density function based on
quadratic local polynomials (Panel B) of our running variable and do not find graphical
evidence for bunching above the rounding threshold. In Figure IA4 in the Appendix,
we report the estimation results of the formal treatment manipulation test by Cattaneo
et al. (2017) for different polynomial and bandwidth choices. In all specifications, we fail
to reject the null hypothesis that our running variable is locally continuous around the
rounding threshold.
    The local continuity assumption implies individuals below and above the cutoff should
not only be similar in terms of the forcing variable but also along other characteristics.
Since overdraft users lack the ability to precisely manipulate their distance to the rounding
threshold, no systematic differences in observable characteristics between the two groups
of individuals should exist. Consistent with this argument, we do not find significant
differences in the average age, gender, time since account opening, account inflows, and
consumption between treated and control users prior to the activation of the mobile over-
draft. As an alternative balancing test, we repeat our RD analysis but replace our main
outcome variable with each observable user characteristic. In Table IA1 of the Internet
Appendix, we document the RD treatment effect for all our covariates is economically
and statistically indistinguishable from zero.
    Overall, the evidence in this subsection indicates that overdraft users do not ma-
nipulate their treatment assignment and that individuals above and below the rounding
threshold have similar observable characteristics. Both findings suggest the local conti-
nuity assumption is satisfied and thereby corroborates the internal validity of our sharp
RD design.



                                             28
6.4    RD Consumption Effect
In Figure 11, we graphically illustrate the RD treatment effect of a 250 Euro higher
overdraft limit on users' consumption behavior. We aggregate our data into disjoint
bins and make sure each bin contains either treatment or control observations. We then
calculate the average value of our outcome variable, plot this value above the midpoint
of the bin, and separately fit two linear regressions through all observations on each side
of the rounding threshold.
    In Panel A of Figure 11, we verify that individuals just above the threshold indeed
receive a higher maximum overdraft amount (relative to their income) compared to users
just below the threshold. The slope of both fitted regressions lines is negative since, within
treatment and control group, individuals with larger values of our forcing variable Xi have
a higher income, which we use to normalize users' overdraft limit. In Panel B, we plot
the change in average (normalized) consumption three months after and before the user
obtained access to the credit line. We find a positive discontinuity in users' consumption
growth right at the rounding threshold, indicating treated users consume more relative to
control users following the exogenous assignment of a 250 Euro higher overdraft limit. In
Table 5, we present the coefficients from estimating the sharp RD design we formalized
in equations (3) to (6). We estimate first- and second-order polynomial regressions at the
rounding threshold and report both bias-corrected and conventional t-statistics (Cattaneo
et al., 2017; Gelman and Imbens, 2018). In columns (1) and (2), we document a positive
and highly statistically significant RD treatment effect on users' consumption growth.
The coefficient estimates do not attenuate when we add user characteristics as control
variables in a linear and additive-separable way. In line with Calonico et al. (2019), we
find adding covariates increases the precision of our point estimates, which again suggests
the local continuity assumption is satisfied.
    We conduct two robustness tests to assess the sensitivity of our RD estimates. First,
we examine how sensitive the RD results are with respect to the choice of our bandwidth
(Imbens and Lemieux, 2008). Varying the bandwidth is only meaningful over small
intervals around the MSE-optimal choice (Cattaneo et al., 2020). Bandwidths much larger
than the MSE-optimal bandwidth bias the RD estimator, while substantially smaller
bandwidths inflate its variance. Figure IA5 in the Internet Appendix shows different
bandwidth choices do neither substantially affect the magnitude of the point estimate,
nor its significance. Second, we assess how robust our RD point estimates are to excluding
data close to the threshold (see, e.g., Barreca et al., 2011, 2016). We drop users located


                                             29
within the radius r > 0 of the rounding cutoff, that is, we exclude observations for which
|Xi |  r (Cattaneo et al., 2020). Internet Appendix Figure IA6 plots the coefficient
estimates for different choices of r and shows that observations close to the rounding
threshold do not drive our results. Taken together, the RD results confirm our baseline
findings and alleviate concerns that selection into the app to obtain access to a line of
credit in the anticipation of upcoming expenses drive our results.


7    Conclusion
We study the consumption response to the introduction of an overdraft facility on a
FinTech app. The average user increases her consumption spending over income by 4.5
percentage points on impact relative to similar users that have access to the overdraft
facility at a later point in time. The increase in consumption has a permanent component
and we observe a reallocation of consumption from discretionary to non-discretionary
expenses.
    The surprising result is that we find a large spending response for users with high
liquid savings, whereas the users with the lowest amount of liquid savings barely react
at all to the provision of the overdraft facility. We do not detect any heterogeneity in
preferences or beliefs across liquidity quintiles, nor heterogeneity in standard theoretical
drivers of precautionary savings motives. These results are not fully consistent with
myopic consumers, models with financial constraints, buffer stock models (with durables)
and the canonical life-cycle permanent income model.
    When we study heterogeneity in the response by observables, we observe a similar
response for young and old users, for users with low and high income volatility, and for
users with steep and flat income paths.
    We argue that a perceived precautionary savings channel might be at work for users
with high deposits over inflow. Before the facility is available, they perceive high income
risk or future expenses and consequently save. Once the overdraft facility is available,
which acts like an insurance against future shortfalls, they increase their consumption
substantially but in fact barely make use the overdraft facility.
    Our findings open new paths for future research. What are the microfoundations
of perceived precautionary savings motives? In particular, does this attitude results
from biased beliefs about the likelihood of future negative states of the world. Or, can
modified versions of the neoclassical consumption model predict the patterns we uncover?
In terms of policy and real-world applications, do perceived precautionary savings change

                                            30
the effectiveness of conventional fiscal policy such as tax rebates? And could policies be
designed to insure perceived precautionary savers in bad times and nudge them to spend
their cash in times in which higher aggregate demand is needed?




                                           31
References
Agarwal, S., Chomsisengphet, S., Mahoney, N., Stroebel, J., 2017. Do Banks Pass
  Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want to Borrow? Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics 133, 129­190.
Aydin, D., 2015. The Marginal Propensity to Consume Out of Liquidity: Evidence from
 Random Assignment of 54,522 Credit Lines. Working Paper. Stanford University.
Bain, 2017. Evolving the Customer Experience in Banking. https://www.bain.com/
  insights/evolving-the-customer-experience-in-banking, accessed on january 3,
  2019. Bain & Company Inc.
Baron, M., Xiong, W., 2017. Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 132, 713­764.
Barreca, A.I., Guldi, M., Lindo, J.M., Waddell, G.R., 2011. Saving Babies? Revisiting
  the Effect of Very Low Birth Weight Classification. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  126, 2117­2123.
Barreca, A.I., Lindo, J.M., Waddell, G.R., 2016. Heaping-Induced Bias in Regression
  Discontinuity Designs. Economic Inquiry 54, 268­293.
Ben-David, I., Fermand, E., Kuhnen, C.M., Li, G., 2018. Expectations Uncertainty
  and Household Economic Behavior. Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Benjamin, D.J., Choi, J.J., Strickland, A.J., 2010. Social Identity and Preferences. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 100, 1913­28.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M.D., Farrell, M.H., Titiunik, R., 2019. Regression Discontinuity
  Designs Using Covariates. Review of Economics and Statistics 101, 442­451.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M.D., Titiunik, R., 2014. Robust Nonparametric Confidence
  Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs. Econometrica 82, 2295­2326.
Carroll, C.D., 1997. Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypoth-
  esis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1­55.
Cattaneo, M.D., Idrobo, N., Titiunik, R., 2020. A Practical Introduction to Regression
  Discontinuity Designs. Elements in Quantitative and Computational Methods for the
  Social Sciences, Cambridge University Press.
Cattaneo, M.D., Jansson, M., Ma, X., 2017. Simple Local Polynomial Density Estimators.
  Working Paper. University of Michigan.
Cheng, M.Y., Fan, J., Marron, J.S., 1997. On Automatic Boundary Corrections. Annals
 of Statistics 25, 1691­1708.

                                           32
Chetty, R., Szeidl, A., 2007. Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 122, 831­877.

Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Weber, M., 2019. Monetary Policy Communications and
  their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations. Working Paper. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

D'Acunto, F., 2018. Identity and Choice Under Risk. Working Paper. Boston College.

D'Acunto, F., 2019. Tear Down This Wall Street: Anti-finance Rhetoric, Subjective
  Beliefs, and Investment. Working Paper. Boston College.

D'Acunto, F., Hoang, D., Paloviita, M., Weber, M., 2019a. IQ, Expectations, and Choice.
  Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research.

D'Acunto, F., Malmendier, U., Ospina, J., Weber, M., 2019b. Exposure to Daily Price
  Changes and Inflation Expectations. Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

D'Acunto, F., Malmendier, U., Weber, M., 2019c. Traditional Gender Norms Distort
  Women's Economic Expectations. Working Paper. Booth School of Business.

D'Acunto, F., Prabhala, N., Rossi, A.G., 2019a. The promises and pitfalls of robo-
  advising. The Review of Financial Studies 32, 1983­2020.

D'Acunto, F., Prokopczuk, M., Weber, M., 2018. Historical Antisemitism, Ethnic Spe-
  cialization, and Financial Development. Review of Economic Studies 86, 1170­1206.

D'Acunto, F., Rossi, A.G., 2020. Robo-advising. Palgrave Macmillan Handbook of
  Technological Finance .

D'Acunto, F., Rossi, A.G., Weber, M., 2019b. Crowdsourcing financial information to
  change spending behavior .

De Quidt, J., Haushofer, J., Roth, C., 2018. Measuring and Bounding Experimenter
  Demand. American Economic Review 108, 3266­3302.

Deaton, A., 1991. Saving and Liquidity Constraints. Econometrica 59, 1221­48.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., 2017. Credit-Induced Boom and Bust. Review of Financial
  Studies 30, 3711­3758.

Dominitz, J., Manski, C.F., 2007. Expected Equity Returns and Portfolio Choice: Ev-
 idence from the Health and Retirement Study. Journal of the European Economic
 Association 5, 369­379.

Friedman, M., 1957. The Permanent Income Hypothesis, in: A Theory of the Consump-
  tion Function. Princeton University Press, pp. 20­37.

                                          33
Gargano, A., Rossi, A.G., 2018. Does it pay to pay attention? The Review of Financial
 Studies 31, 4595­4649.

Gelman, A., Imbens, G., 2018. Why High-Order Polynomials Should Not Be Used in
 Regression Discontinuity Designs. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 0, 1­10.

Gomes, F., Michaelides, A., 2005. Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation: Understanding
 the Empirical Evidence. Journal of Finance 60, 869­904.

Gross, D.B., Souleles, N.S., 2002. Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
  Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  117, 149­185.

Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., 2017. Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liq-
 uidity Trap. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1427­1467.

Guiso, L., Jappelli, T., Terlizzese, D., 1992. Earnings Uncertainty and Precautionary
 Saving. Journal of Monetary Economics 30, 307­337.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., Zingales, L., 2004. The Role of Social Capital in Financial
 Development. American Economic Review 94, 526­556.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., Zingales, L., 2008. Trusting the Stock Market. Journal of Finance
 63, 2557­2600.

Imbens, G.W., Lemieux, T., 2008. Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Practice.
  Journal of Econometrics 142, 615­635.

ING, 2018. International Survey Mobile Banking 2018. https://www.ezonomics.com/
  ing international surveys/mobile-banking-2018, accessed on january 3, 2019.
  ING-DiBa AG.

Jappelli, T., Pistaferri, L., 2017. The Economics of Consumption: Theory and Evidence.
  Oxford University Press.

Kaplan, G., Violante, G.L., Weidner, J., 2014. The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth. Brookings
 Papers on Economic Activity , 77­153.

Lee, D.S., Lemieux, T., 2010. Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics. Journal
  of Economic Literature 48, 281­355.

Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2011. Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
  Retirement Wellbeing. Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2014. The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: The-
  ory and Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature 52, 5­44.



                                           34
Meier, S., Sprenger, C., 2010. Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing.
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, 193­210.

Mian, A., Sufi, A., 2015. House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Reces-
 sion, and How We Can Prevent it from Happening Again. University of Chicago Press
 .

Mian, A., Sufi, A., Verner, E., 2017. Household Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1755­1817.

Olafsson, A., Pagel, M., 2018. The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence from Personal
  Finance Management Software. Review of Financial Studies 31, 4398­4446.

Roberts, M.R., Whited, T.M., 2013. Endogeneity in Empirical Corporate Finance, in:
  Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Elsevier. volume 2, pp. 493­572.

Schularick, M., Taylor, A.M., 2012. Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
  Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review 102, 1029­61.




                                         35
Tables and Figures

 Figure 2: Consumption Pattern around Overdraft Availability
                12%




                                                    Overdraft Available
                             8%
   Consumptiont / Inflowst-1
       0%         4%
                -4%
                -8%




                                  t-6   t-5   t-4   t-3    t-2  t-1     t    t+1 t+2 t+3   t+4   t+5   t6
                                                          Months relative to Treatment

Notes: This figure shows coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals for OLS regres-
sions estimating the effect of mobile overdrafts on users' consumption behavior. We estimate
model (1) from Table 2 but replace the Overdraft Available indicator with separate time dum-
mies, each marking a one-month period (except for event period t - 1).




                                                                      36
          Figure 3: Intertemporal Consumption Smoothing?



                         8%
                         6%
               Consumption / Inflows
                  2%     0%
                         -2%4%




                                       Q1   Q2             Q3              Q4    Q5
                                                 Inflows Growth Quintile
                         8%
                         6%
               Consumption / Inflows
                  2%     0%
                         -2%4%




                                       Q1   Q2            Q3               Q4    Q5
                                                      Age Quintile

Notes: This figure illustrates the cross-sectional heterogeneity in users' consumption response to the
mobile overdraft. To generate these plots, we take the cross-section of users at their treatment date
and assign them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th quintile) based
on the underlying user characteristic. We then interact each of the 5 quintile indicators with a dummy
variable that equals 1 if the user has access to a mobile overdraft in the given month. Vertical bands
represent 95% confidence intervals for the point estimates of each quintile. We double cluster standard
errors at the NUTS2 and year-month level.




                                                       37
Figure 4: Consumption Response by Deposit-to-Income
Quintile
               16%       12%
   Consumption / Inflows
      4%        8%
               0%
               -4%




                               Q1   Q2               Q3              Q4                  Q5
                                         Deposits / Inflows Quintile

Notes: This figure illustrates the cross-sectional heterogeneity in users' consumption response to the
mobile overdraft. To generate this plot, we take the cross-section of users at their treatment date and
assign them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th quintile) based on
the underlying user characteristic. We then interact each of the 5 quintile indicators with a dummy
variable that equals 1 if the user has access to a mobile overdraft in the given month. Vertical bands
represent 95% confidence intervals for the point estimates of each quintile. We double cluster standard
errors at the NUTS2 and year-month level.




                                                  38
Figure 5: Consumption Pattern by Deposit-to-Income Quintile
               40%
                                                    Overdraft Available
                           30%
   Consumptiont / Inflowst-1
       10%      20%
               0%
               -10%




                                 t-6   t-5    t-4   t-3    t-2  t-1     t    t+1 t+2 t+3    t+4   t+5   t6
                                                          Months relative to Treatment

                                             Q2             Q3             Q4          Q1               Q5

Notes: This figure shows coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals for OLS regressions estimating
the heterogeneous effect of mobile overdrafts on the consumption behavior of users with different ex-ante
liquidity. To generate this plot, we take the cross-section of users at their treatment date and assign them
into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th quintile) based on the deposit
to inflows ratio in the month before treatment. We estimate model (1) from Table 2 but replace the
Overdraft Available indicator with separate time dummies, which we further interact with our quintile
indicators. Each time dummy marks a one-month period (except for event period t - 1). Coefficients are
normalized by subtracting the pre-treatment mean for each quintile. We double cluster standard errors
at the NUTS2 and year-month level.




                                                                      39
                                                                       Figure 6: Robustness Tests
                              Controlling for Age, Inflow Growth, and Inflow Volatility                                                                Account for at least 12m before Treatment
                20%




                                                                                                                                20%
                       15%




                                                                                                                                          15%
   Consumption / Inflows




                                                                                                                      Consumption / Inflows
              10%




                                                                                                                                 10%
       5%




                                                                                                                          5%
 0%




                                                                                                                    0%
                -5%




                                                                                                                                -5%
                                  Q1              Q2               Q3              Q4              Q5                                             Q1              Q2               Q3              Q4             Q5
                                                       Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                                                                     Deposits / Inflows Quintile

                                             Baseline Specification       Additional Controls                                                                       All Users      At least 12 Months



                                           Minimum Average Consumption Rate                                                                            Deposits / Inflows Grouping from t-12 to t-3
          28%




                                                                                                                                20%
                       21%




                                                                                                                                          15%
   Consumption / Inflows




                                                                                                                      Consumption / Inflows
              14%




                                                                                                                                 10%
       7%




                                                                                                                          5%
 0%




                                                                                                                    0%
          -7%




                                                                                                                                -5%




                                 Q1              Q2                Q3              Q4              Q5                                             Q1              Q2               Q3              Q4             Q5
                                                       Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                                                                     Deposits / Inflows Quintile

                               All Users    At Least 40%    At Least 50%     At Least 60%       At Least 70%                                        Deposits / Inflows in t-1     Deposits / Inflows from t-12 to t-3



                                    Users Who Activate Overdraft at Introduction                                                                         Alternative Standard Error Clustering
                30%




                                                                                                                            20%10% 15%
                        20%




                                                                                                                     Consumption / Inflows
    Consumption / Inflows
               10%




                                                                                                                         5%
        0%




                                                                                                                    0%
 -10%




                                                                                                                            -5%
                -20%




                                                                                                                                                  Q1              Q2               Q3              Q4             Q5
                                  Q1              Q2               Q3              Q4              Q5                                                                  Deposits / Inflows Quintile
                                                       Deposits / Inflows Quintile
                                                                                                                                                NUTS2 and Year-Month       NUTS3 and Year-Month         User and Year-Month
                                                All Users       Activation at Introduction                                                      NUTS2                      NUTS3                        User


Notes: This figure illustrates the cross-sectional heterogeneity in users' consumption response to the
mobile overdraft for various robustness specifications. To generate these plots, we take the cross-section
of users at their treatment date and assign them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile)
to highest (5th quintile) based on the deposit to inflows ratio. We then interact each of the 5 quintile
indicators with a dummy variable that equals 1 if the user has access to a mobile overdraft in the given
month. In the top left panel, we additionally control for user characteristics at treatment (overdraft
available interacted with user age, inflows growth and inflows volatility at treatment). In the top right
panel, we keep only users that had an account with the bank for at least 12 months before they activated
the overdraft facility. In the middle left panel, we focus on users who exhibit an average consumption
rate of at least X % over the sample period where we vary X from 40 to 70. In the middle right panel,
we group users into quintiles based on the average deposit to income ratio from 12 until 3 months before
treatment. In the bottom left panel, we focus on users who activate the overdraft at the introduction
date and compare them to users who activate the overdraft at least one year after the introduction.
In the bottom right panel, we provide baseline regression results for various standard error clusterings.
Vertical bands represent 95% confidence intervals for the point estimates of each quintile. Except for the
bottom right panel, we double cluster standard errors at the NUTS2 and year-month level.

                                                                                                               40
                                                              Figure 7: External Validity
                                        Low vs. High Savings Rate                                                                  Low vs. High Development
             20%




                                                                                                            27%
                       15%




                                                                                                                       18%
   Consumption / Inflows




                                                                                                   Consumption / Inflows
              10%




                                                                                                              9%
       5%




                                                                                                -9%    0%
 0%




                                                                                                            -18%
             -5%




                             Q1          Q2               Q3              Q4          Q5                                     Q1     Q2               Q3              Q4     Q5
                                              Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                                                Deposits / Inflows Quintile

                                  Savings Rate < Median       Savings Rate > Median                                               Low Development        High Development



                                           Urban vs. Non-Urban                                                                         Young vs. Old Users
             20%




                                                                                                            20%
                       15%




                                                                                                                      15%
   Consumption / Inflows




                                                                                                  Consumption / Inflows
              10%




                                                                                                             10%
       5%




                                                                                                      5%
 0%




                                                                                                0%
             -5%




                                                                                                            -5%




                             Q1          Q2               Q3              Q4          Q5                                     Q1     Q2               Q3              Q4     Q5
                                              Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                                                Deposits / Inflows Quintile

                                                Urban       Non-Urban                                                                Age < Median        Age > Median


Notes: This figure illustrates the cross-sectional heterogeneity in users' consumption response to the
mobile overdraft for various sample splits. To generate these plots, we take the cross-section of users at
their treatment date and assign them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest
( quintile) based on the deposit to inflows ratio. We then interact each of the 5 quintile indicators with
a dummy variable that equals 1 if the user has access to a mobile overdraft in the given month. Vertical
bands represent 95% confidence intervals for the point estimates of each quintile. We double cluster
standard errors at the NUTS2 and year-month level. Note: savings rate refers to the NUTS1 average
savings rate in 2015 from statistisches Bundesamt.




                                                                                           41
 Figure 8: User Characteristics by Deposit-to-Income Quintile

                                           Age (at Treatment)

               38
               36
               34
               32
               30
               28




                       Q1             Q2               Q3              Q4         Q5
                                           Deposits / Inflows Quintile


                               Inflows Volatility (over last 12 Months)
               1600
               1400
               1200
               1000
               800
               600




                       Q1             Q2               Q3              Q4         Q5
                                           Deposits / Inflows Quintile

Notes: This figure illustrates the cross-sectional heterogeneity in users' characteristics by deposits to
inflows quintile. To generate these plots, we take the cross-section of users at their treatment date and
assign them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th quintile) based on
the deposit to inflows ratio in the month before treatment. Vertical bands represent 95% confidence
intervals for the mean of each quintile.




                                                   42
    Figure 9: Subjective Beliefs by Deposit-to-Income Quintile
                                 Risk Aversion                                                           Patience




                                                                         150
      10




                                                                         140
      8




                                                                         130
      6




                                                                         120
      4




                                                                         110
      2




                                                                         100
      0




            Q1           Q2               Q3              Q4   Q5                 Q1         Q2                Q3              Q4    Q5
                              Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                          Deposits / Inflows Quintile


                 Likelihood of Large Expenses - 12m Horizon                     Likelihood of Large Medical Expenses - 12m Horizon
      10




                                                                         10
      8




                                                                         8
      6




                                                                         6
      4




                                                                         4
      2




                                                                         2
      0




                                                                         0




            Q1           Q2               Q3              Q4   Q5                 Q1         Q2                Q3              Q4    Q5
                              Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                          Deposits / Inflows Quintile


                         Likelihood of Loosing Job                                                 Health Satisfaction
      10




                                                                         10
      8




                                                                         8
      6




                                                                         6
      4




                                                                         4
      2




                                                                         2
      0




                                                                         0




            Q1           Q2               Q3              Q4   Q5                 Q1         Q2                Q3              Q4    Q5
                              Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                          Deposits / Inflows Quintile


                               Life Expectancy                                 Can Perform Simple Financial Computation (% within Q)
      110




                                                                         100
      100




                                                                         80
      90




                                                                         60
      80




                                                                         40
      70




                                                                         20
      60




                                                                         0




            Q1           Q2               Q3              Q4   Q5                  Q1        Q2               Q3             Q4     Q5
                              Deposits / Inflows Quintile                                         Deposits / Inflows Quintile


Notes: This figure plots a set of preferences and beliefs dimensions we elicited from users through an
ad-hoc survey intervention. To generate these plots, we take the cross-section of users at their treatment
date and assign them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th quintile)
based on the ratio of deposited amount over income. We limit the sample to users that activate the
overdraft facility in our main sample. Vertical bands represent 95% confidence intervals for the point
estimates of each quintile.


                                                                    43
Figure 10: Treatment Assignment in Regression Discontinuity
Analysis

                    Panel A: Rounding Logic of Overdraft Allocation Algorithm

                      Rounded to 4,000                  Rounded to 4,250
                                                                                      2·Income
            3,875           4,000              4,125            4,250        4,375
                              Rounded DownRounded Up



                             Panel B: Visualization of Sharp Treatment
           Rounded Up




             Threshold




        Rounded Down
                            -100        -50             0           50     100
                                              Distance to Threshold

Notes: This figure illustrates how we assign users to treatment and control group in our regression
discontinuity analysis based on discrete rounding thresholds embedded in the bank's credit risk model.
Panel A visualizes the rounding logic of the overdraft allocation algorithm. Panel B plots users' treatment
probability for different values of our forcing variable Xi .




                                                       44
                               Figure 11: Regression Discontinuity Results

                                                                                        Panel A: Overdraft Amounts


                                           2.63
               Overdraft Amountt / Incomet
                     1.8       2.2            1.4
                                              1




                                                                                 -100       -50          0       50   100




                                                                                        Panel B: Consumption Growth
                                                                            20
                  (Consumptiont+1:t+3 - Consumptiont-3:t-1) / Incomet-3:t-1
               -20      -12           -4       4               12




                                                                                 -100       -50          0       50   100

Notes: This figure provides graphical evidence for the sharp discontinuity in users' overdraft limits and
consumption growth rates at the rounding threshold. In Panel A, we plot the income-normalized overdraft
limit that users receive at the treatment date. In Panel B, we plot users' consumption growth rate,
which we define as the difference in average consumption three months before and after the treatment,
normalized by the average account inflows three months prior to the overdraft application. We aggregate
our data into 12 disjoint bins, calculate the average value, plot this value above the midpoint of each bin,
and separately fit two linear regressions through all observations on each side of the rounding threshold.




                                                                                                    45
                                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                          N        Mean           SD      P10      P25       P50        P75        P90
User Age [Years]                        603,157      34.07        9.93    23.91    27.00      31.49      38.66      48.91
Female [0/1=Yes]                        603,157       0.21        0.41     0.00     0.00       0.00       0.00       1.00
Urban [0/1=Yes]                         603,157       0.53        0.50     0.00     0.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
Account Age [Years]                     603,157       1.57        0.86     0.47     0.88       1.49       2.18       2.78
Overdraft Available [0/1=Yes]           603,157       0.91        0.29     1.00     1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
Overdraft Amount [Euro]                 574,328   1,561.38    1,602.05   500.00   500.00   1,000.00   2,000.00   3,000.00
Consumption [Euro]                      603,157     730.81      949.42     0.00   131.00     465.00     993.00   1,715.00
Inflows [Euro]                          603,157   2,219.84    5,948.55    90.00   380.00   1,124.00   2,534.00   4,564.00
Consumption / Inflows [%]               603,157      48.11       44.89     0.00    13.88      37.24      70.08     108.00
Card Consumption [Euro]                 603,157     498.58      736.64     0.00    67.00     281.00     646.00   1,206.00
Card Consumption / Inflows [%]          603,157      33.80       37.17     0.00     6.49      22.12      47.85      84.72
Cash Withdrawals [Euro]                 603,157     220.92      400.55     0.00     0.00      90.00     300.00     600.00
Cash Withdrawals / Inflows [%]          603,157      13.44       19.56     0.00     0.00       5.33      19.27      40.00
Discretionary [Euro]                    603,157     208.36      419.58     0.00     1.00      70.00     242.00     550.00
Non-Discretionary [Euro]                603,157     290.22      469.75     0.00    26.00     159.00     373.00     692.00
Discretionary / Non-Discretionary [%]   484,683      61.03       79.26     0.00     7.66      34.41      82.45     155.17

  Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for our user-month panel. The sample consists of 36,005
  users that received an overdraft between February 2015 and September 2017 and covers each individual's
  complete transaction history from February 2015 to March 2019. For each variable, we report the number
  of observations (N), mean, standard deviation (SD), 10% quantile (P10), 25% quantile (P25), median
  (P50), 75% quantile (P75), and 90% quantile (P90). We define all variables in Appendix A1.




                                                             46
Table 2: Effect of Overdraft Availability on Users'
Consumption Behavior
                                   Consumptiont   Card Consumptiont   Cash Withdrawalst     Discretionaryt
 Dependent Variable (×100):         Inflowst-1        Inflowst-1          Inflowst-1      Non-Discretionaryt

                                        (1)                  (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                                                                                 
 Overdraft Availablet               4.572          3.152               1.345               2.902
                                     (11.11)        (9.71)              (7.73)              (5.38)
 Economic Effect Size:               9.503%         9.325%             10.007%             4.755%
 Fixed Effects:
 User                                  Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes
 NUTS3 × Year-Month                    Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes
 Standard Error Clusters:
 NUTS2                                 48               48                48                  48
 Year-Month                            49               49                49                  50
 Adjusted R2                          0.301         0.300               0.339               0.185
 User-Year-Month Observations        603,157       603,157             603,157             484,683

Notes: This table provides coefficient estimates of OLS regressions estimating the effect of mobile over-
draft facilities on users' consumption behavior (equation (1)). Consumption is the sum of users' Card
Consumption and Cash Withdrawals in the given month. Card Consumption is the user's total amount
of electronic card consumption. Cash Withdrawals is the user's total amount of cash withdrawals from
ATMs in the given month. Inflows is the total amount of all incoming transactions a user receives in the
given month. Discretionary is the sum of users' monthly spending on Entertainment, Shopping, Gas-
tronomy, and Travel. Non-Discretionary consumption equals Card Consumption minus Discretionary
spending. Overdraft Available is a binary indicator that equals 1 if the user has access to a mobile
overdraft in the given month. We compute the Economic Effect Size as the pre-treatment average of
each outcome variable multiplied by the corresponding coefficient estimate. We report t-statistics based
on standard errors double-clustered at the NUTS2 and year-month level in parentheses. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                   47
  Table 3: User Characteristics by Deposit-to-Income Quintile
                                 Panel A: Users' Financial Characteristics
                                                                Deposits / Inflows Quintiles
                                                     Q1            Q2          Q3              Q4         Q5          SD
 Flow Characteristics
 Cumulative Inflowst-12:t-1                    11,491.77    13,381.19    14,930.03   10,580.58      10,753.34   16,980.36
 Inflowst-1                                     1,270.25     1,775.88     1,882.12    1,779.34       1,293.43    3,961.29
 Inflowst-12:t-1                                  957.65     1,115.10     1,244.17      881.71         896.11    1,415.03
 SD(Inflowst-12:t-1 )                             836.63       941.74     1,191.37      793.55         901.77    1,635.70
 SD(Consumptiont-12:t-1 )                         462.59       471.12       483.49      473.75         429.53      476.92
 Cumulative Outflowst-12:t-1                   11,778.41    13,135.22    13,767.61    9,589.49       7,774.88   15,500.42

 Deposit Characteristics
 Depositst-1                                      39.45         451.87    1,128.83     1,715.09      4,163.05    8,520.52
 Depositst-12                                    283.02         320.74      468.30       434.86        627.48    1,225.21
 Depositst-12:t-1                                273.90         459.46      729.29       814.87      2,012.25    2,432.76
 Negative Depositst+1:t+3                          0.65           0.41        0.29         0.19          0.10        0.47

 Account Characteristics
 User Aget                                        31.35          32.25       32.69       33.15         35.05         9.89
 Female                                            0.20           0.20        0.22        0.25          0.23         0.41
 Urban                                             0.50           0.54        0.56        0.54          0.47         0.50
 Account Aget                                      0.67           0.62        0.61        0.55          0.71         0.36
 Users                                            1,909          1,909       1,910       1,908         1,909       9,545


                                     Panel B: Users' Subjective Beliefs
                                                                Deposits / Inflows Quintiles
                                                     Q1            Q2          Q3              Q4         Q5          SD
 Risk Aversion [0-10]                              5.13           4.63        4.47        4.65          4.72        2.31
 Trust Level [0-10]                                5.29           5.74        5.53        5.31          5.47        2.15
 Risk-Return Category [1-4]                        2.88           2.85        3.03        2.93          2.86        0.74
 Patience [> 100]                                118.98         119.07      119.45      121.96        117.48       17.42
 Likelihood of Large Expenses [0-10]               4.13           4.29        4.48        4.46          4.80        2.63
 Likelihood of Large Medical Expenses [0-10]       2.32           2.26        2.32        2.50          2.45        2.29
 Likelihood of Loosing Job [0-10]                  1.34           1.15        1.41        1.14          1.29        2.12
 Health Satisfaction [0-10]                        6.99           7.28        7.16        7.02          7.41        2.21
 Reasons for Saving [1-4]                          2.20           2.26        2.23        2.35          2.29        0.98
 Basic Financial Computation Ability [1-3]         2.85           2.72        2.82        2.70          2.69        0.56
 Life Expectancy [number]                         83.37          85.57       84.70       83.06         83.13       10.63
 Users                                               96           141          112         114           136         599


Notes: This table provides descriptive statistics of user characteristics and survey responses. Panel A
provides descriptive statistics for users at the time of overdraft activation, sorted into quintiles based
on the ratio of deposits over inflows in the month before activation of the overdraft facility. Subscript t
refers to the activation date, while T denotes the last month of each user in our sample. The last column
reports the standard deviation of the corresponding characteristic across all users. Panel B reports a set
of preferences and beliefs dimensions we elicited from users through an ad-hoc survey intervention. We
take the cross-section of users at their treatment date and assign them into non-overlapping quintiles
from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th quintile) based on the ratio of deposited amount over income.
We limit the sample to users that activate the overdraft facility in our main sample.




                                                           48
           Table 4: Assessing RDD Identification Assumptions
                                    Panel A: Treatment Manipulation Tests
                                  Bandwidths                           Effective N                          Test
                           Left             Right            Left                Right          T -Stat.           p-value
                 ^1)
             T2 (h        104.17            76.21                373                 328         -0.94              0.35
 h- = h+         ^2)
             T3 (h         75.73            82.98                285                 345         -0.85              0.39
                 ^3)
             T4 (h        89.01             55.32                322                 221          0.39              0.70
                 ^1)
             T2 (h        111.32            111.32               424                 448         -0.05              0.96
 h- = h+         ^2)
             T3 (h         71.59            71.59                248                 289         -0.51              0.61
                 ^3)
             T4 (h        58.32             58.32                201                 229         -0.59              0.56



                       Panel B: User Characteristics around Rounding Thresholds
                                         Rounded Up                          Rounded Down                Difference in Means
                                  Mean         SD     Median            Mean           SD   Median         Diff.      t-Stat.
 User Age [Years]              32.32          9.34       29.91        33.02         10.12      30.37       0.70          1.13
 Female [0/1=Yes]               0.25          0.43        0.00         0.24          0.43       0.00      -0.01         -0.35
 Account Age [Years]            0.87          0.38        0.83         0.85          0.41       0.79      -0.01         -0.53
 Inflowst-3:t-1 [Euro]      1,405.64      1,530.10    1,101.67     1,458.92      1,454.29   1,069.67      53.28          0.56
 Consumptiont-3:t-1           558.89        522.39      427.17       620.04        597.38     482.83     61.14           1.70
 [Euro]
 Users                             500                                    474                               974


Notes: This table provides the results of tests assessing our RDD identification assumptions. Panel A
reports the results of treatment manipulation tests using the local polynomial density estimator by Cat-
taneo et al. (2017). Tq (hp ) denotes the q -th order local polynomial test with bandwidth hp . "Bandwidth"
is the mean-squared-error (MSE) optimal bandwidth, "Effective N" is the effective sample size on each
side of the threshold, and "T" is the two-sided test statistic with corresponding p-value. The tests in the
first three rows allow for different bandwidths on each side of the threshold, while the tests in the last
three rows impose a common bandwidth on both sides of the threshold. Panel B provides descriptive user
characteristics for individuals above ("Rounded Up") and below ("Rounded Down") the RD rounding
threshold. For each variable, we report the mean, standard deviation (SD), and median (P50). In the
last two columns, we test for differences in means across both types of users. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                            49
  Table 5: Consumption Growth around Rounding Thresholds
                                                  Consumptiont+1:t+3 -Consumptiont-3:t-1
  Dependent Variable (×100):                                  Inflowst-3:t-1

                                       (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)
  Conventional                       17.63              23.48             17.96            23.70
                                      (2.19)             (2.20)            (2.12)           (2.34)
  Robust                             21.56              26.52             21.83            26.62
                                      (2.37)             (2.31)            (2.31)           (2.46)
  Covariates                           No                No                 Yes              Yes
  User Observations                    876               876                876              876
  Order Local Polynomial (p)            1                 2                  1                2
  Order Bias (q )                       2                 3                  2                3
  Bandwidth Left                      25.47             35.89              23.98            36.86
  Bandwidth Right                     25.47             35.89              23.98            36.86

Notes: This table presents non-parametric estimates for the RD treatment effect of a 250 Euro higher
overdraft amount on users' consumption behavior. The dependent variable is the difference in average
consumption three months before and after the treatment, normalized by the average account inflows
three months prior to the overdraft application. We residualize users' consumption growth rate with
country × year-month fixed effects to ensure that we compare treated and control users from the same
European country at a similar point in time. We only use polynomials of order 1 and 2 to avoid overfitting
issues (Gelman and Imbens, 2018), apply weights from a triangular kernel because it is the mean squared
error (MSE) minimizing choice (Cheng et al., 1997), and employ the MSE-optimal bandwidth selection
procedure recommended by (Calonico et al., 2014). We report both conventional and robust RD estimates
(Calonico et al., 2014, 2019). In columns (1) and (2), we do not add any covariates. In columns (3)
and (4), we control for User Age, gender (Female ), and Account Age. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                   50
Appendix

                          Table A1: Variable Definitions
Variable                   Definition
Account Age                End of month date minus the date when the user completed the account
                           opening procedure.
Big Ticket Expenditure     Indicator variable equal to one if the user has at least one transaction of
                           more than 5,000 EUR in the given month.
Card Consumption           Total amount of electronic card consumption in the given month.
Cash Withdrawals           Total amount of cash withdrawals in the given month.
Consumption                Sum of Card Consumption and Cash Withdrawals.
Deposits                   Total amount of available funds in a user's account at the end of a month.
Discretionary              Sum of users' monthly expenditures on Entertainment, Shopping, Gas-
                           tronomy, and Travel.
Female                     Indicator variable equal to one if the user is female.
Incoming Wire Transfers    Total amount of all SEPA credit transfers a user receives in the given
                           month.
Inflows                    Total amount of all incoming transactions a user receives in the given
                           month.
Negative Deposits          Indicator variable equal to one if the user has a negative account balance
                           in the given month.
Non-Discretionary          Card Consumption minus Discretionary spending.
Overdraft Available        Indicator variable equal to one if the user has access to a mobile overdraft
                           in the given month.
Overdraft Amount           Maximum overdraft amount granted to the user by the bank in the given
                           month.
Savings Rate               Lagged inflows minus total current outflows divided by lagged inflows.
Urban                      Indicator variable equal to one if the user lives in a NUTS3 region with a
                           population of at least 500,000 people.
User Age                   End of month date minus first day of user's birth year.




                                                 51
              Internet Appendix to


Perceived Precautionary Savings Motives:
         Evidence from FinTech


  Francesco D'Acunto         Thomas Rauter

   Christoph Scheuch          Michael Weber
Figure IA1: Savings Rate Pattern by Deposit-to-Income
Quintile 20%

                                       Overdraft Available
         0%
    Savings Ratet
   -40%     -20%
         -60%
         -80%




                    t-6   t-5    t-4   t-3    t-2  t-1     t    t+1 t+2 t+3        t+4   t+5     t6
                                             Months relative to Treatment

                                Q2             Q3            Q4               Q1                Q5

Notes: This figure shows coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals for OLS regressions estimating
the heterogeneous effect of mobile overdrafts on the savings behavior of users with different ex-ante
liquidity. To generate this plot, we take the cross-section of users at their treatment date and assign
them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th quintile) based on the
deposit to inflows ratio in the month before treatment. We estimate model (1) from Table 2 but replace
the Overdraft Available indicator with separate time dummies, which we further interact with our quintile
indicators. Each time dummy marks a one-month period (except for event period t - 1). Coefficients are
normalized by subtracting the pre-treatment mean for each quintile. We double cluster standard errors
at the NUTS2 and year-month level.




                                                         1
Figure IA2: Big Ticket Expenditure Response by
Deposit-to-Income Quintile


                            0.02      0.01
               Big Ticket Expenditure
                   -0.01      0
                            -0.02
                            -0.03




                                             Q1   Q2               Q3              Q4   Q5
                                                       Deposits / Inflows Quintile

Notes: This figure illustrates the cross-sectional heterogeneity in users' big-ticket expenditure response
after accessing the mobile overdraft. To generate this plot, we take the cross-section of users at their
treatment date and assign them into non-overlapping quintiles from lowest (1st quintile) to highest (5th
quintile) based on the underlying user characteristic. We then interact each of the 5 quintile indicators
with a dummy variable that equals 1 if the user has access to a mobile overdraft in the given month.
Vertical bands represent 95% confidence intervals for the point estimates of each quintile. We double
cluster standard errors at the NUTS2 and year-month level.




                                                               2
Figure IA3: Distribution of Forcing Variable around Rounding
Thresholds

                                 Panel A: Histogram of Forcing Variable
                    50
                    40 30
               Frequency
              20    10
                    0




                              -100        -50              0            50    100
                                                Distance to Threshold




                              Panel B: Local Polynomial Density Estimate
                    .01
                    .008
                       .006
                 Density
              .004  .002
                    0




                              -100       -50              0             50    100
                                                Distance to Threshold

Notes: This figure provides graphical evidence for our treatment manipulation tests in Section 6.3.
Panel A plots the number of users and Panel B reports the local polynomial density estimate by Cattaneo
et al. (2017) for different values of our forcing variable Xi around the rounding threshold.




                                                      3
Figure IA4: Robustness Analyses for Treatment Manipulation
Tests

                   3
                                                        MSE Optimal Symmetric Bandwidth


                   2
                                                                                            t = 1.645
                   1
   t-Statistics




                   0


                  -1
                                                                                           t = -1.645

                  -2


                  -3

                        25                 50                  75                100                    125
                                                  Bandwidth

                             Polynomial Order:           p=2        p=3        p=4


Notes: This figure reports t-statistics for the treatment manipulation test by Cattaneo et al. (2017) for
different polynomial orders and bandwidth choices. The vertical horizontal lines indicate the critical
10% significance levels at which the test rejects the null hypothesis that our running variable is locally
continuous around the rounding threshold.




                                                    4
  Figure IA5: Sensitivity of RDD Effects to Bandwidth Choice

                                                   40                       MSE Optimal Bandwidth
   Conventional RD Effect on Consumption Growth




                                                   30




                                                   20




                                                   10




                                                    0




                                                  -10

                                                        19   21   23               25         27
                                                                       Bandwidth
Notes: This figure shows convetional regression (RD) discontinuity estimates (solid line) and correspond-
ing 95% confidence intervals (shaded area) for varying bandwidth choices. The figure demonstrates that
different bandwidth choices do neither substantially affect the magnitude nor the significance of our
main RD consumption effect. Varying the bandwidth is only meaningful over small intervals around
the mean-squared-error (MSE) optimal choice (Cattaneo et al., 2020). Bandwidths much larger than
the MSE-optimal bandwidth bias the RD estimator, while substantially smaller bandwidths inflate its
variance.




                                                                        5
Figure IA6: Sensitivity of RDD Effects to Observations around
Rounding Thresholds

                                            100
   Robust RD Effect on Consumption Growth




                                            80




                                            60




                                            40




                                            20




                                              0

                                                  0   1   2              3      4                 5
                                                          Donut Hole Radius
Notes: This figure shows robust regression discontinuity (RD) estimates (solid line) and corresponding
95% confidence intervals (shaded area) for varying donut hole radius choices. This figure demonstrates
that our main RD consumption effect is robust to excluding data close to the rounding threshold (e.g.,
Barreca et al., 2011, 2016). We drop users located within the radius r > 0 of the rounding cutoff.
Specifically, we exclude observations for which |Xi |  r (Cattaneo et al., 2020) and illustrate that
observations close to the rounding threshold do not drive our results.




                                                              6
 Table IA1: User Characteristics around Rounding Thresholds

 Dependent Variable:                  User Age                  Female                Account Age
                                          (1)                      (2)                      (3)
 Conventional                           3.485                   -0.00263                  0.0568
                                        (1.28)                   (-0.02)                  (0.61)
 Robust                                 4.192                   -0.0407                   0.0432
                                        (1.26)                  (-0.24)                   (0.39)
 Covariates                              No                       No                       No
 User Observations                       972                      972                      972
 Order Local Polynomial (p)               1                        1                        1
 Order Bias (q )                          2                        2                        2
 Bandwidth Left                         29.77                    33.95                    41.64
 Bandwidth Right                        29.77                    33.95                    41.64

Notes: This table reports non-parametric estimates for the RD treatment effect of a 250 Euro higher
overdraft amount on several user characteristics. The dependent variables are the user's age, gender,
and time since account opening at the treatment date. We only use polynomials of order 1 and 2 to
avoid overfitting issues (Gelman and Imbens, 2018), apply weights from a triangular kernel because it
is the mean squared error (MSE) minimizing choice (Cheng et al., 1997), and employ the MSE-optimal
bandwidth selection procedure recommended by Calonico et al. (2014). We report both conventional
and robust RD estimates (Calonico et al., 2014, 2019). ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-tailed), respectively.




                                                    7
                                Table IA2: Survey Questions
Question                                                          Possible Answers
Do you rate yourself as a risk-taking person or are you           Scale from 0 (not willing to take risks) to 10 (very willing
trying to avoid risks?                                            to take risks)

Would you say that you are a person who trusts others, or         Scale from 0 (I do not trust others) to 10 (I trust others
not?                                                              fully)

When you make savings or investment decisions for your-           1 ­ I take significant risks and want to generate high re-
self, which of the following statements describes you best?       turns.
                                                                  2 ­ I take above-average risks and want to achieve above-
                                                                  average returns.
                                                                  3 ­ I take average risks and aim for average returns.
                                                                  4 ­ I am not willing to take any financial risk and accept
                                                                  not to generate any returns.

Imagine, you get either 100 Euros immediately or a higher         1 ­ 101 Euros
amount of money in a month. What is the lowest amount             2 ­ 103 Euros
you would be willing to wait for a month?                         3 ­ 108 Euros
                                                                  4 ­ 117 Euros
                                                                  5 ­ 125 Euros
                                                                  6 ­ 133 Euros
                                                                  7 ­ 150 Euros
                                                                  8 ­ 167 Euros
                                                                  9 ­ 183 Euros
                                                                  10 ­ 200 Euros
                                                                  11 ­ 233 Euros

How likely is it that you will face large, unexpected ex-         Scale from 0 (very unlikely) to 10 (very likely)
penses over the next 12 months?

How likely is it that you will face large medical expenses        Scale from 0 (very unlikely) to 10 (very likely)
for yourself or a family member over the next 12 months,
including hospitalization and nursing care?

How likely are you to lose your job in the next 12 months?        Scale from 0 (very unlikely) to 10 (very likely)

How satisfied are you with your health at the moment?             Scale from 0 (not satisfied) to 10 (very satisfied)

What do you usually think of when saving?                         1 ­ I usually save for very specific expenses, such as a va-
                                                                  cation or a car.
                                                                  2 ­ I usually save to have a small amount of money avail-
                                                                  able for unexpected expenses.
                                                                  3 ­ I do not save much or cannot save much. Whenever I
                                                                  put money aside, I do it without much thought.
                                                                  4 ­ I am saving with the goal of building a small estate
                                                                  that I may pass on to my children, nephews, nieces, or
                                                                  other family members.

Suppose you have 100 Euros in your savings account and            1 ­ Lower than 120 Euros
earn 10 percent interest per year. How high will be your          2 ­ 120 Euros
balance after 2 years?                                            3 ­ Higher than 120 Euros

How high do you estimate your life expectancy?                    Enter number




                                                              8
           Table IA3: Characteristics of Survey Respondents
                                           Non-Respondents         Respondents
                                                         Mean                Mean                    SD
 User Age [Years]                                       33.78                38.37                  9.93
 Female [0/1=Yes]                                        0.22                 0.12                  0.41
 Urban [0/1=Yes]                                         0.54                 0.39                  0.50
 Account Age [Years]                                     1.56                 1.77                  0.86
 Overdraft Available [0/1=Yes]                           0.91                 0.91                  0.29
 Overdraft Amount [Euro]                             1,566.51             1,484.89              1,602.05
 Consumption [Euro]                                    742.09               561.75                949.42
 Inflows [Euro]                                      2,236.78             1,965.94              5,948.55
 Consumption / Inflows [%]                              48.33                44.86                 44.89
 Card Consumption [Euro]                               506.49               379.95                736.64
 Card Consumption / Inflows [%]                         33.91                32.22                 37.17
 Cash Withdrawals [Euro]                               223.92               175.96                400.55
 Cash Withdrawals / Inflows [%]                         13.53                12.04                 19.56
 Discretionary [Euro]                                  212.97               139.35                419.58
 Non-Discretionary [Euro]                              293.53               240.60                469.75
 Discretionary / Non-Discretionary [%]                  81.46                69.44                102.50
 Observations                                           565,423             37,734              603,157
Notes: This table provides descriptive statistics of characteristics for users who responded to the survey
and those who did not respond. The last column reports the standard deviation of the corresponding
characteristic across all users. We limit the sample to users that activate the overdraft facility in our
main sample.




                                                    9
