                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           A MODEL OF CRYPTOCURRENCIES

                                        Michael Sockin
                                         Wei Xiong

                                      Working Paper 26816
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26816


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank An Yan for a comment that led to this paper, and Will Cong, Haoxiang Zhu, Aleh
Tsyvinski, and seminar participants at ITAM, NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, NBER Summer
Institute, Tsinghua, UBC, UNC, and Yale for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Sockin and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Model of Cryptocurrencies
Michael Sockin and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 26816
March 2020
JEL No. G19

                                        ABSTRACT

We model a cryptocurrency as membership in a decentralized digital platform developed to
facilitate transactions between users of certain goods or services. The rigidity induced by the
cryptocurrency price having to clear membership demand with supply of token by speculators,
especially with strong complementarity in membership demand, can lead to market breakdown.
While user optimism mitigates the market fragility by increasing user participation, speculator
sentiment exacerbates it by crowding users out. Informational frictions attenuate the risk of
breakdown by dampening price volatility and platform performance. Furthermore, the users'
anticipation of losses from strategic attacks by miners exacerbates the market fragility.


Michael Sockin
Department of Finance
UT Austin McCombs School of Business
Austin, TX 78712
michael.sockin@mccombs.utexas.edu

Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu
       The rapid growth of the cryptocurrency market in the last few years promises a new
funding model for innovative digital platforms. Rampant speculation and volatility in the
trading of many cryptocurrencies, however, have also raised substantial concerns that asso-
ciate cryptocurrencies with potential bubbles. The failure of the DAO only a few months
after its ICO raised $150 million in 2016, together with a number of other similar episodes,
particularly highlights the risks and fragility of cryptocurrencies. Understanding the risks
and potential bene...ts of cryptocurrencies requires a systematic framework that incorporates
several integral characteristics of cryptocurrencies-- their roles in funding digital platforms
and in serving as investment assets of speculators, and their integration of blockchain tech-
nology with decentralized consensus protocols to record transactions on the platforms. We
develop such a model in this paper.
       Speci...cally, our model analyzes the properties of utility tokens, a subset of cryptocur-
rencies along with coins and security tokens. Utility tokens are native currencies accepted
on decentralized digital platforms that often provide intrinsic bene...t to participants.1 The
bene...ts of utility tokens can range from provision of secure and veri...able peer-to-peer trans-
action services to the maintenance of smart contracts. Examples of such utility tokens include
Ether, which enables participants to write smart contracts with each other, Filecoin, which
matches the demand and supply for decentralized computational storage, and GameCredits,
which ...nances the purchase, development, and consumption of online games and gaming
contents. The development of these platforms is ...nanced by the sale of tokens to investors
and potential users through the issuance of utility tokens.
       In our model, a cryptocurrency serves as membership to a platform, created by its de-
veloper to facilitate decentralized bilateral transactions of certain goods or services among a
pool of users by using a blockchain technology. Users face di¢ culty in making such transac-
tions outside the platform as a result of severe search frictions. The value of the platform,
consequently, lies with its design in ...lling the users'transaction needs, and in its capability
in pooling together a large number of users with the need to transact with each other. We
   1
    In contrast, coins (and altcoins), such as Bitcoin and Litecoin, are ...at currencies that are maintained on
a public blockchain ledger by a decentralized population of record keepers, while security tokens are ...nancial
assets that trade in secondary markets on exchanges, and whose initial sale is recorded on the blockchain of
the currency that the issuer accepts as payment. Coins are typically created through "forks" from existing
currencies, such as Bitcoin Gold from Bitcoin, and by airdrops, in which the developer sends coins to wallets
in an existing currency to pro...t from the price appreciation of its retained stake if the new currency becomes
widely adopted. Security tokens are typically sold through ICOs structured as "smart contracts" on existing
blockchains such as that of Ethereum.



                                                       1
model a user'
            s transaction need by its endowment in a consumption good, and its prefer-
ence of consuming its own good together with the goods of other users. As a result of this
preference, users need to trade goods with each other, and the platform serves to facilitate
such trading. Speci...cally, we assume that, when two users are randomly matched, they can
trade their goods with each other only if they both belong to the platform. Consequently,
there is a key network e¤ect-- each user'
                                        s desire to join the platform grows with the number
of other users on the platform and the size of their goods endowments.
   In addition to serving as the membership to transact goods with other users, the cryp-
tocurrency in our model is also an investable asset-- for both users and speculators with no
transaction needs-- to capitalize on the future growth of the platform. To systematically
analyze these dual roles, our model features an in...nitely many periods, with users and spec-
ulators holding di¤erent beliefs about the capital gain from investing in the token issued by
the platform. In each period, a new generation of users choose whether to join the platform
by purchasing the tokens, partly from users of the previous period and partly from new token
issuance, which follows a deterministic schedule. In making its decision, each user trades
o¤ the cost of buying a token with the bene...ts from transacting goods on the platform and
from the expected token price appreciation. We show that each user optimally adopts a
cuto¤ strategy to join the platform by purchasing the token only if its goods endowment is
higher than a threshold. The threshold and the token price are jointly determined by the
users'common goods endowment and optimism about the token price appreciation, which
determine the users' token demand, and the speculators' sentiment about the token price
appreciation, which determines the supply of tokens to users.
   We analyze the equilibrium in two settings, one with perfect information and the other
with realistic informational frictions. In the latter setting, the platform'
                                                                           s demand fundamen-
tal (i.e., the users'common goods endowment) is unobservable and each user uses its own
goods endowment as private information and other public signals, including the token price,
to infer the demand fundamental. In both of these settings, despite the inherent nonlinear-
ity induced by each user'
                        s cuto¤ strategy for joining the platform, we are able to derive a
tractable token price function and an analytical equilibrium condition for each user'
                                                                                    s par-
ticipation threshold in each period, which allow us to systematically characterize the token
market equilibrium.
   As a result of the network e¤ect-- if more users join the platform, each user bene...ts



                                              2
more from joining the platform and is thus willing to adopt a lower participation threshold
and pay a higher token price-- the token market may break down under certain conditions.
That is, there may not exist any equilibrium price to clear the users' token demand with
the token supply. In particular, the token market breaks down if the platform'
                                                                             s demand
fundamental is su¢ ciently low or if the speculators' sentiment is su¢ ciently high. Inter-
estingly, users' optimism about the token price appreciation mitigates the fragility of the
token market by inducing them to join the platform even when the bene...ts of trading their
endowments are low, while the speculators'sentiment exacerbates the fragility by raising the
users'participation cost and crowding them out.
   Since the supply of tokens increases deterministically over time, the platform exhibits
life-cycle e¤ects that are governed by the substitution of the token'
                                                                    s current convenience
yield and expected capital gains, which jointly determine the total token return to each user.
The ination of the token base over time lowers expected capital gains by shifting out the
token supply curve. Consequently, the region of market breakdown and the relative weight
of the convenience yield in the total token return increase over time. Both of these e¤ects in
turn raise the sensitivity of the user base to the current demand fundamental and log token
price volatility over time.
   Our analysis also shows that informational frictions attenuate the token market fragility
by dampening the responses of the users' beliefs to fundamental shocks. This dampening
e¤ect is particularly strong in our dynamic setting as each user needs to forecast the ex-
pectations of future users, leading to a bias reminiscent of Allen, Morris and Shin (2006),
even though our setting is highly nonlinear. Furthermore, informational frictions dampen
platform performance because the equilibrium token price is a convex function of the users'
common belief of the platform'
                             s demand fundamental, following the Bayesian persuasion
arguments of Aumann and Maschler (1995) and Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011).
   We also extend the model to incorporate miners who follow the Proof of Work protocol to
provide accounting and custodial services to record transactions on the platform'
                                                                                s blockchain.
Each miner incurs a computational cost in providing the service, and is compensated by
the seignorage from token ination, which diminishes deterministically over time, and a
transaction fee, which is a fraction of the transaction surplus of the users on the platform.
This tradeo¤ determines the number of miners on the platform. When the number of miners
falls su¢ ciently low, some corrupt miners may choose to attack the cryptocurrency so that



                                              3
they can gain from creating fraudulent seignorage and stealing other miners' transaction
fees. While such attacks do not directly lead the platform to fail, our analysis shows that
the users'anticipation of future losses from miner attacks may exacerbate the fragility of the
token market, especially when the mining cost is high.
   Our framework provides a rich set of empirical predictions for token price appreciation,
which is directly measurable by the econometrician and thus the focus of most empirical stud-
ies. As only part of users'token return, the expected token price appreciation is determined
by the marginal user'
                    s equilibrium condition-- as the total cost of capital and participation
minus the convenience yield from transaction surplus. Consistent with Liu and Tsyvinski
(2019), our model predicts a role for both news and investor sentiment in explaining the time
series of cryptocurrency price appreciation, not through risk premia but rather by predicting
the marginal user'
                 s convenience yield. In addition, our model can rationalize the momentum
patterns that they observe in token price appreciation, through persistence of user partici-
pation costs and convenience yields, as well as the size e¤ect that Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu
(2019) show in the cross-section of cryptocurrency price appreciation.
   Our paper contributes to the emerging literature on cryptocurrencies. Easley, O'
                                                                                  Hara,
and Basu (2019) analyze the rise of transactions fees in Bitcoin through the strategic in-
teraction of users and miners. Chiu and Koeppl (2017) consider the optimal design of a
cryptocurrency, and emphasize the importance of scale in deterring double-spending by buy-
ers. Athey et al (2016) model Bitcoin as a medium of exchange of unknown quality that
allows users to avoid bank fees when sending remittances, and uses the model to guide
empirical analysis of Bitcoin users. Cong and He (2017) investigate the tradeo¤ of smart
contracts in overcoming adverse selection while also facilitating oligopolistic collusion, while
Biais et al (2019) consider the strategic interaction among miners. Abadi and Brunnermeier
(2018) examine disciplining writers to a blockchain technology with static incentives, and
Saleh (2018) explores how decentralized consensus can be achieved with the Proof of Stake
(PoS) protocol. Schilling and Uhlig (2019) study the role of monetary policy in the presence
of a cryptocurrency that acts as a private ...at currency.
   Biais et al (2018) develop a structural model of cryptocurrency pricing with transac-
tional bene...ts and costs from hacking and estimate the model with data on Bitcoin. Our
model shares a similar pricing model, but di¤ers by deriving a strong network e¤ect in the
transactional bene...ts of cryptocurrency, as well as subtle interactions between the strategic



                                               4
attacks by miners and the fragility of the cryptocurrency. Cong, Li, and Wang (2018) also
emphasize the strong network e¤ect in platform users by constructing a dynamic model of
crypto tokens to study the dynamic feedback between user adoption and the responsiveness
of the token price to expectations about future growth in the platform. Our model di¤ers
from theirs in microfounding the network e¤ect, in highlighting the fragility of the platform
induced by the rigidity of the token price in clearing the users' token demand under the
network e¤ect with the token supply, and in showing that miner attacks may exacerbate the
platform fragility through the users'anticipation of losses from future attacks. This e¤ect
of miner attacks on platform stability overlaps with the analysis of Pagnotta and Buraschi
(2018) and Pagnotta (2018), who develop an equilibrium framework for Bitcoin with a focus
on the interaction between the network of users and the investment of miners into network
security. While their analysis shows that this interaction can amplify the volatility of Bitcoin
price, they do not address the platform fragility induced by the users'network e¤ect.
    Our work also adds to the literature on cuto¤ equilibrium with dispersed information.
With risk-neutral investors and normally distributed payo¤s, Morris and Shin (1998) and
Dasgupta (2007) analyze coordination and delay in global games. Furthermore, Goldstein,
Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013) investigate feedback e¤ects of learning on ...rm investment de-
cisions, Albagli, Hellwig, and Tsyvinski (2014a, 2015) focus on the role of asymmetry in
security payo¤s in distorting asset prices and ...rm investment incentives, and Gao, Sockin,
and Xiong (2018) analyze the distortion of informational frictions in housing markets. Like
our model, Albagli, Hellwig, and Tsyvinski (2014b) also investigate how dispersed informa-
tion in a dynamic setting impacts asset prices with non-linear payo¤s, yet their emphasis is
on explaining the overpricing of downside risk in bond markets. In contrast, our model ex-
amines how informational frictions, operating through a Keynesian Beauty Contest, dampen
cryptocurrency platform performance when the convenience yield of the platform is endoge-
nously formed by its users.


1     The Model
Consider a cryptocurrency, which serves as the membership to a digital platform with a
pool of users who share a certain need to transact goods with each other. The platform
serves to reduce search frictions among these users. The bene...ts to participating on a utility
token platform, such as Ether or FileCoin, include securing transactions and writing smart


                                               5
contracts to sharing in gaming content and providing secure ...le storage. As the value of the
token may appreciate with the development of the platform over time, it also serves as an
investable asset for users and speculators to speculate about the growth of the platform.
   The model is discrete time with in...nitely many periods: t = 1; 2; ::. There are three
types of agents on the platform: users, speculators, and an owner. The success of the cryp-
tocurrency is ultimately determined by whether the platform can gather a large number
of users together. In each period, a new generation of users purchase the cryptocurrency
as the membership to join the platform, and then are randomly matched with each other
to transact their goods endowments. We choose this speci...c form of gains from trade to
facilitate analysis within a standard trade framework. The goods transactions are supported
by the owner of the decentralized platform who acts as a service provider and completes all
user transactions. It records these transactions in an indelible ledger called the blockchain.
Since the owner can add and modify records, or blocks, on the blockchain, the blockchain is
called a permissioned blockchain. We will extend the model in Section 4 to incorporate de-
centralized miners, who follow the Proof of Work protocol to record transactions on a public
blockchain. Although the model features overlapping generations of users and speculators,
the setting is nonstationary because the demand fundamental follows a random walk and
the supply of available tokens is deterministically increasing over time.

1.1    Users
There are overlapping generations of users that join the platform. In each period t; there is
a pool of potential users, indexed by i 2 [0; 1]. These potential users have needs to transact
goods with each other. Each of them may choose to purchase a unit of the cryptocurrency,
which we call a token of the platform, in order to participate on the platform. We can
divide the unit interval into the partition fNt ; Ot g in each period, with Nt \ Ot = ? and
Nt [ Ot = [0; 1] : Let Xi;t = 1 if user i purchases the token, i.e., i 2 Nt , and Xi;t = 0 if he
chooses not to purchase. An indivisible unit of currency is commonly employed in search
models of money, such as Kiyotaki and Wright (1993). If user i at t = 1 chooses to purchase
the token, it purchases one unit at the equilibrium price Pt ; denominated in the consumption
numeraire. In the next period t + 1; each user from period t resells his token to future users
and to speculators.
   In each period, user i is endowed with a certain good and is randomly paired with a


                                               6
potential trading partner, user j , who is endowed with another good. Users i and j can
transact with each other only if both have the token. After their transaction, user i has
a Cobb-Douglas utility function over consumption of his own good and the good of user j
according to
                                                                              1
                                                                 Ci;t                 c
                                                                                          Cj;t       c

                            Ui;t (Ci;t ; Cj;t ; Nt ) =                                                   ;                 (1)
                                                             1           c                  c

where   c   2 (0; 1) represents the weight in the Cobb-Douglas utility function on his consump-
tion of his trading partner'
                           s good Cj;t ; and 1                       c   is the weight on consumption of his own
good Ci;t : A higher    c   means a stronger complementarity between the consumption of the
two goods. Both goods are needed for the user to derive utility from consumption. If one
of them is not a member of the platform, there is no transaction. As a result, each of them
gets zero utility in the absence of a transaction. This setting implies that each user cares
about the pool of users on the platform, which determines the probability of completing a
transaction.
   The goods endowment of user i is eAi;t ; where Ai;t is comprised of a component At common
to all users and an idiosyncratic component "i;t :

                                                                       1=2
                                            Ai;t = At +            "         "i;t ;

with "i;t s N (0; 1) being normally distributed and independent with each other, across time,
                                R
and from At : We assume that "i;t d ("i;t ) = 0 at each date by the Strong Law of Large
Numbers. The aggregate endowment At follows a random walk with a constant drift                                          2 R:

                                                                             1=2 A
                                       At = At      1    +       +       A      "t+1 ;

where "A
       t+1 s iid N (0; 1) : The aggregate endowment At is a key characteristic of the plat-

form. A cleverly designed platform serves to attract users with strong needs to transact with
each other. As we will show, a higher At leads to more users on the platform, which, in turn,
implies a higher probability of each user to complete a transaction with another user, and
furthermore each transaction gives greater surpluses to both parties. One can therefore view
At as the demand fundamental for the cryptocurrency, and                                        "   as a measure of dispersion
among users in the platform.
   We start with describing each user'
                                     s problem in period t; conditional on joining the
platform and meeting a transaction partner, and then go backward to describe his earlier
decision on whether to join the platform. At t, when user i is paired with another user j on

                                                             7
                                                                                                              Ai;t
the platform, we assume that they simply swap their goods, with user i using                                ce       units of
                                 Aj;t
good i to exchange for      ce          units of good j . Consequently, both users are able to consume
both goods, with user i consuming

                                                             Ai;t                     Aj;t
                                 Ci;t (i) = (1        c) e          ; Cj;t (i) =    ce


and user j consuming

                                                 Ai;t                                     Aj;t
                                Ci;t (j ) =    ce     ;   Cj;t (j ) = (1           c) e          :

We formally derive these consumption allocations between these two paired users in Appen-
dix A through a microfounded trading mechanism between them. Furthermore, we can use
equation (1) to compute the utility surplus Ui;t of each user from this transaction.
       Before ...nding a transaction partner on the platform, each user needs to decide whether
to join the platform by buying the token. In addition to the utility surplus, Ui;t ; from the
transaction, there is also a capital gain from retrading the token, Pt+1 RPt ; with R                                1 being
the interest rate for the holding period. We assume that users have quasi-linear expected
utility, and incur a linear utility gain equal to this capital gain net of a ...xed participation
cost      > 0 if they choose to join the platform. The participation cost may be either pecuniary
or mental, and could represent, for instance, the cost of setting up a wallet and installing
the software necessary for participating on the platform. Furthermore, we assume that each
user needs to give a fraction             of his utility surplus Ui;t from the transaction as service fee
to the platform.
       In summary, user i makes his purchase decision at t according to

                        max (E [(1             ) Ui;t + Pt+1 j Ii;t ]         RPt                ) Xi;t ;                (2)
                         Xi;t

where Ii;t is the information set of user i at date t: Note that the expectation of the user'
                                                                                            s
utility ow is regarding the uncertainty associated with matching a transaction partner, while
the expectation of the capital gain from holding the token is regarding the uncertainty in the
growth of the platform. By adopting a Cobb-Douglas utility function with quasi-linearity in
                                                        s capital gain.2
wealth, users are risk-neutral with respect to the token'
       An important aspect of our analysis is how the weights of the token'
                                                                          s convenience yield
and capital gain transition over the life of the platform. When the platform is young, there
   2
    As Liu and Tsyvinski (2018) ...nd little evidence that cryptocurrencies load on conventional sources of
systematic risk, such as market or style factors, such an assumption for the token market is realistic.


                                                             8
are few tokens in circulation and users bene...t more from the token price appreciation. When
the platform matures, there are many tokens in circulation and users bene...t mostly from
the convenience yield from transactions on the platform. This transition underlies several
interesting implications that more mature platforms might be more vulnerable to market
breakdown, that younger platforms might have higher market capitalizations, and that token
price volatility is increasing over time.
   We now describe the information set, Ii;t ; of each user. We assume that while each
user knows the value of his own goods endowment, Ai;t ; when joining the platform, the
users do not directly observe the aggregate endowment, At ; As such, they will have to form
expectations about the aggregate endowment when deciding whether to join the platform
and, consequently, the token price serves to aggregate their dispersed information.
   To facilitate our analysis of how users' speculation of the token price may a¤ect their
participation in the platform, we endow all users with a public signal about next period'
                                                                                        s
innovation to aggregate endowment, "A
                                    t+1 ; which by construction is orthogonal to At :

                                                           1=2 Q
                                       Q t = "A
                                              t+1 +       Q   "t ;

where "Q
       t      iid N (0; 1) : This public signal is similar to a "news" shock in the language
of Beaudry and Portier (2006). Since the public signal only reveals information about next
period'
      s At+1 ; it only impacts users'decisions through their beliefs about the next period'
                                                                                          s
token price, E [Pt+1 j Ii;t ] ; and therefore represents a speculative shock to all of the users.
Even though we use the term "user optimism" to denote the speculative shock induced by
the public signal Qt , the users are fully rational in information processing in our model.
   In addition to their private endowment, the market-clearing price of the token, and the
public signal Qt , users also observe a noisy public signal Vt about the volume of transactions
that take place on the platform in period t: An advantage of the blockchain technology that
cryptocurrencies employ is that it acts as an indelible and veri...able ledger that records de-
centralized transactions that take place in the cryptocurrency. As such, it provides a history
of public information about the volume of trade in the token. Assuming an equilibrium in
which users follow a cuto¤ strategy, such that they participate if Ai;t                      At ; we follow Sockin
(2019) and assume that the volume signal takes the following form
                                            p                         2
                                Vt =            "   (At   At ) + "V
                                                                  t       ;

where    ( ) is the CDF of normal distribution and "V
                                                    t s N (0;                 v
                                                                                  1
                                                                                      ) is independent of all other

                                                     9
shocks in the economy. This speci...cation has the appeal that the volume signal is always
between 0 and 1, and is highly correlated with the volume of traded tokens.3 Since the CDF
of normal distribution is a monotonically increasing function, we can invert Vt to construct
an additive summary statistic:

                                          1=2   1       1=2                       1=2 V
                             vt =     "             Vt         + At = At +    "      "t ;                       (3)

which serves as the volume statistic.4 The precision of the volume statistic is                      " v;   so that
the less dispersed the endowments of users, the more informative is the volume signal.
       In classical asset market models with dispersed information, e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980) and Hellwig (1980), trading volume plays no role in learning.5                         6
                                                                                                  In our setting,
users learn from both the price and volume of the cryptocurrency when deciding whether
to purchase it. As such, volume provides a complementary source of information to the
token price. Let It =           fPs ; Qs ; Vs gs    t    be the tribe formed by all public information. In
addition to the public information, each user also observes his own private endowment, Ai;t :
We denote Ii;t =          Ai;t ; fPs ; Qs ; Vs gs   t         as the user i'
                                                                           s full information set.
       It then follows that user i'
                                  s purchase decision is given by
                                   1 if E [(1            ) Ui;t + Pt+1     RPt j Ii;t ]
                       Xi;t =                                                             :
                                   0 if E [(1            ) Ui;t + Pt+1     RPt j Ii;t ] <
As the user'
           s expected utility is monotonically increasing with his own endowment, regardless
of other users'strategies, it is optimal for each user to use a cuto¤ strategy when next period'
                                                                                               s
price is increasing in the demand fundamental. This, in turn, leads to a cuto¤ equilibrium,
in which only users with endowments above a critical level At buy the token. This cuto¤
is eventually solved as a ...xed point in the equilibrium to equate the token price, net of
   3
     The noise in the volume signal re    ects that, in practice, the anonymous nature of cryptocurrency trans-
actions makes it di¢ cult to accurately assess the volume of actual transactions, since transferring cryptocur-
rencies across wallets, in which no actual tokens are traded between two parties, is a transaction that hits the
blockchain, while innovations such as the Lightning Network process small transactions o¤ the blockchain.
We parameterize the uncertainty arising from these issues as measurement error.
   4
     In contrast to Kocherlakota (1998), in which memory implicitly encoded in monetary balance is used for
individual monitoring, memory encoded in the blockchain is explicit and serves as an aggregate signal about
the cryptocurrency'   s fundamental.
   5
     Notable exceptions are Blume, Easley, and O'       Hara (1994) and Schneider (2009). In the former, past
prices and volumes trivially reveal the su¢ cient statistics of all past trader private information (which still
contain residual uncertainty because of correlated signal error). In the latter, trading volume provides a
signal about how informative prices are about an asset'     s fundamentals.
   6
     This is, in part, an artifact of the CARA-Normal framework, in which trading volume is the expectation
of a folded normal random variable. This makes learning intractable if a noisy version of trading volume
were observed. An advantage of our model with a cuto¤ equilibrium is that we can incorporate a noisy
volume signal while still maintaining tractability.


                                                              10
the expected resale value and participation cost, with the expected transaction utility of
the marginal user from joining the platform. As each user'
                                                         s participation strategy also
depends on his expected token resale value E [Pt+1 j Ii;t ] ; the common optimism among
users induced by Qt and the private optimism induced by Ai;t with informational frictions
helps to overcome their participation cost : Given the cuto¤ strategy for each user, who
participates if Ai;t       At ; the total token demand of users is given by
                              Z 1
                                                             p
                                   Xi;t (Ii;t ) d ("i;t ) = ( " (At At )) :                                (4)
                                1


1.2         Token Supply and Speculators
The supply of tokens,         (yt ) ; grows over time according to a pre-determined schedule

                                             (yt ) =    (yt   1   + );

where         ( ) is the normal distribution function. This leads to a supply of tokens

                                             (yt ) =    (y0 + t) ;

with y0 as the supply at the Initial Coin O¤ering (ICO). This speci...cation captures, as
in practice, that the increase in supply from token ination tapers over time. For PoW
platforms, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, the number of new coins and tokens created by
ination periodically halves over time, according to a predetermined schedule, so that the
total supply asymptotes to a ...xed limit.7
         In addition to the token ination, we assume that there is a continuum of myopic specula-
tors, who trade the token to speculate on its price uctuation over time. Speculators provide
liquidity by buying tokens, including those from the old generation of users, and then selling
them to the new generation of users. We assume speculators hold noisy expectations of the
next-period token price:
                                     E S [Pt+1 j It ] = 1 + e       t   RPt ;

where RPt is the required risk-neutral return for holding the token to the next period, and
                      2
 t         iid N 0;       is the speculators' aggregate sentiment, which is not observable to the
users. We consider speculators to be outsiders to the platform. They are distinct from
     7
   With this speci...cation, at most a unit measure of tokens exists. All of our key qualitative results remain
unchanged, however, if instead we cap token supply at a maximum smaller than one unit.



                                                       11
users who actually participate on the platform. As such, they do not have private infor-
mation about the platform'
                         s demand fundamental or fully understand how to interpret the
implications of the same public information as users. Instead, these speculators may trade
overcon...dently on noisy information or on spurious correlations that give rise to mispeci...ed
technical trading strategies. Given the nascent and highly speculative nature of the cryp-
tocurrency universe, and the limited data availability on the performance of its thousands
of constituent cryptocurrencies, such speculators are likely ubiquitous.
   Through the speculators'trading, we assume that the net supply of token to users is

   yt    S   log E S [Pt+1 j It ]    RPt +     P   log (RPt ) =   ( yt      S t   +(   P   S ) log (RPt )) ;


where   S   log E S [Pt+1 j It ]    RPt represents speculators' token demand driven by their
speculative motive with        S   > 0, and   P   log (RPt ) represents the speculators'token supply
in response to the price with        P   > 0. When the speculators are more optimistic about the
next-period token price, their token purchase tightens the token supply to users. On the
other hand, if the token price is higher, the usual downward-sloping demand e¤ect leads to
stronger selling by the speculators and therefore more token supplied to users. To ensure an
upward-sloping net supply curve with respect to the token price, we impose that

                                                   P   >    S:


By equating the supply with the users'token demand in (4), we obtain that
                              p
                    1            "                    1             S
              Pt = exp               (At At )               yt +         t ;           (5)
                   R         P     S                P     S      P     S
where the market-clearing token price Pt is a log-linear function of the platform'
                                                                                 s demand
fundamental At , the users'participation threshold At , the token supply yt , and the specu-
lators' sentiment     t.   Note that this log-linear price function holds even though the users'
demand fundamental At and the speculators'sentiment               t   are not publicly observable to the
users. Instead, the informational frictions a¤ect each user'
                                                           s participation threshold At ; which
is yet to be determined by each user'
                                    s optimal strategy in equilibrium. Each user'
                                                                                s partici-
pation threshold also depends on the token market dynamics and the user'
                                                                       s expectation of
future token price appreciation.

1.3     Owner
The platform requires record keeping of all transactions. For the baseline model, we assume
that the owner of the platform completes all user transactions each period and records these

                                                       12
transactions on the blockchain.8 In a later section (Section 4), we expand the model to
include a group of miners, who record the transactions for a fee and who may also attack
the cryptocurrency. In the baseline setting, the payment to the owner in period t is both
the seignorage from the scheduled ination of the token base,                                         (yt   1   + )             (yt 1 ) ; and
the transaction fees from users:

                                       t   = ( ( yt   1   + )            (yt 1 )) Pt + Ut ;

where Ut is the total transaction surplus on the platform. The owner has no use for tokens
and, potentially for liquidity reasons, sells them immediately to speculators. Assuming a
cuto¤ strategy for users, we can integrate the expression for the expected utility of a user
that joins the platform, as derived in Proposition 7 of Appendix A, over Ai;t for Ai;t                                                  At
to arrive at the realized surplus from user transactions:
                  1         2              1                                 At        At                            At        At
       Ut = eAt + 2 ((1            )
                               2
                          c) + c                                   1=2                                     1=2
                                       "
                                               (1         c)   "         +            1=2            c "         +            1=2
                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                  "                                       "
As the platform'
               s token base matures from ination, the compensation to the owner shifts
from seignorage to transaction fees.9

1.4     Rational Expectations Equilibrium
Our model features a rational expectations cuto¤ equilibrium, which requires the rational
behavior of each user and the clearing of the token market:

       User optimization: each user chooses Xi;t in each period t to solve his maximization
       problem in (2) for whether to purchase the token.

       In each period, the token market clears:
                 Z 1
                      Xi;t (Ai;t ; Pt ) d ("i;t ) = (yt                           S t       +(   P    S ) log (RPt )) ;                 (6)
                      1
       where each user'
                      s demand Xi;t depends on its information set Ii;t : The demand from
       users is integrated over the idiosyncratic component of their endowments f"i;t gi2[0;1] ,
       which also serves as the noise in their private information.
   8
      In contrast to traditional multi-sided platforms, such as in Rochet and Tirole (2003) and Evans (2003),
the owner issues a native token to users that has a     oating exchange rate with other tokens and currencies
instead of collecting discriminating participation fees. This potentially bu¤ers the pricing of the platform'
                                                                                                            s
services from external shocks, such as monetary policy shocks to ...at currencies, by denominating them in
the native token, and disciplines their valuation through price discovery in ...nancial markets.
    9
      We assume the owner completes all transactions without censorship or charging monopoly markups. See
Huberman et al (2018) for how Proof of Work decentralized consensus can overcome these issues at the cost
of transaction delays.


                                                                   13
2     Perfect Information Equilibrium
Before we analyze the equilibrium with informational frictions, we ...rst analyze a benchmark
equilibrium with perfect information in this section. The key characteristics of the perfect
information equilibrium also hold in the equilibrium with information frictions.
    Speci...cally, we characterize the equilibrium in each period t when At and           t   are publicly
observable. In this case, the token market is characterized by the following state variables:
the users'demand fundamental At ; the token supply yt ; the users'optimism driven by the
public signal Qt ; and the speculators'sentiment        t.   We use the notation It = fAt ; yt ; Qt ; t g
to represent the state variables at t, which are also equivalent to the set of public information
discussed earlier. Note that the volume signal Vt is not a state variable, but the public
signal, Qt ; which contains information about At+1 ; is still useful to users for forming their
expectations about the token price in period t + 1; Pt+1 : Given that all users now have a
common expectation about Pt+1 ; we drop the i subscript from their information sets. After
observing Qt ; users share the same posterior belief about At+1 ; which is normal with the
following conditional mean:

                                 ^t+1 = At +                  Q
                                 A                  +                 Qt :
                                                         "   +    Q

As we discussed earlier, the noise in Qt is a shock to the users'speculative optimism, since
it has no impact on their current surplus from transacting with other users on the platform.
    In each period, users sort into the platform according to a cuto¤ equilibrium determined
by the net bene...t of joining the platform, which trades o¤ the opportunity of transacting
with other users on the platform and the expected token price appreciation with the cost
of participation. Despite the inherent nonlinearity of our framework, we derive a tractable
cuto¤ equilibrium that is characterized by the solution to a ...xed-point problem over the
endogenous cuto¤ of the marginal user that purchases the token, At ; as summarized in the
following proposition.

Proposition 1 The rational expectations equilibrium exhibits the following properties:

    1. Regardless of other users' strategies, it is optimal for each user i to follow a cuto¤
       strategy in purchasing the token:
                                           1 if Ai;t A (At ; yt ; Qt ; t )
                               Xi;t =
                                           0 if Ai;t < A (At ; yt ; Qt ; t )

                                                  14
  2. In the equilibrium, the cuto¤ At solves the following ...xed-point condition:

                                              At )+At + 1            2   1                            At        At
              (1       ) e(1         c )(At             2            c "
                                                                                          c "
                                                                                                1=2
                                                                                                               1=2
                                                                                                                     1f   >tg   + E [Pt+1 jIt ]
                                                                                                           "
                   p
                       "                          1                  S
                               (At   At )                 yt +               t
         = e       P       S                  P       S          P       S       ;                                                                (7)

      where    is the stopping time for the breakdown of the platform due to the failure of the
      token market clearing:

                                                      = finf t : At < Ac (yt ; Qt ; t )g ;

      with Ac (yt ; Qt ; t ) as a critical level for At , below which equation (7) has no root.

  3. In each period t, there may be no or multiple equilibria, depending on the users'expected
      token resale value:

           If E [Pt+1 j It ]                          0, equation (7) has zero or two roots.

           If E [Pt+1 j It ]                  > 0, equation (7) has one or three roots.

  4. In the dynamic equilibrium, the token price P (At ; yt ; Qt ; t ) is determined by equation
      (5) according to the users' equilibrium cuto¤ At and how users coordinate on their
      expectations of future equilibria.

   Proposition 1 characterizes the cuto¤ equilibrium in the platform, and con...rms the op-
timality of a cuto¤ strategy for users in their choice to purchase the token. Users in each
period sort into the platform based on their endowments, with those with higher endow-
ments, and thus more gains from trade, entering the platform. In this cuto¤ equilibrium, the
token price is a correspondence of the token market state variables (At ; yt ; Qt ; t ) ; according
to equation (5) with At as an implicit function of these state variables.
   Equation (7) provides a ...xed-point condition to determine the optimal cuto¤ in each
period. The left-hand side of equation (7) reects the expected bene...t to a marginal user with
Ai;t = At from acquiring a token to join the platform: the ...rst term is the expected utility
ow from transacting with another user on the platform, while the other terms E [Pt+1 j It ]
  represent other bene...ts, given by the user'
                                              s expected next-period token price (i.e., the
expected token price under rational expectation E [Pt+1 j It ] with the public signal Qt ) net
of the user'
           s participation cost : The right-hand side of equation (7) reects the cost of
purchasing a token.

                                                                                     15
     Figure 1 illustrates how the intersection of the two sides, each of which is plotted against
At    At determines the equilibrium cuto¤. The dashed bell-shaped line depicts the left-hand
side of equation (7) in a benchmark case when E [Pt+1 j It ]             = 0. That is, it captures
a marginal user'
               s expected utility ow from transacting with another user. Note that this
curve goes to zero when At         At goes to either    1 or 1. If At &          1, the marginal
user'
    s own endowment is so low that there cannot be any gain from transacting with the
other user. On the other hand, if At % 1, the equilibrium cuto¤ is so high that there are
so few other users on the platform to transact with the marginal user. This network e¤ect
makes her expected utility from transaction zero, despite her high endowment. Once the
two end points are determined, it is intuitive that the marginal user'
                                                                     s expected utility ow
from transacting with another user on the platform has a bell shape.
     The right-hand side of equation (7) is a negative exponential function of At      At , because
the number of users on the platform is decreasing with the equilibrium cuto¤ At and because
the token price is an increasing function of the number of users as in equation (5). Figure 1
shows that either the dashed bell-shaped curve intersects with the solid negative exponential
curve twice if they intersect, or not at all if the solid curve lies above the bell-shaped curve.
The latter case is particularly important as it represents the breakdown of the token market
and, consequently, the failure of the platform. This happens when the expected utility from
transacting is strictly lower than the cost of acquiring the token, either as a result of the
small token supply yt or strong speculator sentiment       t.   Proposition 1 shows that these two
curves do not intersect when At falls below a critical level Ac
                                                              t (yt ; Qt ; t ) ; which is determined

by the other three state variables.
     The terms E [Pt+1 j It ]       may move the bell curve of the marginal user'
                                                                                s expected
bene...t from participating in the platform up or down relative to the benchmark case. If
E [Pt+1 j It ]      > 0, possibly as a result of the users'optimism about the future token price
appreciation (i.e., positive shock to Qt ), the bell curve moves up relative the benchmark
dashed curve in Figure 1. In this case, the bell curve may intersect with the negative
exponential curve either once (as illustrated by the dotted curve) or three times.
     If E [Pt+1 j It ]   < 0, either as a result of users'pessimism or a high participation cost
 , the bell curve moves down relative to the benchmark dashed line in Figure 1, creating
the possibility for the token market to break down. That is, an increase in           may lead to
the failure of the platform. As each user does not account for his participation decision



                                                16
                       2.5


                        2


                       1.5


                        1


                       0.5


                        0
                               -2          0            2              4

         Figure 1: An illustration of the left-hand and right-hand sides of equation (7).


on other users through the network e¤ect, this externality exacerbates the e¤ect of            on
the equilibrium user participation. Interestingly, users'optimism o¤sets the e¤ect of their
participation cost, thus helping to overcome the network externality.


Market breakdown The market breakdown is caused by the network e¤ect in the user
demand for tokens and the rigid supply by the speculators. The following proposition char-
acterizes the conditions for market breakdown to occur.

Proposition 2 As a result of the network e¤ect, no equilibria exist, i.e., the token market
breaks down, under the following conditions:

  1. The net speculative motive of users, E [Pt+1 j It ]       ; is nonpositive.

  2. The users' demand fundamental is su¢ ciently low, i.e., At < Ac (yt ; Qt ; t ), or equiv-
                                                                       c
      alently speculator sentiment is su¢ ciently high, i.e.   t   >       (At ; yt ; Qt ).

The critical level Ac (yt ; Qt ; t ) is decreasing in the user optimism Qt and increasing in spec-
ulator sentiment   t   and the user participation cost :

   Proposition 2 characterizes the determinants of the fundamental critical level Ac (yt ; Qt ; t )
for the token market breakdown to occur. On the demand side, the users'speculative motive,

                                               17
                            Table I: Baseline Model Parameters

               Demand Fundamental:                     = 0:01;    A    = 10

               Platform:                                 y0 =     :84

               Sentiment:                 Q   = 100;       = 2;    S    = 1;   P   =2

               Users:                      = 1;    c   = 0:3;     = 0:03; R = 1:02




driven by their optimism, helps to overcome the participation externality. On the supply
side, speculators'sentiment has the opposite e¤ect.
   To further illustrate the properties of the token market equilibrium, we provide a series
of numerical examples based on the parameter values given in Table I. Figure 2 depicts
the fundamental critical level Ac across speculator sentiment (the left panel), user optimism
(the middle panel), and token supply (the right panel). When the platform fundamental
A is below Ac , the token market breaks down. The left panel shows that as speculator
sentiment increases, the crowding out e¤ect of speculators holding more tokens lowers user
participation, shifting up the region of breakdown. In contrast, the middle panel shows that
an increase in user optimism, which incentivizes more users to participate, has the opposite
e¤ect and shifts down the region of breakdown. Taken together, these two panels illustrate
the opposite e¤ects generated by users'optimism and speculators'sentiment on the fragility
of the platform, as formally established by Proposition 2.
   The right panel of Figure 2 shows that an increase in token supply, by lowering the
expected retrade value of the token, increases the breakdown boundary. When the token
base is small, there are at least two advantages: First, it is easier to clear markets with a
small pool of users. Second, the expected growth of the token value is also higher. As the
token supply inates over time, the e¤ects of token supply imply that the platform becomes
more fragile over time, as the token'
                                    s expected retrade value falls and user participation
is driven more by the ow of convenience yields from transactions on the platform. This
pattern thus suggests that large market capitalization tokens, such as Ethereum, might
be more fragile and thus have more pronounced price volatility than small capitalization
tokens. Interestingly, while Cong, Li and Wang (2018) emphasize the role of token resale in


                                              18
       -2.5                                 -2.5                                  -2.5




           -3                                   -3                                    -3
       c




                                            c




                                                                                  c
       A




                                            A




                                                                                  A
       -3.5                                 -3.5                                  -3.5




           -4                                   -4                                    -4




       -4.5                                 -4.5                                  -4.5
           -4       -3        -2       -1       -1   -0.5           0   0.5   1      0.2   0.4   y 0.6   0.8   1
                                                            Q                                     t
                         t                                      t

Figure 2: An illustration of the market breakdown boundary for the demand fundamental Ac with
respect to speculator sentiment (left panel), user optimism (middle pannel), and token supply (right
panel) in the perfect information equilibrium. Baseline values are = 0; Q = 0, and y = 0:9:


facilitating adoption, our model shows that it also helps to stave o¤ failure of the platform.


User participation and token price For the simplicity of our analysis, we assume that
all users coordinate on the highest price (i.e., the lowest cuto¤) equilibrium in each period,
regardless of how many equilibria exist. One can motivate this re...nement based on the
(dynamic) stability of the potential equilibria.10 Then, the following proposition derives
several comparative statistics of the equilibrium user participation and token price.

Proposition 3 The equilibrium has the following properties:

   1. Demand fundamental: the token price and the fraction of users that participate in the
       platform are increasing in the demand fundamental, At :

   2. User Optimism: the token price and the fraction of users that participate in the platform
       are increasing in user optimism, Qt :
  10
    The second (high cuto¤) and third (highest cuto¤) equilibria may or may not exist at any given date,
depending on the expected retrade value of the token. As such, they are dynamically unstable, and we can
eliminate them as predictions for the equilibrium outcome. In addition, the second (high cuto¤) equilibria
is unstable even ...xing the token's expected retrade value. Introducing a small amount of noise into users'
participation decisions, for instance, and letting this noise become arbitrarily small would ensure convergence
away from this second equilibrium to the highest price equilibrium.


                                                       19
Figure 3: An illustration of the token price across the demand fundamental for di¤erent values of
speculator sentiment (left panel), user optimism (middle panel), and the token supply (right panel).
Baseline values are t = 0; Qt = 0; and y = 0:9:


  3. Speculator Sentiment: the fraction of users that participate in the platform is decreasing
      in speculator sentiment,    t;   while the token price is increasing (decreasing) in   t   when
      At    At is su¢ ciently negative (positive).

   Figure 3 illustrates the equilibrium token price across the demand fundamental A for
di¤erent values of speculator sentiment (the left panel), user optimism (the middle panel),
and token supply (the right panel). The middle panel shows that the token price is increasing
with user optimism, as formally established by Proposition 3. The left panel shows that
the token price is also increasing with speculator sentiment, which holds, as established
by Proposition 3, only when the demand fundamental is high. The di¤erence across user
optimism is more pronounced because user optimism increases user participation by raising
their expectations of the token'
                               s resale value, which in turn raises the price today; speculator
sentiment, in contrast, raises the token price, but also crowds out user participation, which,
in turn, lowers the price, leading to a more muted overall e¤ect on the token price. Finally,
the right panel shows that the token price is decreasing in token supply because it lowers
the expected retrade value of the token.




                                                  20
Life-cycle E¤ects Since our model is nonstationary with the token supply increasing
deterministically over time, it has nuanced implications for how platform performance varies
over the platform'
                 s life cycle. Central to understanding this pattern is the tension between
the contemporaneous convenience yield and the capital gains in each user'
                                                                        s total return from
holding the token. Since users are risk-neutral, the sum of the two pieces always equal the
cost of carry plus the participation cost, R + =Pt in equilibrium. Thus, when expected
future token price appreciation is high, the current demand fundamental and convenience
yield must be low.
   The demand fundamental'
                         s expected growth rate                 and the token supply yt are the two
key model parameters that determine the expected token price. A platform with a higher
  will, on average, see At trend upward over time, sustaining a high expected token price,
while a high yt depresses token prices across all values of At from supply saturation. The
tension between the convenience yield and the expected future token price also impacts the
log token price volatility over time. When the demand fundamental growth rate                    is high,
the expected token price remains higher over time. Since more of the token return for high
platforms is from the capital gains part of the token return, the user base is less sensitive to
instantaneous uctuations in the demand fundamental, which drive the convenience yield.
As such, we expect higher         platforms to have lower token price volatility. In contrast, as
the token supply increases, both the region of market breakdown and the importance of the
convenience yield in token returns increase, leading to a more volatile token price.
   To see this graphically, we consider two platforms that di¤er only in the expected funda-
mental growth rate, one with         = 0:01 and the other with        = 0:10: To avoid concerns that
the patterns are driven by the token supply asymptoting to 1; which covers the full popula-
tion of users, we instead assume a maximum token supply of 0:90:11 Figure 4 illustrates our
intuition. When the expected growth rate of the demand fundamental is small ( = 0:01),
the token supply e¤ect dominates and the expected log token price is falling over time, while
the log token price volatility is rising over time. In contrast, when the expected growth rate
is high ( = 0:10), the expected token price declines more slowly over time and log price
volatility is more attenuated. Taken together, our analysis suggests that stronger platforms
(with a higher ) see both higher expected token prices and lower log token price volatility,
while weaker platforms (with a lower ) experience a quicker decline in their expected token
  11
     With a ...xed token supply less than 1; we must now iterate over a ...xed point equation to ...nd the
terminal value of the token price and then backwardly solve the model when the supply is less than 0:90:


                                                   21
                                 4                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                               = 0.01
                                                                                                                             12                = 0.10
                                 2
      Expected Log Token Price




                                                                                                Log Token Price Volatility
                                                                                                                             10

                                 0
                                                                                                                              8


                                                                                                                              6
                                 -2

                                                                                                                              4
                                 -4
                                              =0.01                                                                           2
                                              =0.10

                                 -6                                                                                           0
                                      0   5           10   15         20     25       30    35                                    0        5       10    15            20        25    30   35
                                                                  t                                                                                               t

Figure 4: An illustration of unconditional expected log token price (left panel) and unconditional
log price volatility (right panel) over time. The solid line is for a demand fundamental growth rate
  = 0:01;and the dashed is for = 0:10: The maximum token supply is 0:90:


price and a more pronounced increase in token price volatility over time.


3      Informational Frictions Equilibrium
In this section, we analyze the more realistic setting with informational frictions, in which
both the users'demand fundamental At and the speculators'sentiment                                                                                                          t   are not publicly
observable. As such, each user needs to form an expectation about At before making his
token purchase decision. A key insight from this section is that informational frictions will
act akin to insurance on the platform against failure from market breakdown, mitigating
breakdown when the demand fundamental is weak at the cost of more tepid performance
when the fundamental is strong. They dampen platform performance because users, facing
the non-trivial inference problem, under-react to the fundamental.
    As we discussed earlier, even though both At and                                                                                  t   are not publicly observable, the token
price nevertheless takes the same log-linear form given in (5), as in the perfect-information
case. It is convenient to denote pt as the su¢ cient statistic for the information contained by
the token price Pt :
                                                              (   P        S ) log (RPt )   + yt                                                        S
                                                       pt =                  p                                                + At = At + p                       t;                         (8)
                                                                                  "                                                                          "

which is a linear combination of the two unobservables At and                                                                                           t.       Equivalently, the token

                                                                                           22
price is given by                             p
                                1                   "                                 1
                            Pt = exp                        (pt      At )                     yt :
                                R             P         S                         P       S

Despite the seemingly tractable price function, the token-market equilibrium is highly nonlin-
ear as a result of the cuto¤ strategy used by each user, which is captured by the equilibrium
threshold At , which is a nonlinear function of the state variables at t, and which serves as
the channel for informational frictions to a¤ect the equilibrium.
   To forecast the platform'
                           s demand fundamental At in each period, each user'
                                                                            s infor-
mation set Ii;t now includes its own endowment Ai;t and the public information set It =
    fps ; vs ; Qs gs   t   , which include the history of equilibrium token price, volume, and the
public signal. In what follows, we focus on the deterministic steady-state of the Kalman
Filter recursion for users'belief formation, the proof of its characterization is given in the
proof of Proposition 4. Conditional on the public information set It ; users hold the follow-
ing common posterior belief about the platform fundamental At j It N (A      ^t ; A ) with the
                 ^t determined by the following iterative dynamics:
conditional mean A
                                         2                   Q              30
                                                    v
                                                    u
                                                  1 u1            A+ Q
                                                                              2                        3
                                          6        +
                                                  2 t4
                                                       +             "      7             Qt 1
                 ^t = A
                      ^t                  6                     " v+   2    7 4           ^i;t 1       5;
                 A           1   +   + A1 6                            S    7 pt          A
                                          4                 "
                                                                2
                                                                            5             ^i;t 1
                                                                S               vt        A
                                                            " v

and the conditional variance at a steady-state level:
                    v
                    u                 2
                    u         1               1                               1                   1
                A =
                    t                   +                                                                   :
                                                                                  "
                         2 ( A + Q)        A+ Q "                           v +       2       2( A +   Q)
                                                                                      S


                         ^t summarizes the relevant information in fps ; vs ; Qs 1 g
The users' common belief A                                                                                          re-
                                                                                     s                          t

garding the current-period demand fundamental At . The current period signal Qt contains
information about the future innovation to At+1 ; but not about the current period At : As a
        ^t does not subsume the information in Qt , which serves as a shock to the users'spec-
result, A
ulative demand for the token, just as in the perfect information equilibrium. Furthermore,
the token market'
                s common belief about speculator sentiment is
                                           p
                         ^ = E ( j It ) =      "   ^t pt ;
                          t        t              A
                                                                    S

which is derived from the de...nition of pt . Taken together, we can represent the state of
                                                          n                  o
the token market by the following state variables: It = A   ^t ; Qt ; ^t ; yt , which summarize

                                                            23
all relevant information in the public information set and which are almost the same as the
state variables in the perfect-information equilibrium, except with the actual values of At
and t replaced by the users'common ...ltered beliefs, A^t and ^t .
   Further conditional on its own endowment Ai;t ; user i'   s private belief is also Gaussian
             ^i;t ; i ); with its conditional mean and variance given by
At j Ii;t N (A

                                      ^i;t =
                                      A                      i
                                                                          1   ^t +
                                                                              A          i " Ai;t ;                                                            (9)
                                                                      A
                                           1                      1
                                       i           =         A           +     ":


In addition to the common optimism introduced by the public signal, Qt ; about next period'
                                                                                          s
innovation to At+1 ; users now have heterogeneous beliefs about the current value of At
because each user'
                 s private endowment, Ai;t ; acts as a private signal about At : Since the
demand fundamental is persistent, this also translates to heterogeneous beliefs about next
period'
      s demand fundamental At+1 ; and consequently about the token'
                                                                  s expected retrade
value.
   By solving each user'
                       s token demand and clearing the users' aggregate demand with
the supply from the speculators, we derive the token market equilibrium. The following
proposition summarizes the equilibrium price and each user'
                                                          s optimal token demand in this
equilibrium.

Proposition 4 In the presence of informational frictions, the token market equilibrium ex-
hibits the following properties:

  1. If other users follow a cuto¤ strategy, it is optimal for each user i to follow a cuto¤
      strategy in purchasing the token:

                                                   1 if Ai;t                        A        ^t ; yt ; Qt ; ^t
                                                                                             A
                                  Xi;t =                                                                                           ;
                                                   0 if Ai;t < A                             ^t ; yt ; Qt ; ^t
                                                                                             A

      where the cuto¤ At is measurable with respect to the public information set.

  2. In the equilibrium, the cuto¤ At solves the following ...xed-point condition:
                             ^t + 1                              ^t )+ 1                      1
                 (1     )e
                             A           c
                                      1+ " A           (At       A     2
                                                                               2
                                                                               c   (   i+ "       )
                              0 r                                                                 p                                              1
                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                  ^t
                                                                                                                  A                At
                              @ c                                    A                                                                           A 1f
                                           "
                                               1   +                           +p                                                                       >tg
                                                       1+            "    A      (1 +                         "   A ) (1       +2       "   A)
                                                        p
                                                             "
                                                                     (At       ^t )+
                                                                               A             S        ^               1
                                                                                                                              yt
                                                                                                          t
                 +E [Pt+1 jIt ]            =e           P        S                       P        S               P       S        ;                          (10)

                                                                         24
      where It is the information set of the marginal user whose endowment is Ai;t = At ;
      and    is the stopping time for the breakdown of the platform:
                                    n                             o
                                               ^     c        ^
                                  = inf t : At < A yt ; Qt ; t ;

      with Ac yt ; Qt ; ^t as a critical level for A
                                                   ^t , below which equation (10) has no root.

   Proposition 4 con...rms that even when At and                  t   are not publicly observable, each user
continues to follow a cuto¤ strategy for his token purchase decision, except that the equi-
librium threshold A is determined by the users'common beliefs A  ^t and ^t . The ...xed-point
                      t

condition for At in (10) is similar to (7) for the perfect-information setting, with a few key
di¤erences: A^t replaces At ; ^t replaces t ; and learning modi...es various coe¢ cients in the
marginal user'
             s expected utility on the left-hand side to reect the additional uncertainty
that the demand fundamental is unobserved.
   The equilibrium cuto¤ A A ^t ; yt ; Qt ; ^t is the only channel for informational frictions to
directly a¤ect the market equilibrium. By distorting users'expectations of the retrade value
of the token, informational frictions have both a static and a dynamic e¤ect on the platform,
speci...cally by making the equilibrium token price over-weight public information and, con-
sequently, be less responsive to fundamental shocks. To see this, note that the equilibrium
token price is crucially determined by the expected convenience yield (1                         ) E Ui;t j Ii;t
from the perspective of the marginal user i at date t. Similar to Albagli, Hellwig, and
Tsyvinski (2017), the marginal user has a signal realization equal to the participation cuto¤,
A = At ; which is an equilibrium function of all public information, as summarized by
n i;t               o
 A ^t ; yt ; Qt ; ^t : For this particular user, his private signal is not conditionally uncorrelated
with this public information, but is instead a function of it. The marginal user therefore
                                                                            ^i;t .
overweights the public information when forming his conditional expectation A
   The dynamic e¤ect further exacerbates this distortion. Speci...cally, iterating forward on
the equilibrium cuto¤ condition (10) gives
                      X              1
               Pt =           E              E E [(1    ) Ui;t0         j It0 ] j It0 1 ::: j It ;
                      t0 =t
                                  Rt0 +1 t

where we have switched the order of summation and expectation because Ui;t is nonnegative.
In addition, the E E [Ui;t0 j It0 ] j It0 1 ::: is shorthand for the iterated expectations arising
from the Keynesian Beauty Contest that today'
                                            s marginal user must forecast the expecta-
tions of future marginal users, who must themselves forecast the expectations of marginal

                                                       25
users that temporally follow them. Since the information sets across the marginal users are
temporally non-nested, these iterated expectations do not collapse to ...rst-order expecta-
tions, leading to a bias toward public information, which is reminiscent of Allen, Morris, and
Shin (2006) and discussed in the context of downside risk in Albagli, Hellwig, and Tsyvinski
(2014b). Given that the marginal user at each date, in equilibrium, overweights the price in
inferring the demand fundamental, the price'
                                           s bias toward the public versus private infor-
mation through the "forecasting the forecasts" of others is even more acute. Taken together,
informational frictions dampen the platform performance by making the equilibrium token
price systematically underreact to the users'private information and, consequently, to the
fundamental shocks as well.
   The following proposition summarizes several properties of the informational frictions
equilibrium.

Proposition 5 The informational frictions equilibrium has the following properties:

  1. All of the comparative statics for the token price and user participation from Proposition
      3 are preserved, except that the users'demand fundamental and speculator sentiment,
                                                                ^t and ^t ; respectively.
      At and t ; are replaced by their ...ltered counterparts,, A

  2. Consider a temporary increase in uncertainty about the demand fundamental,                   A;   at
      date t; leaving the uncertainty     A     in all future periods unchanged. This temporary
      increase in uncertainty lowers (increases) the token price and user participation at
                                                   ^t and user optimism Qt are su¢ ciently
      date t when the ...ltered demand fundamental A
      high (low) or when ...ltered speculator sentiment ^t is su¢ ciently low (high).

   Proposition 5 reveals that the comparative statics from the perfect information equilib-
rium are preserved under informational frictions. This is natural since users form posterior
beliefs about the latent states, At and   t;   by observing the public signals (Pt ; Vt ; Qt ) and their
private information Ai;t ; and then choose their optimal entry decisions as they would under
perfect information. The di¤erence is that users now need to account for the additional
uncertainty of their inference problem.
   The second part of Proposition 5 provides an insight into how informational frictions
impact the current-period platform performance. A one-time increase in uncertainty from
                                                                                        ^t ;
learning, A ; lowers user participation when the platform fundamentals are strong (high A


                                                   26
Figure 5: An illustration of the market breakdown boundary across the demand fundamental for
di¤erent values of speculator sentiment (left panel), user optimism (middle panel), and token supply
(right panel) for the cases with perfect information (solid line) and asymmetric information (dashed
line). Values are the ...ltered demand fundamental and speculator sentiment for the asymmetric
information case. Baseline values are t = ^t = 0; Qt = 0; and y = 0:9:


high Qt ; or low ^t ), and raises participation when the fundamentals are weak. As such,
informational frictions are dampening, in that the platform performs less well when the
fundamentals are strong, and less poor when the fundamentals are weak. A limitation of
this analysis, however, is that it abstracts from the e¤ect of a persistent increase in        A   at
all future dates, which further feeds back into the expected retrade value of the token by
changing the cuto¤ function at all future dates. As informational frictions systematically
dampen the poor performance of the platform, this dynamic feedback e¤ect can further
shrink the region of market breakdown.
   As part of the analysis, we establish that the token price is convex in the ...ltered demand
fundamental whenever an equilibrium exists, which is important for conveying the intuition
of the role of informational frictions.
   To fully understand how informational frictions dampen platform performance, we appeal
to the logic of the Bayesian Persuasion literature, e.g., Aumann and Maschler (1995) and
Kamenica and Gentzkow (2015). A key idea of the Bayesian Persuasion analysis is that
                                                                                 ^t whenever
since the token price is convex with respect to the ...ltered demand fundamental A
an equilibrium exists, informational frictions lower the token price. This is because more
information makes the users'common belief A    ^t more responsive to the actual value of At ;


                                                27
                               2.5                                                                           12
                                                                                                                          perfect info
                                 2                                                                                        asymmetric info
                                                                                                             10
    Expected Log Token Price



                               1.5




                                                                                Log Token Price Volatility
                                 1                                                                            8

                               0.5
                                                                                                              6
                                 0

                               -0.5                                                                           4

                                -1
                                          perfect info                                                        2
                               -1.5       asymmetric info

                                -2                                                                            0
                                      0   10         20     30   40   50   60                                     0       10        20      30       40   50    60
                                                            t                                                                               t
Figure 6: An illustration of the unconditional expected log token price (left panel) and log price
volatility (right panel) over time. The solid line is the perfect information case and the dashed is
the asymmetric information case under the assumption A0 = A      ^0 = 0:


so that users bene...t more from the possible high values of At although do not lose as much
from the possible low values. By Jensen'                                                    ^t
                                          s Inequality, the higher variance of user beliefs A
raises the unconditional average of token price. On the other hand, informational frictions
make A ^t underreact to both high values and low values of the demand fundamental, thus also
reducing the region of market breakdown. In this sense, informational frictions introduce a
tradeo¤ between platform fragility (market breakdown) and performance (high participation
when the demand fundamental is strong).
   Figure 5 is the asymmetric information analogue of Figure 2 with                                                                              v   = 1: Similar to
the perfect information equilibrium, the left panel demonstrates that market breakdown
occurs when the ...ltered demand fundamental A  ^t is su¢ ciently weak, while this boundary
shifts down when the ...ltered speculator sentiment ^ is low (left panel), user optimism Qt                           t

is high (middle panel), or when the token supply yt is small (right panel). Interestingly,
market breakdown occurs at lower values of the ...ltered demand fundamental than with
perfect information, with the exception of high values of ...ltered speculator sentiment since
it is negatively correlated with the ...ltered demand fundamental. This is because users
underreact to negative information about the platform and, consequently, are willing to
participate over a wider region of the ...ltered demand fundamental.



                                                                           28
   Figure 6 shows the unconditional expected log token price and log price volatility as the
platform matures, assuming initially that A0 = A^0 = 0: While the expected token price is
lower with informational frictions, the expected log price (left panel) overtakes its perfect
information counterpart as the platform matures. This occurs because of the dampening
mechanism discussed earlier. As a result of informational frictions, the region of market
breakdown is smaller than with perfect information, and this boosts the expected log price
by minimizing downside risk. Consistent with dampening, the log token price volatility is
lower with informational frictions, as users underreact to new information that arrives on
the platform.
       Taken together, informational frictions attenuate platform fragility. Not only is market
breakdown less likely with informational frictions, especially when the platform is young, but
it also mutes token price volatility. The cost of this dampening, however, is the worsened
platform performance when the demand fundamental is strong, because users underreact to
At and thus under-participate when At is actually high. As a result, the expected token price
is also lower with informational frictions as a result of the convexity of the price function.
This cross-subsidization of informational frictions, consequently, mitigates platform fragility
at the expense of a lowered token price by expectation. In this way, informational frictions
act as a form of insurance that protects against weak fundamentals at an insurance premium.


4        Mining and Strategic Attacks
Up until now, we have assumed that the cryptocurrency platform has a permissioned blockchain
because the owner veri...es and completes all transactions. A key feature of the blockchain
technology underpinning cryptocurrencies, however, is that they are permissionless and verify
transactions through decentralized consensus, amongst an anonymous population of miners,
while maintaining trust in the cryptocurrency by deterring strategic attacks. The risk of
strategic attacks by miners is a central concern for cryptocurrency platforms. Attacks on
Bitcoin Gold, ZenCash, Vertcoin, Monacoin, Ethereum Classic, Verge (twice) have already
led to losses of approximately $18.6M, $550K, $50K, $90K, $1.1M, and $2.7M, respectively.
Such attacks include, for instance, ...fty-one percent attacks that lead to "double spending"
fraud and transaction failures through denials of service.12
  12
    This issue has also received signi...cant attention in the literature. See, for instance, Chiu and Koeppl
(2017), Pagnotta (2018), and Budish (2018).



                                                     29
       To illustrate how Proof of Work mining can impact platform performance and stability,
we consider a simple extension of our perfect information setting in this section. We now
assume that in each period, a new population of potential miners mine the token by pro-
viding accounting and custodial services using its underlying blockchain technology.13 As in
practice, there is free entry of miners onto the platform.
       All miners provide computing power to facilitate transactions among users, subject to a
cost of setting up the required hardware and software to mine the token: e                                    t    Mj;t ; where
Mj;t 2 f0; 1g is the miner'
                          s decision to mine and                       t   measures the miner'
                                                                                             s mining e¢ ciency
by inversely parameterizing the miner'
                                     s cost of mining. This mining e¢ ciency                                   t   is common
to all miners and follows an AR(1) process:

                                                                      1=2
                                               t   =   t 1     +            "t ;

with "t s iid N (0; 1) : Instead of the platform owner, miners are compensated with the
transaction fee Ut ; which is a fraction of the transaction surplus, and the seignorage from
token ination, ( (yt       1   + )     (yt 1 )) Pt : Consistent with many token platforms with PoW
mining, miners also earn transaction fees since, over time, the number of tokens created by
ination will diminish. It is thus necessary to shift the compensation toward fees. Miners
have no use for tokens and sell them to users and speculators. If NM;t miners join the
                                                   Ut +( (yt   1+ )        (yt   1 ))Pt
platform at date t; each miner earns                           NM;t
                                                                                          e   t   in expected net gain.14
       Suppose that when a strategic attack occurs, users lose half of their transaction surplus
from failed transactions in the current period as a result of service delays and denials. The
interruption of service also reduces transaction fees by half. Furthermore, we assume that a
strategic attack occurs whenever

                                               ( (yt      1    + )               (yt 1 )) Pt + 2 Ut        2
              ( (yt +     )      (yt )) Pt +                                                              NM;t ;          (11)
                                                                             2
where ;       > 0: On the left-hand side of this condition, the ...rst term has the interpretation
of fraudulent seignorage created by corrupt miners from double spending, and the second is
  13
     In practice, several miners are randomly drawn from a queue to compete to complete each transaction,
and miners often pool their revenue to insure each other against the risk of not being selected. See Cong,
He and Li (2018) for an extensive analysis of this issue. Our modeling of mining as a static problem when
there is free-entry is consistent with that in Abadi and Brunnermeier (2018).
  14
     To focus on the broader implications of the cryptocurrency for users, we abstract from the strategic
considerations that miners face in adding blocks to the blockchain to collect fees, such as consensus protocols
and on which chain to add a block. See, for instance, Easley, O'Hara, and Basu (2017) and Biais et al (2017)
for game theoretic investigations into these issues.


                                                           30
half the mining fees, in the forms of legitimate seignorage and transaction fees, earned from
mining the attack. The right-hand side is the cost of attack, which is a convex function of
the number of miners, reecting that a larger pool of miners makes it increasingly costly
for corrupt miners to acquire the necessary computing power for completing a 51% attack.
In Appendix B, we provide a microfoundation for this strategic attack condition, although
all that we require is that strategic attacks occur whenever the cost of mining is su¢ ciently
high and the number of miners is su¢ ciently low.
      Consider the incentives of miners to join the platform at date t: With rational expecta-
tions, miners choose whether to join, fully anticipating the possibility of a strategic attack.
Miner j with the common mining e¢ ciency                          thus maximizes his expected gain:
                                                                      t
                                                                                        !
                                                ( (yt 1 + )    (yt 1 )) Pt + 1+ Ut
                                                                                t
                            j   = max                                                e t Mj;t ;                      (12)
                                  Mj;t                    (1 + t ) NM;t

where          t   2 f0; 1g is the indicator for whether there is a strategic attack at date t: The
  1                                                                              1
1+
          factor reects that the mining pool receives only                       2
                                                                                     of the total mining revenue from
      t

completing less than half of the blocks when a strategic attack occurs.
      For simplicity, we characterize strategic attacks by miners under the perfect information
setting when the platform'
                         s demand fundamental At is publicly observable. Note that relative
to the perfect information equilibrium characterized in Section 2, the miners'common mining
e¢ ciency           t   becomes an additional state variable. The following proposition shows that
strategic attacks occur when either At or                        t   falls below a certain level.

Proposition 6 The equilibrium has the following properties:

                                                        a
      1. There exists a critical level                      (At ; yt ; Qt ; t ) such that strategic attacks occur when
                    a
           t   <        (At ; yt ; Qt ; t ) :

      2. There exists a critical level Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) ; which is decreasing in               t;   such that strate-
          gic attacks occur when At < Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) :

      3. Both an attack equilibrium and a no-attack equilibrium can exist as a result of the
          positive relationship between the bene...ts and costs of attacks.

      From Proposition 6, a strategic attack occurs when the mining fundamental and/or the
user demand fundamental are su¢ ciently weak, since in these situations the number of

                                                                     31
Figure 7: An illustration of the strategic attack boundary (left), the market breakdown boundary
(middle), and the token price (right) with respect to mining fundamental t . Market breakdown
boundary without mining (solid line) is for comparison. User optimism is turned o¤ ( Q = 0) in
this illustration. Baseline values are t = 0; and yt = 0:90:


miners is too small to deter a strategic attack. Although the impact of each strategic attack
is transitory, the occurrence of strategic attacks is persistent, since an attack will occur every
period in which the platform is in the attack region. As attacks reduce the token price and
thus the incentives of miners to join the platform, it may be possible for both a no-attack
equilibrium and an attack equilibrium to be self-ful...lling.
   Figure 7 depicts the strategic attack boundary (left panel) and the platform breakdown
boundary with and without mining (middle panel) for             = 10;   = 0:8; and     = 3: Min-
ers choose to attack the cryptocurrency if the user fundamental At falls below the attack
boundary Aa . This attack boundary is decreasing with the mining fundamental            t,   as for-
mally derived in Proposition 6. While each strategic attack does not lead to the failure of
the platform, the expected losses induced by future attacks lead to a higher threshold Ac for
market breakdown. As such, the possibility of strategic attacks by miners also exacerbates
platform fragility.
   As our analysis highlights, the PoW protocol introduces several novel features to cryp-
tocurrency platforms. First, the anticipation of future attacks makes such a strategic attack
easier to execute through an adverse feedback loop. An attack lowers the revenue each


                                               32
honest miner receives, which reduces the number of miners that join the platform and thus
lowers the cost of an attack. Interestingly, the decentralized consensus protocol exacerbates
the problem, by dispersing the revenue from mining over the whole population of miners.
As a result, an honest miner captures only a fraction of the revenue that is recovered by
increasing its own mining power to preempt attacks.15 In this way, decentralized consensus
averts internalization of incentives to ensure the platform security.
       Second, the feedback e¤ects from mining to the platform token'
                                                                    s intrinsic value through
service delays and denials are peculiar to the decentralized consensus protocol. Users are
also shareholders in the platform through the retradability of the token. As such, delays,
and expectations of future delays, have an important impact on the token price because they
reduce user participation and, consequently, demand for the token.
       Finally, from Figure 7 (right panel), there is a non-linear relation between the mining
fundamental and token price. When the mining fundamental is far away from the strategic
attack boundary, an incremental change in the e¢ ciency of mining has a limited impact on
the token price, since the probability of an attack is small. When the mining fundamental
is close to the strategic attack boundary, however, a small change in the e¢ ciency of mining
can have a substantial impact on the token price, which in turn leads to a substantial impact
on the platform'
               s stability.


The role of rational bubbles The presence of mining on the platform introduces a role
for rational bubbles to improve the platform'
                                            s security and stability by inating the token
price that compensates miners for their services. Since our setting features overlapping
generations of agents over an in...nite horizon, it is also suitable for investigating the role of
rational bubbles, which we briey discuss here. Suppose that we augment the token price
with a rational bubble bt           0 that, following Blanchard and Watson (1982), satis...es the
following law of motion:
                                                   Rbt
                                         (1   ) Pr( >t+1 j It )
                                                                  if > t + 1
                             bt+1 =                                              ;
                                                   0               otherwise
  15
     While, in principle, mining pools could coordinate to preempt a strategic attack, their primary function is
risk-sharing. Further, such coordination would undermine the spirit of the decentralized consensus protocol.
In May 2019, the BTC.top and BTC.com mining pools, with combined 44% mining power, were criticized
for coordinating an "attack" on the BTC Cash blockchain to reverse a hacker'      s transactions.




                                                       33
where       is an exogenous probability of the bubble bursting in the next period and R is
the gross interest rate in the economy.16 Since the bubble also bursts if the token market
breaks down, the endogenous possibility of market breakdown from the users'coordination
failure raises the return on the bubble, conditional on the platform'
                                                                    s survival. Interestingly,
when the platform is most vulnerable is also when the bubble sees its largest ex post price
appreciation conditional on survival.
       To save space, we briey discuss several possible e¤ects of this rational bubble, without
formally characterizing them. First, it has no direct e¤ects on users since they always pay
the fair value to purchase the token. Second, the rational bubble reduces the likelihood
of strategic attacks by miners, because it raises the token price and miners are partially
compensated by seignorage from token ination. Third, the lower likelihood of strategic
attacks today and in the future raises the token'
                                                s expected retrade value, increases user
participation, and consequently the token price and transaction surplus today. Fourth,
when the platform matures, however, all miner revenue is derived from transaction fees, and
the rational bubble ceases to have real e¤ects. Finally, the bubble bursting for exogenous
reasons is also a source of instability on the platform, as it generates a sudden drop in the
token price and consequently a fall in user participation.


5        Empirical Implications
In this section, we discuss several empirical implications of our conceptual framework for
cryptocurrency returns. Cryptocurrency returns in our framework have three components:
a convenience yield of the marginal user, which acts like a dividend, a capital gain from the
token price appreciation, and an embedded discount in the token price to compensate users
for their participation cost. By the marginal user'
                                                  s equilibrium condition in (7), these three
components satisfy the following relationship:
                                       (1        ) Ut       E [Pt+1 j It ]
                                 R=                     +                         :
                                            Pt                   Pt          Pt
       In contrast to ...at currencies, the expected capital gain can be quite positive, despite
token ination, and substantial, which has attracted many speculators to the nascent asset
  16
    To avoid the restrictive conditions in Santos and Woodford (1998), since tokens are in positive supply,
we implicitly assume users are unconstrained in their resources in the numeraire to purchase tokens. This
assumption re   ects that cryptocurrencies, in practice, are a small part of the overall asset universe and, if
the rest of the economy grows su¢ ciently fast, then users could, in principle, ...nance the bubble.


                                                        34
class. In addition, and novel to cryptocurrencies, the convenience yield is created by share-
holders acting in their dual capacity as users of the platform, which gives rise to a feedback
mechanism from the cryptocurrency return to user participation.17 As the platform matures
and participation increases, the cryptocurrency return transitions from being driven more
by the capital gain component to more by the convenience yield.18
       The empirical literature is mostly focused on the capital gain component of the cryp-
tocurrency return, as it is directly measurable by the econometrician. In equilibrium, the
expected excess capital gain can be expressed as
                                 E [Pt+1 j It ]                 (1        ) Ut
                                                    R=                           :                         (13)
                                      Pt                   Pt        Pt
Consistent with the empirical ...ndings of Hu, Parlour, and Rajan (2018) and Liu and Tsyvin-
ski (2019), the expected excess capital gain in our setting does not exhibit conventional risk
premia. The capital gain may still exhibit predictibility through the underlying state vari-
ables that explain the convenience yield. These state variables are the demand fundamental,
user optimism, speculator sentiment, and token supply. In the presence of informational
frictions, the demand fundamental and speculator sentiment are replaced by their ...ltered
counterparts, which are linear functions of the full history of token prices, trading volumes,
and public news signals. Liu and Tysvinski (2019), for instance, show that investor atten-
tion, measured either with Google searches or Twitter post counts for "Bitcoin", predicts
future cryptocurrency returns, with positive (negative) attention, as measured by keywords,
positively (negatively) predicting future weekly returns.19 Liu and Tsyvinski (2019) also ...nd
that investor sentiment, measured as either the log ratio between the number of positive and
negative phrases of cryptocurrencies in Google searches or the ratio of trading volume to
return volatility, predicts future cryptocurrency returns.
       Our model also suggests the participation cost borne by users, which is not directly
observed by the econometrician, as an additional channel of return predictability. As this
cost e¤ect is inversely related to the token price and, consequently, market capitalization,
  17
     Shams (2019) provides evidence of the importance of network e¤ects for cryptocurrency returns by show-
ing that return comovement arising from overlapping exposures to demand shocks is signi...cantly stronger
among "high community-based" cryptocurrencies.
  18
     A subtle issue is how to measure the marginal user'     s convenience yield in practice. If users were all
                 Ut
identical, then p Vt
                     ; which is similar to the average transaction fee, would be this yield. With selection onto
the platform, however, a reasonable, noisy proxy is the minimum transaction size on the blockchain.
  19
     Although the measure is constructed with searches for "Bitcoin" speci...cally, we view this measure as a
noisy proxy for interest in cryptocurrencies more geneally.


                                                      35
our model predicts a size e¤ect in the capital gain of cryptocurrencies. This prediction
is consistent with Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2019), who ...nd a size factor in the cross sec-
tion of cryptocurrency returns, with size measured as either market capitalization, price, or
maximum price.
                                                                                         (1     )Ut
    In addition, the persistence of the two return components                 Pt
                                                                                   and        Pt
                                                                                                      in (13) can lead
to a positive autocorrelation in the capital gain:
          Pt+2 Pt+1                                     (1      ) Ut+1             (1         ) Ut
    Cov       ;     It    1    = Cov                                     ;                              It   1   > 0;
          Pt+1 Pt                           Pt+1             Pt+1            Pt          Pt
                          Pt+1 E [Pt+1 j It ]         Pt+2 E [Pt+2 j It+1 ]
because the innovations          Pt
                                                and          Pt+1
                                                                              are uncorrelated with rational
expectations. This positive autocorrelation implies momentum, as empirically documented
by Liu and Tsyvinski (2019) in the prices of cryptocurrencies. Furthermore, the momentum
e¤ect in our model is independent of investor attention and sentiment, which is also consistent
with Liu and Tsyvinski (2019), who ...nd time-series momentum over 1-to-8 week horizons
that is not subsumed by their measures of attention or sentiment.
    Finally, our extension with mining suggests that the capital gain from a cryptocurrency
has a non-linear relation with the marginal cost of mining. When the cost of mining is low
relative to the strategic attack threshold, small changes in it have a muted impact on the
capital gain, as the potential loss from strategic attacks, which can be viewed as an extended
form of the participation cost in (13), is small. As the mining cost increases toward the
strategic attack boundary, however, incremental changes become more relevant. Our model
therefore predicts that measures of mining costs should have more predictive power for the
capital gain when there is a nontrivial chance of strategic attacks, such as when the hash
rate or the number of miners is low.


6     Conclusion
This paper develops a model to analyze cryptocurrencies. In our model, a cryptocurrency
constitutes membership in a platform developed to facilitate transactions of certain goods
or services. As a result of the strong network e¤ect among users to participate on the
platform and the rigidity induced by market-clearing with token speculators, the market can
break down with no equilibrium. While user optimism of future price appreciation raises
user participation, and consequently reduces the risk of breakdown, speculator sentiment
instead exacerbates it by crowding out users. The presence of realistic informational frictions

                                                      36
also mitigates this risk of market breakdown because users systematically underreact to
information about platform fundamentals, both favorable and unfavorable, at the cost of
worse average platform performance. In addition, the potential for strategic attacks when
transactions are recorded on a blockchain by miners acts as a drag on the platform by feeding
back into both the incentives of miners to mine and of users to join the platform, which makes
such attacks more likely. Our model also provides several predictions for cryptocurrency price
changes that are broadly consistent with recent empirical evidence.




   References
 Athey, Susan, Ivo Parashkevov, Vishnu Sarukkai, and Jing Xia (2016), Bitcoin Pricing,
     Adoption, and Usage: Theory and Evidence, mimeo Stanford University Graduate
     School of Business.
 Abadi, Joseph and Markus Brunnermeier (2018), Blockchain Economics, mimeo Princeton
    University.
 Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2014a), Risk-Taking, Rent-Seeking,
     and Investment when Financial Markets are Noisy, mimeo Bank of Chile, Toulouse
     School of Economics, and Yale University.
 Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2014b), Dynamic Dispersed Infor-
     mation and the Credit Spread Puzzle, mimeo Bank of Chile, Toulouse School of Eco-
     nomics, and Yale University.
 Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2015), A Theory of Asset Prices based
     on Heterogeneous Information, mimeo Bank of Chile, Toulouse School of Economics,
     and Yale University.
 Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin (2096), Beauty Contests and Iterated
     Expectations in Asset Markets, Review of Financial Studies 19.3, 719-752.
 Aumann, Robert J. and Michael B. Maschler (1995), Repeated Games with Incomplete
    Information, MIT press, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
 Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier (2006), Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,
     American Economic Review 96, 1293-1307.
 Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, and Catherine Casamatta (2019), The
      Blockchain Folk Theorem, Review of Financial Studies 32.5, 1662-1715.
 Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, Catherine Casamatta, and Albert
      Menkveld (2018), Equilibrium Bitcoin Pricing, Working paper.
 Blanchard, Olivier J. and Mark W. Watson (1982), Bubbles, Rational Expectations,and Fi-
     nancial Markets,î inCrisis in the Economic and Financial Structure, ed. by P. Wachtel,
     pp. 295ñ315. Lexington, Lexington, MA.

                                             37
Blume, Lawrence, David Easley, and Maureen O'  Hara (1994), Market Statistics and Tech-
    nical Analysis: The Role of Volume, Journal of Finance 49, 153-181.
Budish, Eric (2018), The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and the Blockchain, mimeo University
    of Chicago.
Chiu, Jonathan and Thorsten V. Koeppl (2017), The Economics of Cryptocurrencies -
    Bitcoin and Beyond, mimeo Victoria and Queen'
                                                s University.
Cong, Lin William and Zhiguo He (2017), Blockchain Disruption and Smart Contracts,
   mimeo University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Cong, Lin William, Zhiguo He and Jiasun Li (2018), Decentralized Mining in Centralized
   Pools, mimeo University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Cong, Lin William, Ye Li, and Neng Wang (2018), Tokenomics: Dynamic Adoption and
   Valuation, mimeo University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Ohio State Univer-
   sity, and Columbia Business School.
Dasgupta, Amil (2007), Coordination and Delay in Global Games, Journal of Economic
    Theory 134, 195-225.
Diba, B. T., and H. I. Grossman (1988), The Theory of Rational Bubbles in Stock Prices,
    Economic Journal 98, 746-754.
Easley, David, Maurenn O' Hara, and Soumya Basu (2019), From Mining to Markets: The
    Evolution of Bitcoin Transaction Fees, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Evans, David (2003), The Antitrust of Multi-sided Platform Markets, Yale Journal on
    Regulation 20, 325-381.
Gao, Zhenyu, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong (2019), Learning about the Neighborhood,
    mimeo CUHK, UT Austin, and Princeton University.
Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren and Kathy Yuan (2013), Trading frenzies and their impact
    on real investment, Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2), 566-582.
Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), On the impossibility of informationally
    e¢ cient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
Hellwig, Martin (1980), On the aggregation of information in competitive markets, Journal
    of Economic Theory 22, 477-498.
Hu, Albert, Christine Parlour, and Uday Rajan (2018), Cryptocurrencies: Stylized Facts
    on a New Investible Instrument, mimeo Changsha Intelligent Driving Institute, UC
    Berkeley, and University of Michigan Ross School of Business.
Huberman, Gur, Jacob Leshno, and Ciamac C. Moallemi (2019), An Economic Analysis of
   the Bitcoin Payment System, mimeo Columbia Business School.
Kamenica, Emir and Matthew Gentzkow (2011), Bayesian Persuasion, American Economic
   Review 101, 2590­2615.
Kocherlakota, Narayana (1998), Money is Memory, Journal of Economic Theory 81, 232-
    251.
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (1998), Unique equilibrium in a model of self-ful...lling
    currency attacks, American Economic Review, 587-597.

                                            38
 Liu, Yukun and Aleh Tsyvinski (2019), Risks and Returns of Cryptocurrency, mimeo
     Rochester Simon Business School and Yale University.
 Liu, Yukun, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Xi Wu (2019), Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency,
      mimeo Rochester Simon Business School, Yale University, and NYU.
 Pagnotta, Emiliano (2018), Bitcoin as Decentralized Money: Prices, Mining, and Network
     Security, mimeo Imperial College.
 Pagnotta, Emiliano S. and Andrea Buraschi (2018), An Equilibrium Valuation of Bitcoin
     and Decentralized Network Assets, mimeo Imperial College London.
 Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2003), Platform Competition in Two-sided Markets,
     Journal of the European Economics Association 1, 990-1029.
 Saleh, Fahad, (2018), Blockchain Without Waste: Proof-of-Stake, mimeo McGill University.
 Schilling, Linda and Harald Uhlig (2019), Some Simple Bitcoin Economics, Journal of
      Monetary Economics 106, 16-26.
 Shams, Amin (2019), What Drives the Covariation of Cryptocurrency Returns?, mimeo
    Ohio State University.
 Schneider, Jan (2009), A Rational Expectations Equilibrium with Informative Trading Vol-
     ume, Journal of Finance 64, 2783-2805.
 Sockin, Michael (2019), Informational Frictions in Intermediated Credit Markets, mimeo
     UT Austin.




Appendix A               Microfoundation of Goods Trading
In this Appendix, we microfound the goods trading between two users when they are matched
on the platform at date t. For clarity, we ignore the impact of strategic attacks on the likeli-
hood of transactions being completed. As all objects are at date t; we omit time subscripts
to economize on notation. We assume that user i maximizes its utility by choosing its con-
sumption demand fCi ; Cj g through trading with its trading partner user j subject to its
budget constraint:

                           Ui =      max U (Ci ; Cj ; N )                                  (14)
                                    fCi ;Cj g

                                    such that pi Ci + pj Cj = pi eAi ;

where pi is the price of its good. Similarly, user j solves a symmetric optimization problem
for its trading strategy. We also impose market clearing for each user'
                                                                      s good between the
two trading partners:

                     Ci (i) + Ci (j ) = eAi     and   Cj (i) + Cj (j ) = eAj :

                                                 39
   Furthermore, we assume that the goods endowments of the two users, Ai and Aj , are
observable to them at the time of their trading, regardless of whether the platform strength
A is publicly observed. Users behave competitively and take the prices of their goods as
given.

Proposition 7 User i's optimal good consumptions are

                                                                 Ai                                 Aj
                                     Ci (i) = (1         c) e         ; Cj (i) =               ce        ;

and the price of his good is
                                                      pi = e     c ( Aj   Ai )
                                                                                 :

Furthermore, the expected utility bene...t of user i at t = 1 is given by
                                                      1 2   1                                                    A        A
        E [ U (Ci ; Cj ; N )j Ii ] = e(1      c )Ai + 2 c "       E e        cA
                                                                                               c "
                                                                                                     1=2
                                                                                                             +           1=2
                                                                                                                                        Ii ;
                                                                                                                     "

and the ex ante utility bene...t of all users before observing their goods endowments is
                  1       2              1                                 A              A                                    A        A
       U0 = eA+ 2 ((1            )
                             2
                        c) + c                                   1=2                                               1=2
                                     "
                                             (1         c)   "         +                 1=2                 c "         +             1=2
                                                                                                                                               :
                                                                                     "                                             "

   Proposition 7 shows that each user spends a fraction 1                                      c   of his endowment on consuming
his own good Ci (i) and a fraction                c   on the good of his trading partner Cj (i). The price
of each good is determined by its endowment relative to that of the other good. One user'
                                                                                        s
good is more valuable when the other user has a greater endowment, and consequently each
user needs to take into account the endowment of his trading partner when making his own
decision. The proposition demonstrates that the expected utility of a user in the platform
is determined by not only his own endowment eAi but also the endowments of other users.
This latter component arises from the complementarity in the user'
                                                                 s utility function.


Appendix B                 Microfoundation for Strategic Attacks
In this Appendix, we provide a microfoundation for the strategic attack condition in the
main text. Speci...cally, we examine whether rogue miners wish to collude to engage in
a 51% "double spending" attack. This requires that a group of miners amasses enough
computational power, compared to the rest of the mining community, to be able to verify, on
average, the majority of transactions on the blockchain. Conceptually, by winning enough
blocks to add to the blockchain, these corrupt miners will be able to eventually validate their
own blocks on the longest chain, or to mine secretly a second chain longer than the current
blockchain and broadcast it to the mining community as the legitimate chain. When this

                                                               40
occurs, these miners can reverse their own transactions to undo their expenditures, returning
their spent tokens to their wallet to be spent again. This is the so-called "double spending"
problem. By creating duplicate tokens, the strategic attack temporarily increases the token
supply through fraudulent in ation.20
       The bene...ts and costs of of a 51% attack are linked to participation by both users and
miners. As more miners join the mining pool, the probability of completing any transaction
and adding it to the blockchain falls, increasing the e¤ective computational cost of attacking
the currency. In addition, user and miner participation also increase the computational cost
of an attack through the di¢ culty of mining each transaction, or the hashrate. Many PoW
protocols, such as those of Bitcoin and Ethereum, set the hashrate to maintain a ...xed average
time for new blocks to be added to the blockchain, and the hashrate increases in the number
of users and miners to prevent blocks from being added too quickly. As a consequence,
having more subscribers and a more diverse mining pool can make the platform more secure.
       We assume that miners lack commitment, which is consistent with the static incentives
miners face because of free entry (Abadi and Brunnermeier (2018)). Any miner can attack the
blockchain by engaging in a ...fty-one percent attack to "double spend" the coins they receive
from seignorage. If corrupt miners attack the blockchain, the strategic attack arti...cially
inates the token base by         (yt +     )     (yt ) ; for   > 0; and the miner sells these additional
tokens to earn ( (yt + )      (yt )) Pt in additional revenue. These additional tokens have to
be absorbed by users and speculators by increasing the e¤ective token supply to (yt + ) :
In addition, since the corrupt miners add over half the blocks to the blockchain, they earn
...fty percent of the transaction fees from users and seignorage. As a result of increased
waiting times and service denials, users also experience a loss in expectation of half their
trade surplus.21
       To acquire ...fty-one percent of the computing power, corrupt miners must replicate the
                                                                                   2
mining power of the existing NM;t miners by expending a convex technological cost NM;t ;
where       > 0: That the cost is convexly increasing in the number of miners NM;t reects that
it is increasingly di¢ cult to acquire more mining power because of additional hardware and
electricity costs.22 To join the strategic attack, a potential attacker has to pay a participation
  20
     To date, the major attacks on blockchains have been 51%. In 2015, the Bitcoin mining pool ghash.io
voluntarily committed to reducing its share of mining power from over ...fty percent to less than forty percent
to assuage fears of it coordinating a potential 51% attack amongst its miners on the currency. There is even
a website, Crypto51, that tracks the computational cost of a 51% attack in real-time.
  21
     In addition to fraud and theft, hackers have engaged in 51% attacks to disrupt the blockchain and deny
service to undermine con...dence in the cryptocurrency. It should be stressed that, while hackers can disrupt
the blockchain and double spend, they cannot steal tokens from user wallets.
  22
     Implicitly, we assume that, to avoid detection by the mining pool, which could result in punishment and
unraveling the attack, that these rogue miners must acquire additional computing power to compete with
their own honest mining.


                                                      41
cost, which can be viewed as the cost or disutility of coordinating with the other attackers,
that we normalize to 1 in the numeraire good.
   Suppose that NM;t miners providing mining services at date t and that a fraction pt of
miners attack and split the proceeds from the attack equally. They then need to acquire
half of total mining power and, consequently, they must acquire NM;t in additional mining
power. An attack will occur when the bene...t, the fraudulent seignorage and additional
1
2
  fraction of the seignorage and transaction fees, is greater than the cost of doubling the
existing computing power of the mining community

                                          1                                    1          2
             (yt +    )        (yt ) +      ( (yt )           (yt    )) Pt +      Ut     NM;t      0;
                                          2                                    22

When this situation happens, a strategic attack occurs. Notice, however, that when this
condition is satis...ed that all miners will want to attack the platform, which will dilute the
mining power and undermine a strategic attack. If all miners increase their mining by NM;t
units, then the no miner achieves ...fty-one percent of the mining power on the platform.
As this cannot be an equilibrium, the miners must play a mixed strategy when a strategic
attack is possible. The probability of a miner attacking, pt ; is the date t probability then
ensures that every miner is indi¤erent to attacking based on the outcome of an i.i.d. draw
of a Bernoulli random variable with Pr (Attack ) = pt : By the weak LLN, exactly a fraction
                                                                                          1
pt of the existing mining pool will attack. This probability satis...es that the fraction pt
                                                                                             of
the revenue from attacking is o¤set by the disutility of participation
                                  1            1                       1          2
                 (yt +     )      2
                                      (yt )    2
                                                   (yt        ) Pt +     U
                                                                       22 t
                                                                                 NM;t
                                                                                         1 = 0;
                                               pt NM;t

from which follows, when pt > 0; that
                                           1             1                     1         2
                          (yt +       )    2
                                               (yt )     2
                                                               (yt   ) Pt +      U
                                                                               22 t
                                                                                        NM;t
               pt =                                                                            :
                                                         NM;t

otherwise there is no attack. Consequently, we can interpret the strategic attack condition
(11) as arising from a 51% attack on the currency, and the possibility of attack leads to a
stability boundary in the state space of the platform.


Appendix C                Proofs of Propositions
C.1     Proof of Proposition 1
We ...rst examine the decision of a user to purchase the token. We ...rst recognize that each
user'
    s expectation about Pt+1 ; E [Pt+1 j It ] ; depends on each user'
                                                                    s expectation of At+1 : By

                                                         42
the Bayes Rule, it is straightforward to conclude that the conditional posterior of users about
At+1 after observing At and Qt is Gaussian At+1 jIt s N A    ^t+1 ; ^ 1 ; where the conditional
                                                                                                          A
estimate and precision satisfy

                                                  ^t+1 = At +                         Q
                                                  A                            +               Qt ;
                                                                                     "+    Q
                                                   ^A =           "   +    Q:


         We de...ne       as the stopping time, at which the platform fails as a result of the breakdown
of the token market. We shall derive the conditions that determine                                                   later. Conditional on
t < , the expected utility of user i; who chooses to purchase the token at t; from transacting
with another user is

                  E [Ui;t jIt ;      > t; Ait ; matching with user j ] = e(1                          c )Ai;t   E e      c Aj;t   jIt ;

which is monotonically increasing with the user'
                                               s own endowment Ai;t . Note that E e                                                       c Aj;t   j It
is independent of Ai;t ; but dependent on the strategies used by other users. It then follows
that user i will follow a cuto¤ strategy that is monotonic in its own type Ai;t :
   Suppose that every user uses a cuto¤ strategy with a threshold of At . Then, the expected
utility of user i is
                                                                      1 2   1                             At        At
                   E [Ui;t jIt ; > t] = e(1          c )Ai;t + c At + 2 c "
                                                                                          c "
                                                                                                1=2
                                                                                                      +            1=2
                                                                                                                            1f    >tg ;
                                                                                                               "

since losing a transaction is independent of the identities of the two transacting parties.
         To determine the equilibrium threshold, consider a user with the critical endowment
Ait = At : As this marginal user must be indi¤erent to his purchase choice, it follows that

                                    E [(1          ) Ui;t + Pt+1 j It ; Ait = At ] = RPt + ;

which is equivalent to
                                        1 2   1                       At        At
    (1         ) e(1   c )Ai;t + c At + 2 c "
                                                      c "
                                                            1=2
                                                                  +            1=2
                                                                                      1f   >tg    + E [Pt+1 j It ] = RPt + ; (15)
                                                                           "

with Ai;t = At : Fixing the critical value At ; the expected token price E [Pt+1 j It ] ; and the
price Pt ; we see that the LHS of equation (15) is monotonically increasing in Ai;t ; since
1          c   > 0: This con...rms the optimality of the cuto¤ strategy that users with Ai;t                                                       At
acquire the token to join the platform, and users with Ai;t < At do not. Since Ai;t = At + "i;t ;
                                      p
it then follows that a fraction           " (At   At ) of the users enter the platform, and
               p
a fraction       " (At    At ) choose not to. As one can see, it is the integral over the
idiosyncratic endowment of users "i that determines the fraction of potential users on the
platform.

                                                                      43
   By substituting Pt from equation (5) into equation (15), we obtain an equation to deter-
mine the equilibrium cuto¤ At = At (It ):

                                                                At )+ 1      2   1                                At        At
            (1                  ) eAt +(1        c )(At               2      c "
                                                                                                  c "
                                                                                                        1=2
                                                                                                              +            1=2
                                                                                                                                   1f   >tg   + E [Pt+1 j It ]
                                                                                                                       "
                   p
                        "                            1                   S
                                (At At )                      yt +               t
         = e     P          S                    P       S           P       S       + :                                                                                      (16)
             p
De...ne zt =   " (At   At ), which determines the population that buys the token. We can
rewrite equation (16) as
               h                                         i
                                   1=2           1                               1
                   (1       c) "         +                   zt + A t + 1    2
                                                                             c "                        1=2
    (1     )e                                P       S                  2
                                                                                              c "                 zt 1f      >tg                                              (17)
                                                                                     1                                                             1                  S
                                                                                             zt                                                            yt +               t
                                                                          +e     P       S        (E [Pt+1 j It ]                ) = e         P       S          P       S




   Note that the ...rst term in the LHS of equation (17) has a humped shape with respect
to zt ; and the second term is an exponential function of zt with a coe¢ cient that may be
either positive or negative. As the RHS of equation (17) is constant with respect to zt , this
equation may have zero, one, two, or three roots:

      If E [Pt+1 j It ]                          0; the LHS has a humped shape with a maximum at z , and it may
      intersect with the RHS at zero or two points:

         1. If LHS (z ) < RHS , then equation (17) has no root.
         2. If LHS (z ) > RHS , then equation (17) has two roots.

      If E [Pt+1 j It ] > 0; the LHS is non-monotonic with LHS ( 1) = 0, LHS (1) = 1,
      and one local maxium z  · and one local minimum z_ in ( 1; 1), and it may intersect
      the RHS at one or three points:

         3. If RHS < LHS (z
                          _ ) or if RHS > LHS (·
                                               z ) ; then equation (17) has one root.
         4. If LHS (z                z ) ; then equation (17) has three roots.
                    _ ) < RHS < LHS (·

   In the ...rst scenario outlined above, there is no equilibrium, and the token market breaks
down. Note that At shifts up and down the left-hand side of equation (17). Thus, equation
(17) has no root when At is su¢ ciently small. For this situation to occur, the speculative
motive, E [Pt+1 j It ]                   ; must be nonpositive, otherwise equation (17) has one or three roots.
This condition is also satis...ed when At is su¢ ciently small because E [Pt+1 j It ] is increasing
with At . Thus, the token market breaks down when At falls below a certain critical level,



                                                                                         44
which we denote as Ac (yt ; Qt ; t ). Thus, the stopping time                                                 of the platform'
                                                                                                                             s disbandment
is
                                          = finf t : At < Ac (yt ; Qt ; t )g :

      Finally, note that, since the only di¤erence among users is the value of their transaction
bene...t, E [Ui;t j It ; > t] ; which is monotonically increasing in Ai;t regardless of the mass
of users that join the platform, it follows that, regardless of the strategies of other users, it
is always optimal for each user i to follow a cuto¤ strategy.

C.2         Proof of Proposition 2
The ...rst part of the proposition follows from the derivation of Proposition 1 and the de...nition
of Ac : This proof characterizes the determinants of the fundamental critical level Ac .
   With regard to speculator sentiment, notice from equation (17) that, when E [Pt+1 j It ]
                                                                                                                        c
     is nonpositive, there is a critical value of speculator sentiment                                                      (At ; yt ; Qt ):
                                                               h                                     i
                                                                               1=2           1                      1   2   1
        c            P       S                                     (1   c) "         +                   zt + A t + 2   c "                 1=2
        t       =                log sup (1                 )e                           P       S
                                                                                                                                      c "             zt
                         S           zt
                                              1
                                                                                          oo y
                                                      zt                                       t
                                     +e   P       S        (E [Pt+1 j It ]               )  +    ;
                                                                                                              S

                                                               c                                                                                  c
such that no equilibrium exists if                    t            (At ; yt ; Qt ) ; with the convention that                                     t   =    1 if
the argument in the log is negative.
      It is straightforward to see that, in the high price (low cuto¤) equilibrium, the Implicit
                              dzt
Function Theorem implies that d   > 0: Since the user participation is ( zt ) ; it follows that
                                t
an increase in t exacerbates the market breakdown region by lowering user participation.
Since       t   is i.i.d., there is only this static impact of an increase in speculator sentiment on
the equilibrium cuto¤. As such, by lowering user participation, it shifts up Ac (yt ; Qt ; t ) for
any given pair of fyt ; Qt g.
   We next consider how user optimism Qt impacts the market breakdown region. Since
user optimism Qt raises each user'
                                 s estimate of the resale value of the token at date t + 1; it
raises user participation and the token price at date t: Since Qt is i.i.d., this is the only impact
of an increase in user optimism. As such, it shifts down the market breakdown threshold,
Ac (yt ; Qt ; t ) ; for any given pair of fyt ; t g.
      Similarly, an increase in the user participation cost, ; deters user participation at all
dates and therefore exacerbates the market breakdown by both increasing the cost today and
lower the expected retrade value of the token tomorrow through the reduced participation
in the future. As such, it also shifts up Ac (yt ; Qt ; t ) :



                                                                        45
C.3        Proof of Proposition 3
We ...rst establish that the map from the demand fundamental At to the equilibrium user
cuto¤ for joining the platform is monotone when the highest price equilibrium is always
played.23
   Suppose that the token price at date t + 1; Pt+1 ; is increasing in At for all (yt ; Qt ; t )
triples in the high price equilibrium. Then, since At follows a random walk, its cumulative
distribution function satis...es the Feller Property, and the conditional expectation operator
preserves this relation
                                   "                                                                                                                              #
                @E [Pt+1 j It ]      @P At +                                                      + "t+1 ; yt+1 ; Qt+1 ;                     t+1
                                =E                                                                                                                           j It > 0;
                    @At                                                                               @At

where the expectation is take over "t+1 : Consequently, E [Pt+1 j It ] is increasing in At :Then,
we can rewrite equation (17) as the function Gt
                                              h                                                   i
                                                                    1=2               1                          1        2   1
                                                  (1       c) "           +                           zt + A t + 2        c "                    1=2
              Gt = (1                    )e                                       P           S
                                                                                                                                         c "                     zt 1f   >tg
                                     1                                                                                    1                  S
                                              zt                                                                                  yt +               t
                            +e   P        S        (E [Pt+1 j It ]                                    )       e       P       S          P       S


                            0:                                                                                                                                                       (18)

Assuming existence of an equilibrium, applying the Implicit Function Theorem to Gt ; one
has that
                                                                    @zt                           @Gt =@At
                                                                        =                                  ;
                                                                    @At                           @Gt =@zt
where
                      h                                    i
@Gt                    (1    c) "
                                    1=2
                                          +        1
                                                               zt +At + 1             2
                                                                                      c "
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                      1=2
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                 zt @E   [Pt+1 j It ]
    = (1         )e                            P       S                2
                                                                                                              c "                  zt + e            P       S                        > 0:
@At                                                                                                                                                                       @At
In the high price equilibrium, the RHS of equation (17) intersects the hump-shaped curve of
the LHS in zt on the left-side of the hump, and consequently @G t
                                                              @zt
                                                                     0:24 It then follows that,
                                                   @zt
in the high price equilibrium,                     @At
                                                               < 0: Therefore, user participation                                                             ( zt ) is increasing in
At :
                                                           1                      1                           S
                                                                    zt                        yt +                    t
       Furthermore, since Pt = e                       P        S             P           S               P       S       ; it follows that
                                                           @Pt                                Pt            @zt
                                                               =                                                > 0:
                                                           @At                            P               S @At

Consequently, Pt is increasing in At in the high price equilibrium. Since the choice of t and
t + 1 are arbitrarily, Pt is increasing in At generically if the high price equilibrium is played
at each date.
  23
    Our proof is based on a modi...ed argument of Milgrom and Roberts (1994) for comparative statics in
the presence of strategic complementarity.
  24 @Gt
     @zt = 0 at the critical value of zt at which breakdown occurs if the fundamentals deteriorate.


                                                                                              46
   Finally, since user optimism Qt enters into the user'
                                                       s problem by raising the expected
resale token price, it raises user participation and the token price. In contrast, speculator
sentiment t lowers user participation by leading to nonfundamental upward pressure on the
token price. Since it also lowers user participation, the overall impact on the token price is
ambiguous. To see this, we rewrite equation (18) as
                                                     1=2                         1 2   1
          Ht         (1        ) e(1        c) "            zt +
                                                           (~         S t )+At + 2 c "
                                                                                                 c "
                                                                                                       1=2
                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                             ~t        S t   1f   >tg
                               1                 1
                                       z
                                       ~t                  yt
                      e    P       S         P         S        + E [Pt+1 j It ]                = 0;

where the change of variables z   ~ now absorbs speculator sentiment, so that the price is
         1       1
            z
            ~t       yt
Pt = e P S     P   S    : Since speculator sentiment is i.i.d., and the equilibrium is Markovian
in the state space (At ; yt ; Qt ; t ), the retrade value of the token is una¤ected by changes
in sentiment today. It is straightforward by the Implicit Function Theorem to the above
equation that
                                                                @z
                                                                 ~t           dHt =d t
                                                                    =                  :
                                                                @ t           dHt =dz
                                                                                    ~t
Since z
      ~ enters Ht symmetrically as z does in equation (17), dHt =dz
                                                                  ~t > 0 in the high price
equilibrium. In contrast, dHt =d                   t   is
                                                                1=2                                                                1=2
                                                       c "               z
                                                                         ~t        S t                                       c "         zt
                               1=2                                                                               1=2
 dHt =d   t   / (1    c)   "                                                               = (1         c)   "                                :
                                                                1=2                                                                1=2
                                                       c "               z
                                                                         ~t        S t                                       c "         zt

Consequently, if zt is su¢ ciently small, then dHt =d                                      t   > 0; while if zt is su¢ ciently large,
                                   @Pt                     1         @z~t
then dHt =d t < 0: Since   =     P @ t
                                             it follows that @P
                                                             @ t
                                                                t
                                                                S
                                                                  > 0 for zt su¢ ciently small,
                                                                  Pt @    ;
                                                                        t
    @Pt
and @ < 0 for zt su¢ ciently large. Since zt = At At ; the result follows.
      t



C.4       Proof of Proposition 4
In this proof, we construct an equilibrium by conjecturing and verifying that every user
follows a cuto¤ strategy with a threshold of At : Since there can be multiple equilibria, as
in the perfect information model, we assume that users will always coordinate on the lowest
threshold (or highest token price) equilibrium. This helps ensure a positive relation between
the price and the demand fundamental, At ; which is needed for a cuto¤ equilibrium to exist.
   Given our assumption about the su¢ cient statistic in token price in equation (8), the
posterior about At given all public information is Gaussian At jIt s N A^t ; A;t with the




                                                                              47
conditional mean and variance satisfying the Kalman Filter recursion:
            2                 30 02   1
                                                                          3                                                                                                                              1       1
                       1
                                    Q           0              0
                     A
    A^t = 4 A;t 1 + 1 5 B        @
                                  6
                                  4 0      A;t 1 + "
                                                     2
                                                     S
                                                              A;t 1
                                                                          7
                                                                          5+
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1   0C
                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                          A                                                                                                                                                                      A
                            1
                A;t 1 + A           0          A;t 1    A;t 1 + "
                                                                    1   1
                                                                      v
             2                   3
                     Qt 1
             4 pt A  ^i;t 1      5+A^t 1 ;
               vt A  ^i;t 1
                              2      1
                                            30
                                                                               A
    A;t   =       A;t 1             +       A
                                                1         4          A;t 1      +           A
                                                                                                1       5
                                                                                                1
                                                                     A;t       1+           A
                  02                 1
                                                                                                                                            3                  1       1   2                                     3
                                    Q                        0                                                  0                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                  B6                                                       2                                                                7              1   0C          4                                 1   5:
                  @4 0                              A;t      1+        "
                                                                           S
                                                                                                            A;t 1                           5+         A       A                       A;t 1     +       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                     0                                       A;t 1                      A;t 1               +               1           1                                              A;t      1+       A
                                                                                                                        "           v
                                                                                                    0
By the Sherman-Morrison formula, since                                                                  is an outer product of column matrices, we can
express
                                                                                        1                                    C 1~
                                                                                                                                u~v0C 1
                                                             (C + ~
                                                                  u~v0)                     =C                  1
                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                                                                             1+~v 0 C 1~
                                                                                                                                       u
and therefore
      02      1
                                                                                                                    3                            1     1
              Q                         0                                          0
      B6                                                 2                                                          7                       1    0C
      @4 0                      A;t     1+           "
                                                         S
                                                                                   A;t 1                            5+                  A        A
                                                                                                    1           1
         0                              A;t 1                         A;t 1        +            "           v
      2                                                                                                                         3
          Q                             0                                                   0
    6               "       1
                                (
                          A;t 1 + " v                        )                          "                                       7
    6               2                                                                       2       " v
                                                                                                                                7
    6 0             S
                      1       "                                            1       "
                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                7
  = 6
    6
                    A;t 1 +     2 + " v
                                S
                                                                         A;t 1 +     2 + " v
                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                7
    6                     "                                                    1
                                                                              A;t 1 +
                                                                                       "                                        7
    4                       2     " v                                  " v               2                                      5
      0                 1
                            S
                                "                                        1       "
                                                                                         S

                     A;t 1 +      2 + " v                               A;t 1 +    2 + " v
                                  S                                                S
                                                         2                                                                                      32                                                                   30
                                                                                1                       "                                                           1                   "
                                                                  Q            A;t 1        +               2       +           " v                        Q       A;t 1           +        2    +       " v
                            1                            6                                           1
                                                                                                            S                                   76                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                            S                        7
           1            "                                4                          "
                                                                                        2           A;t 1
                                                                                                                                                54                         "
                                                                                                                                                                               2       A;t 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
          A;t 1 +           2    +    " v+ "                                            S                                                                                      S
                            S                                                                         1                                                                                  1
                                                                                    " v             A;t 1                                                                  " v         A;t 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :
                                                                         1                          "                                              1           "
                                      (     A+               Q)         A;t 1          +                2       +           " v             +     A;t 1            2   +           " v
                                                                                                        S                                                          S

It then follows that the above recursion simpli...es to
                                      2           Q
                                                                                                                                                30 2                                         3
                                         1+( A + Q ) A;t                                                                                                       Qt 1
                       ^t 1 + + A;t 6                                                                                                           7 4
                                                                                                                                        1
              A^t = A                 4         "
                                                  2                                                                                             5 pt           ^i;t 1
                                                                                                                                                               A                             5;
                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                    vt         ^i;t 1
                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                " v
                                                                               1
                  A;t           =                        A+ Q                               "
                                                                                                                                :
                                          1+(
                                                                                   +            2       +           " v
                                                    A+ Q         )    A;t 1                     S



                                                                                                            48
Note that the Ricatti Equation for                        A;t   has a deterministic steady-state,                                    A;       that satis...es

                                                           2                                 1
                                  (   A   +       Q)       A    +        A                           "
                                                                                                                     = 0;
                                                                                       "   v +           2
                                                                                                         S


which has a unique positive, real root:
                   v
                   u                   2
                   u          1                                       1                          1                              1
               A =
                   t                     +                                                                                                :
                                                                                                             "
                        2 ( A + Q)                                   A+           Q        "   v +               2          2( A +   Q)
                                                                                                                 S



Consequently, a stationary solution to the Kalman Filter exists and the economy, from any
initial conditions, converges to this steady-state solution as t ! 1:
   Then, the common conditional belief follows
                                                      2                  Q                      30
                                                             v
                                                             u
                                                           1 u1                A+ Q
                                                                                                  2                                  3
                                           6                +
                                                           2 t4
                                                                +                 "             7                       Qt 1
                ^t = A
                     ^t                    6                                 " v+   2           7 4                     ^i;t 1       5:
                A         1   +       + A1 6                                        S           7 pt                    A
                                           4                             "
                                                                             2
                                                                                                5                       ^i;t 1
                                                                             S                      vt                  A
                                                                         " v

Given the steady-state posterior based on common knowledge, it is straightforward by the
Bayes Rule to update to the steady-state private posterior of user i; which is Gaussian
             ^i;t ; i with the conditional mean and variance given by
At jIi;t s N A

                                          ^i;t =
                                          A                      i
                                                                             1   ^t +
                                                                                 A             i " Ai;t ;
                                                                         A
                                                  1                  1
                                              i        =         A       +        ":


                                      ^i of user i is increasing in its own endowment Ai :
Note that the conditional estimate of A
   Given each user'  s posterior Ai;t ; it is straightforward to construct by the Bayes Rule their
posterior for At+1 after observing Qt ; which will also be Gaussian At+1 jIi;t s N A ^i;t+1 ; i + ^                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                        ;
                                                                                                                                                                A
where the conditional estimate and precision satisfy:

                                      ^i;t+1 = A
                                               ^i;t +                                           Q
                                      A                                           +                          Qt ;
                                                                                           A   +     Q
                                          ^A =                   A   +           Q;


and consequently the conditional forecast of the next period'
                                                            s demand fundamental At+1 by
users is also increasing in their endowment. This completes our characterization of learning
by users.
   We de...ne    as the stopping time, at which the platform fails as a result of the breakdown
of the token market. Then, the expected utility of user i if all other users follow a cuto¤


                                                                         49
strategy with cuto¤ At is

                                                                  1 2   1                                                                                         At          At
     E [Ui;t jIi;t ; > t] = e(1                  c )Ai;t + c At + 2 c "                     E e             c (At           At )
                                                                                                                                           c "
                                                                                                                                                   1=2
                                                                                                                                                          +               1=2
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ii;t
                                                                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                0                  1=2         ^i;t +
                                                                                                                                               A                     At
                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                              c i
                                                             ^      1 2                                 1                    c "           +                   1=2
                               = e(1             c )Ai;t + c Ai;t + 2 c               (   i+ "              ) @                        p                  "               A:
                                                                                                                                           1+        "        i


It follows that the transaction bene...t to user i is monotonically increasing in his private
signal, Ai;t :
      Furthermore, let us conjecture that the token price is (weakly) increasing in At : Then, it
follows that E [Pt j Ih i;t ] is increasing
                                     i      in a user'
                                                     s private signal Ai;t ; since with Pt nonnegative
 @                      @Pt
@At
    E [Pt j Ii;t ] = E @At j Ii;t : Consequently, E [(1          ) Ui;t + Pt+1 j Ii;t ] is also increasing
in Ai;t : As such, the user will follow a cuto¤ strategy

                                                               1 if Ai;t                      A             ^t ; yt ; Qt ; pt
                                                                                                            A
                                            Xi;t =                                                                                         ;
                                                               0 if Ai;t < A                                ^t ; yt ; Qt ; pt
                                                                                                            A

for a critical productivity A                         ^t ; yt ; Qt ; pt : Since the household with the critical produc-
                                                      A
tivity At must be indi¤erent to its token choice at the cuto¤, it follows that

                                       E [(1                  ) Ui;t + Pt+1 j Ii;t ] +                                          RP = 0;

which implies
                                                                     0                1=2              ^i;t +
                                                                                                       A                      At
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                    c i
                             ^      1 2                   1                     c "           +                      1=2
(1       ) e(1   c )Ai;t + c Ai;t + 2 c     (    i+ "         ) @                      p                        "                  A + E [Pt+1 j Ii;t ]                                = RPt
                                                                                            1+              "       i


with Ai;t = At : Those with the LHS above RPt purchase the currency, and those below
choose to refrain. This equation does not depend on the unobserved At or speculator opti-
mism, t : As a result, At = A A   ^t ; yt ; Qt ; pt : Substituting for the beliefs of the marginal
user, we arrive at the indi¤erence condition
                                                                                            0                                                         1                            1
                                                                                                           p
                                                                                                                                               i    A
                                                                                                                                                   1=2
                                                                                                                                                              ^t
                                                                                                                                                              A          At
                                       1    ^t                                    1
                                           (A    At )+ 1        2
                                                                     (                ) @                                                                                          A 1f
         (1      ) eAt +   c   i   A                   2        c         i+ "
                                                                                                       c        "
                                                                                                                        1   +      i   +       "
                                                                                                                                                   p                                      >tg
                                                                                                                                                       1+            "    i
                                                  p
                                                      "                               1
                                                              ( At       pt )                 yt
         +E [Pt+1 jIt ]            =e            P        S                       P       S        ;                                                                                           (19)

which is measurable to the public information. Substituting for                                                                                i    and

                                                                 ^t = p               "
                                                                                              ^t
                                                                                              A             pt ;

                                                                                          50
                                                                ^t ; ^t is informationally
we recover the cuto¤ condition stated in the proposition. Since A
              ^t ; pt ; we can express the optimal cuto¤ policy of households as
equivalent to A

                                                             1 if Ai;t                     A              ^t ; yt ; Qt ; ^t
                                                                                                          A
                                             Xi;t =                                                                                                         ;
                                                             0 if Ai;t < A                                ^t ; yt ; Qt ; ^t
                                                                                                          A

Given that each user follows a cuto¤ strategy, it follows that the token price takes the
functional form in (5). Thus, we recover the linear statistic pt from the token price and the
linear statistic vt from the volume signal, both as conjectured.

C.5        Proof of Proposition 5
Rewriting (10) as
                                     h                                                     i
                                                                     1=2           1                ^t + 1                                      1
                  (1            )e
                                         1          c
                                                 1+ " A          "         +
                                                                               P       S
                                                                                               zt + A    2
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                    c   (       A+ "                )
                                             r                                                                                                                               !
                                     1=2                             "     A                                                    zt
                            c "                   1+                                       p                                                                                     1f   >tg
                                                         1+              "     A            (1 +                 "          A ) (1              +2                  "   A)
                            1
                                    zt                                                                1
                                                                                                                yt +                S           ^
                                                                                                                                                    t
                  +e    P       S        (E [Pt+1 jIt ]                        )=e                P        S                P               S           ;                                   (20)

it is immediate that (17) is the informational frictions analogue of (17) with A^t replacing
At ; ^t replacing t ; and the several terms related to the expected convenience yield for the
marginal user now re     ecting the uncertainty about At through the posterior variance of
public beliefs,    A:   Notice that the modi...cations by                                                        A          do not alter the sign of any of the
modi...ed terms compared to the perfect information case. It then follows that we can repeat
the same arguments from Proposition 3 to establish the comparative statics for A  ^t ; ^t ; and
Qt :
       We now apply the Implicit Function Theorem by rewriting the above expression as
                                                  ^t +       1                                        p1             1                                          1
               G = (1                        )e
                                                  A
                                                         P       S
                                                                     zt + 1           c
                                                                                   1+ " A                   "
                                                                                                                zt + 2              2
                                                                                                                                    c   (   A+ "                    )
                                                        r                                                                                                                             !
                                                  1=2                          "       A                                                            zt
                                         c "                 1+                                       p
                                                                         1+        "       A           (1 +                             "       A ) (1              +2   "       A)
                                         1
                                                 zt                                                             S           ^                   1
                                                                                                                                                            yt
                                                                                                                                t
                        +e           P       S        (E [Pt+1 jIt ]                       )          e    P         S                      P           S           ;

where G       0: Holding ...xed the retrade value of the token, E [Pt+1 jIt ] ; it then follows that:
                                                                 dAt                       dG=d A
                                                                     =                             :
                                                                 d A                        dG=dzt
Since (10) is analogous to (7), from the proof of Proposition 1, G is hump-shaped in zt
and, in the high price (low cuto¤) equilibrium, dG=dzt > 0:This sign leads to the intuitive

                                                                                       51
comparative statics, compared to the unstable low price (high cuto¤) equilibrium. Conse-
quently, the sign of dAt =d     A   is negative the sign of dG=d               A:   Notie that          A    only enters
G through the expected transaction bene...t or contemporaneous convenience yield for the
marginal household E [Ui;t j It ] : It then follows that dG=d A = dE [Ui;t j It ] =d A : Since
E [Ui;t j It ] is always nonnegative it follows that we can express dE [Ui;t j It ] =d                         A    as
                                              p
      dE [Ui;t j It ]         1 2           c   "
                         =        c +             zt
           d A                2       (1 + " A )2
                                                           q
                                                       1=2                        zt
                 1      1=2
                            +  1 (3+4 A ) e
                                            z     c  "      1 + 1+" " AA p
                 2  c "        2 1+2 " A      t                            (1+ " A )(1+2 "                     A)
            +               3=2 p                          q                                                          :
               (1 + " A )          1+2 " A             1=2
                                                             1 + 1+" " AA p       zt
                                                   c "                                (1+   "    A )(1+2 "     A)


                                                       dE [Ui;t j It ]                    i;t          dE [U        j I ]
Notice that there is a cuto¤ zt < 0 such that               d A
                                                                       0 if zt zt and    d A
                                                                                              t
                                                                                                <0
                                   dAt                             dAt
for zt < zt : It then follows that d A 0 for zt          zt    and d A 0 for zt < zt : Consequently,
uncertainty    A   raises the cuto¤ when participation is su¢ ciently high (zt su¢ ciently small),
while uncertainty lowers the cuto¤ when participation is su¢ ciently low (zt su¢ ciently large).
   We now relax our assumption on the retrade value of the token. Suppose instead of
holding ...xed the token retrade value, we hold ...xed uncertainty A at date t + 1: The
thought experiment is we are then considering a one time increase in                             A   at date t: Notice
since user and speculator sentiment are i.i.d. that we need only focus on how the token
price varies with the demand fundamental, At ; when forecasting the retrade value of the
token tomorrow. Further notice from the law of motion of user beliefs derived in the proof of
Proposition 4 that informational frictions have no impact on how the user sentiment signal
                                                                                      Q
Qt is used in forecasting At+1 (same weight in conditional mean                      Q+ A
                                                                                            ).
   Notice now that the convexity (or concavity) of the token price in the ...ltered demand
fundamental is given by:
                                                                2
                                1 @ 2 Pt         @At                     @ 2 At
                                         =    1+                                ;
                                     ^2
                                Pt @ A t
                                                  ^t
                                                 @A                      @A  ^2
                                                                              t

        dAt                                                                               ^0 s
since    ^t
        dA
              0 as argued above. Informational frictions preserve the relation found with At
perfect information counterpart, albeit with underreaction. Notice now, from the equilibrium
cuto¤ condition (17) that, as A^t ! 1; At ! 1; since the retrade value E [Pt+1 j It ] is
increasing in At and the convenience yield E [Ui;t j It ] becomes unbounded. Consequently,
even for the users with the lowest endowments, the bene...ts of joining become arbitrarily
large, which corresponds to an arbitrarily large token price. At the opposite extreme, since
the token price is nonnegative, and therefore bounded from below, it either falls to some
                                     ^t falls below its critical threshold Ac Qt ; yt ; ^t : Since
...nite minimum or no long exists if A

                                                  52
dAt                dAt
 ^t
dA
           0 and    ^t
                   dA
                         becomes increasingly negative so as to be unbounded for arbitrarily high
^t                             d2 At
A         0; it follows that   0 when an equilibrium exists (and unde...ned otherwise) and
                               dA ^2
                                   t
                                             ^t whenever an equilibrium exists. Notice that,
consequently the token price Pt is convex in A
                                                                                                                                      2
if it were not convex, then Pt must then have an even number of inection points ( d
                                                                                  dA
                                                                                    Pt
                                                                                    ^2 = 0),
                                                                                                                                          t
which can be ruled out intuitively since (by linearity)

               @E [Pt j It ]                   X                   1                   @Ui;t0
                             = (1          )           E               E E                    j It0        j It0 1 :::    j It ;
                    ^t
                   @A                          t0 =t
                                                               Rt0 t                     ^t
                                                                                        @A

                              ^t on Ui;t0 is to increase the convenience yield by a factor of
and the only direct impact of A
  ^
eAt :
       Since market breakdown occurs for pt                            Ac
                                                                        t ; and therefore when At is su¢ ciently small,
since the cuto¤ function at date t + 1 is unchanged, it then follows that increasing A at
                                   ^t where more probability weight is put on the convex part
date t lowers 4 for high values of A
                                             ^t where more probability weight is put on the
of the price function, and raises it for low A
concave part of the price function near the step function of the non-existence boundary.
    A one time increase in uncertainty therefore subsidizes participation and the token price
for low performing platforms (high zt ) at the expense of participation and the token price
for high performing platforms (low zt ). From our comparative statics analysis, a high cuto¤,
                                        ^t ; low Qt ; and high ^t :
zt ; for a ...xed yt corresponds to low A

C.6         Proof of Proposition 6
From the miner optimization problem (12), it is straightforward to see that, with free en-
try, miners must indi¤erent to participating on the platform. Consequently, the number of
potential miners that choose to mine is given by
                                       ( (yt           1   + )              (yt 1 )) Pt +      1+
                                                                                                          Ut
                                                                                                      t
                              NM;t =                                                                           e   t
                                                                       1+      t

       Substituting the optimal number of miners, NM;t from (12) into the attack condition
given in (11) conjecturing an attack,                      t   = 1; we can de...ne
                                                                       1                 1
        f (yt ; Pt ; E [Ut j It ]) =           (yt +           )         (yt )             (yt            ) Pt
                                                                       2                 2
                                                                                                                                              2
                                           1                                 e2    t
                                       +      E [Ut j It ]                               ( (yt )               (yt     )) Pt +       Ut           :
                                           22                                4                                                   2
There is an attack whenever f (yt ; Pt ; Ut ) > 0:25 It is clear since                                             enters only through the
  25
     Since there is no pro...t when f (yt 1 ; Pt ; E [Ut j It ]) = 0; and only a loss in revenue from honest mining,
it follows that miners would rather not attack at the indi¤erence threshold.


                                                                       53
                                                               c
quadratic term that there exists a threshold                       (At ; Qt ; t ) such that:

                                                                   a
                                      f   t   =1:      t   <           (At ; Qt ; t )g ;

where:
                                                                        1              1                              1
             c                        1         (yt +          )        2
                                                                              (yt )    2
                                                                                             (yt             ) Pt +   22 t
                                                                                                                          U
                 (At ; yt ; Qt ; t ) = log                                                                              2   :
                                      2         a
                                                    ( (yt )                  (yt      )) Pt + 2 E [Ut j It ]
                                                4

Assume now that E [Ut j It ] and Pt are (weakly) increasing in At whenever Pt is positive,
and we de...ne Pt = 0 whenever a market equilibrium does not exist. De...ne:

                                             ( (yt )           (yt           )) Pt + 2 Ut
                                   xt =                                                      ;
                                                                  2
and rewrite f (yt ; Pt ; E [Ut j It ]) as:

                        f (yt ; Pt ; xt ) = ( (yt +        )                (yt )) Pt + xt                e 2 t x2
                                                                                                                 t:

                                                                       1                                                1
Notice that f (yt ; Pt ; xt ) is concave in xt ; increasing for xt < 2 e2 t from 0 to                                 4 e2   t
                                                                                                                                 ; and then
decreasing to 1 for xt > 2 e2 t : It has two roots at xt 2 0; e1
                                    1
                                                                         2 t  :
                                                                                                  1
    It then follows that a strategic attack occurs whenever xt                                   e2   t
                                                                                                          ; or when At is su¢ ciently
small. This occurs because Ut and Pt are (weakly) increasing in At and Ut and Pt converge to
0 as At ! 1; as there is no bene...t to any (positive measure of) users joining the platform.
Consequently, since Pt and Ut are (weakly) increasing in At ; it follows there is a connected
set At = fAt : At < Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t )g ; where Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) = inf At ff (yt ; Pt ; xt ) = 0g ;
such that    t   = 1 when At < At :
    In contrast, when At is su¢ ciently large, it must be the case that limAt !1 f (yt ; Pt ; xt ) < 0
since the highest-order terms in Pt and Ut are quadratic through x2    t : Consequently, there is a
connected set At = At : At > Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) ; where Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) = supAt ff (yt ; Pt ; xt ) = 0g ;
such that    t   = 0 when At > At :
    Consequently, it follows that there is a strategic attack when At 2 At and no attack when
At 2 At : What remains is to determine if At [ At = R or if there are more strategic attack
regions for some At > At : Notice now that f (yt ; Pt ; xt ) is a quadratic function of xt and, by
Descartes'Rule of Signs, has at most one positive root, which we know must exist by the
above arguments. Consequently, f (yt ; Pt ; xt ) has one zero when, substituting for xt ;
                      s
                                  2
                  1         1                (yt 1 + )        (yt )
   E [Ut j It ] = 2 +        2
                                    +4                 2
                                                                    Pt ( (yt )    (yt     )) Pt :
 2                e t      e t                        e t
                                                                                             (21)


                                                           54
Therefore, it must be the case that Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) = Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) ; and therefore the
strategic attack region can be characterized as
                                                            a
                                             1;    t   <        (At ; yt ; Qt ; t )
                                     t   =                  a                       ;
                                             0;    t            (At ; yt ; Qt ; t )

or alternatively
                                             1; At < Aa (; yt ; Qt ; t ; t )
                                 t   =                                       :
                                             0; At Aa (yt ; Qt ; t ; t )
In addition, we recognize from (21) that, since a higher                        t    lowers the critical   2
                                                                                                               Ut ; all else
                         a
equal, it follows that A (yt ; Qt ; t ; t ) is decreasing in t :
   One may be concerned that no mining equilibrium may exist if, conditional on no attack,
miners want to attack the blockchain, while, conditional on an attack, no miner ex post wants
to attack the blockchain. This does not occur because the (convex) cost of attacks from less
miners falls faster than the bene...t from the attack from lower revenue. To see this, notice
that the only endogenous object determined by users is At ; and a strategic attack raises At ;
lowering prices and transaction fees, by reducing the bene...t of joining the platform for all
                                                  ~t : Since if an attack that would occur at
users. This is equivalent to a fall in At to some A
At would also occur at A0t < At ; by the above arguments, it follows that if a strategic attack
would occur when users and miners do not anticipate an attack, it would also occur if it is
anticipated. Consequently, such a strategic attack inconsistency issue does not arise.
   Furthermore, although there cannot be an inconsistency in the attack decision on the
platform, there can be self-ful...lling prophecies in which both the no attack and the attack
equilibria can be sustained. This arises because both the bene...t ( (yt + )          (yt )) Pt
and the cost xt      e 2 t x2
                            t of an attack are positively correlated.
   Finally, we verify that the token price and transaction fees are indeed (weakly) increasing
in At : Let us conjecture that the token price, Pt ; and transaction fees are (weakly) increasing
in At : We further de...ne Pt = 0 whenever there is market breakdown. Under this assumption,
strategic attacks occur when At is su¢ ciently small by the above arguments. It then follows
that strategic attacks preserve the monotonicity of Pt in At from Proposition 3, con...rming the
conjecture. Similarly, since a higher token price is associated with a higher user population,
and consequently higher transaction fees, this con...rms our second conjecture. Further, since
the strategic attacks occur when the mining fundamental,                        t;   is su¢ ciently small, and mining
has no direct impact on platform performance when there is no strategic attack, it follows
that the token price and user participation are (weakly) increasing in                          t:




                                                           55
C.7       Proof of Proposition 7
The ...rst order conditions of user i'
                                     s optimization problem in (14) respect to Ci (i) and Cj (i)
at an interior point are:
                                           1     c
                             Ci (i) :              U (Ci (i) ; Cj (i) ; N ) =                    i pi ;                                               (22)
                                           Ci (i)
                                                c
                             Cj (i) :               U (Ci (i) ; Cj (i) ; N ) =                  i pj ;                                                (23)
                                           Cj (i)
where     i   is the Lagrange multiplier for the budget constraint. Rewriting (23) as

                                    cU   (Ci (i) ; Cj (i) ; N ) =            i pj C j   (i) :
                                                                                           p C ( i)
Dividing equations (22) by this expression leads to 1 c = pji Ci   j
                                                                     ( i)
                                                                          , which in a symmetric
                                                           c
equilibrium implies pj Cj (i) = 1 pi Ci (i) : By substituting this equation back to the user'
                                 c
                                                                                               s
                                           c
budget constraint in (14), we obtain:
                                                                       Ai
                                               Ci (i) = (1         c) e :


                                s good requires that Ci (i) + Ci (j ) = eAi , which implies
The market-clearing for the user'
that Ci (j ) = c eAi .
   The ...rst order condition in equation (22) also gives the price of the good produced by
user i: Since the user'
                      s budget constraint in (14) is entirely in nominal terms, the price system
is only identi...ed up to    i,   the Lagrange multiplier. We therefore normalize                                            i   to 1: It follows
that:
                                    1     c                                             c (Aj    Ai )
                             pi =           U (Ci (i) ; Cj (i) ; N ) = e                                 :                                            (24)
                                    Ci (i)
                                                                                                   Ai                                            Aj
Furthermore, given equation (1), it follows since Ci (i) = (1                              c) e              and Cj (i) =                   ce        that:

                             U (Ci (i) ; Cj (i) ; N ) = e(1         c ) Ai   e   c Aj   = pi e A i ;

from substituting with the user'
                               s budget constraint at t = 2:
   It then follows that, conditional on matching with another user on the platform, the
expected utility of user i conditional on his endowment Ai and a successful match is:
                                                                                                                       1=2           A A
                                                                                      1 2   1                  c "               +         1=2
                                                              (1   c )Ai +       c A+ 2 c "                                            "
        E [ U (Ci (i) ; Cj (i) ; N )j Ai , matching] = e                                                                                          ;
                                                                                                                        A A
                                                                                                                             1=2
                                                                                                                         "


                                                                                                                   A A
and, since the probability of meeting another holder of the token is                                                   1=2       ; the expected
                                                                                                                   "
utility of user i is:
                                                                       1 2   1                                         A          A
          E [ U (Ci (i) ; Cj (i) ; N )j Ai ; A] = e(1     c )Ai + c A+ 2 c "
                                                                                                 c "
                                                                                                             1=2
                                                                                                                   +             1=2
                                                                                                                                             :
                                                                                                                             "

                                                         56
Finally, the ex ante expected utility bene...t of a user before it learns its endowment Ai is

     U0 = E [E [Ui jAi ; A] jA]
                                     1 2   1                       A        A
          = E e(1       c )Ai + c A+ 2 c "
                                                   c "
                                                         1=2
                                                               +           1=2
                                                                                     jA
                                                                       "
                  1        2              1                            A         A                        A        A
          = eA+ 2 ((1             )
                              2
                         c) + c                              1=2                                1=2
                                      "
                                              (1   c)    "         +           1=2        c "         +           1=2
                                                                                                                        :
                                                                           "                                  "




                                                         57
