                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE GREEN BOOKS AND THE GEOGRAPHY OF SEGREGATION IN PUBLIC
                           ACCOMMODATIONS

                                       Lisa D. Cook
                                      Maggie E.C. Jones
                                        David Rosé
                                      Trevon D. Logan

                                     Working Paper 26819
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26819


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We would like to thank Rob Clark, Matt Gregg, Taylor Jaworski, Ian Keay, and Anji Redish for
valuable comments. We also thank seminar participants at the University of Missouri,
Northwestern University, Queen's University, the University of Victoria, York University, and
conference participants at the 2019 NBER Summer Institute (DAE), 2019 CEA meetings, 2019
SSHA meetings, and 2019 SEA meetings for useful feedback. This work would not have been
possible without the help of our dedicated team of research assistants: Ashley Brewster, Maddy
Conkle, Jack Csokmay, Vi Dinh, Mark Drodz, Matthew Edwards, Alisa Feng, Fahim Hossain,
Daniel Lake, Ryan Scott, Daniel Missell, Abby Nenna, Yamini Panagari, Ethan Pointer, Jessica
Shakesprere, Morgan Thompson, Julia Uhler, and Lingxuan Yang. We are grateful for the help of
Peggy Ann Brown and Kevin Morrow at the Library of Congress. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lisa D. Cook, Maggie E.C. Jones, David Rosé, and Trevon D. Logan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Green Books and the Geography of Segregation in Public Accommodations
Lisa D. Cook, Maggie E.C. Jones, David Rosé, and Trevon D. Logan
NBER Working Paper No. 26819
March 2020
JEL No. J15,L83,N32,N82,N92

                                        ABSTRACT

Jim Crow segregated African Americans and whites by law and practice. The causes and
implications of the associated de jure and de facto residential segregation have received
substantial attention from scholars, but there has been little empirical research on racial
discrimination in public accommodations during this time period. We digitize the Negro Motorist
Green Books, important historical travel guides aimed at helping African Americans navigate
segregation in the pre-Civil Rights Act United States. We create a novel panel dataset that
contains precise geocoded locations of over 4,000 unique businesses that provided non-
discriminatory service to African American patrons between 1938 and 1966. Our analysis reveals
several new facts about discrimination in public accommodations that contribute to the broader
literature on racial segregation. First, the largest number of Green Book establishments were
found in the Northeast, while the lowest number were found in the West. The Midwest had the
highest number of Green Book establishments per black resident and the South had the lowest.
Second, we combine our Green Book estimates with newly digitized county-level estimates of
hotels to generate the share of non-discriminatory formal accommodations. Again, the Northeast
had the highest share of non-discriminatory accommodations, with the South following closely
behind. Third, for Green Book establishments located in cities for which the Home Owner's Loan
Corporation (HOLC) drew residential security maps, the vast majority (nearly 70 percent) are
located in the lowest-grade, redlined neighborhoods. Finally, Green Book presence tends to
correlate positively with measures of material well-being and economic activity.

Lisa D. Cook                                   David Rosé
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Michigan State University                      Lazaridis School of Business and Economics
486 W. Circle Drive                            Wilfrid Laurier University
East Lansing, MI 48824                         Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3C7
and NBER                                       Canada
lisacook@msu.edu                               darose@wlu.ca

Maggie E.C. Jones                              Trevon D. Logan
Department of Economics                        The Ohio State University
Business and Economics Building                410 Arps Hall
University of Victoria                         1945 N. High Street
Victoria, British Columbia V8P 5C2             Columbus, OH 43210
Canada                                         and NBER
maggie.ec.jones@gmail.com                      logan.155@osu.edu
         "Do you remember any good stopping places
         in Arizona or western Texas?
         Anything in Phoenix or El Paso?
         And what is the best route from here to the coast?
         I have never driven it, you know."
                                                        -- Arna Bontemps, quoted by Wilkerson (2010)

    Jim Crow segregated African Americans and whites by law and practice. The causes and
implications of the associated de jure and de facto residential segregation have received sub-
stantial attention from scholars. The consensus is that residential segregation exacerbated
racial disparities in income, employment, education, political influence, and homeowner-
ship (Cutler and Glaeser, 1997; Card and Rothstein, 2007; Ananat and Washington, 2009;
Ananat, 2011; Aaronson, Hartley, and Mazumder, 2018). Relatively less attention has been
paid to understanding segregation's role in access to public accommodations and business
ownership.1 This is not due to a lack of interest or importance­after all, the entire Jim
Crow era is characterized by the denial of services to African American consumers­rather,
the absence of reliable data on the location and quantity of non-discriminatory businesses
has hampered researchers' ability to investigate this topic.
    This paper makes use of an important historical tool created to assist African Americans
in navigating segregation. From 1936 to 1960, Harlem postal worker Victor Green published
travel guides for African American motorists.2 Colloquially known as the Green Books,
these directories listed hotels, businesses, restaurants, and other services that were friendly
towards African American clientele during a time when travel could be uncomfortable, at
best, and dangerous, at worst. We use the Green Books to uncover regional, county-, and
city-level patterns of discrimination in access to public accommodations. By digitizing and
geocoding the exact location of all establishments listed in the Green Books between 1938
   1
     An important exception is Gil and Marion (2019) who exploit a ban against segregation in Washington,
D.C. in 1953 to test whether segregation in cinemas was due to taste-based discrimination among firms
(cinema owners) or consumers, or both parties. Whereas, they focus on a narrow industry (cinemas located
in 26 cities), we present evidence on the geographic and temporal extent of access to public accommodations
across industries for counties throughout the continental United States. Another exception is Roback
(1986)'s study of segregated streetcars. Roback's central thesis differs from our paper, as she questions
whether the development of the Jim Crow system was motivated by political factors or changed attitudes
towards blacks. In contrast to studying how segregation affected the demand for services among African
Americans, Cook (2012b) examines the strategies black inventors developed to cope with consumer-side
discrimination, with a particular emphasis on the strategies implemented by Garret A. Morgan, inventor of
both the gas mask and traffic light.
   2
     Taylor (2020) documents that Victor Green worked on the Green Books up until the time of his death
in 1960. His wife, Alma, ran the publication for the following two years. The final two issues, the 1963-64
and 1966-67 editions, were published by Langley Waller, a former writer for the New York Amsterdam
News­Harlem's newspaper.


                                                    2
and 1964, we provide a unique lens into the geography of racial discrimination in public
accommodations during the last years of legal Jim Crow in the United States.
    Our analysis reveals several new facts related to the history of accessibility of public
accommodations to African Americans. First, access to non-discriminatory establishments
was not uniform across the United States. The largest number of Green Book establish-
ments were found in the Northeast, while the West had the fewest number of Green Book
establishments. The Midwest had the largest number of establishments per black resident,
while the South had the least.
    Second, since areas with a large number of Green Book establishments may be areas
that have more establishments in general, we also digitize the retail section of the 1935 and
1948 Census of Business to obtain county-level values of the total number of hotels and
motels. Combining formal accommodation counts from the Green Books with the Census of
Business counts allows us to compute the share of non-discriminatory hotels and motels by
county. Using this measure, we find again, that the Northeast had the highest share of non-
discriminatory accommodations, with the South lagging slightly behind. The finding that
the South was relatively close to the Northeast in terms of the share of non-discriminatory
accommodations is not dissimilar to patterns of residential segregation found during the
early twentieth century in national measures of segregation (Logan and Parman, 2017).
    Next, we investigate how the location of Green Book establishments within cities relates
to the practice of redlining, wherein the Home Owner's Loan Corporation (HOLC) drew
residential security maps of 239 American cities in the 1930s to caution lenders against
lending to patrons in high-risk neighborhoods (Aaronson et al., 2018). Nearly 50 percent
of the Green Book establishments are located in cities for which digitized HOLC security
maps are available, the vast majority of which (69 percent) were located in the lowest-grade,
redlined neighborhoods. The next largest group of Green Book establishments were located
in no-grade (likely business district) areas. While we hesitate to draw strong conclusions
about establishments in D-grade versus no-grade neighborhoods, we suggest that this may
reflect racial differences in business ownership.
    Finally, we estimate a series of elasticities of the number of Green Book establishments
with respect to a set of covariates to understand how Green Book presence relates to eco-
nomic activity, material well-being, and existing measures of segregation and discrimination.
We find that the presence of Green Book establishments correlates positively with the preva-
lence of electricity, radios, refrigerators, manufacturing activity, and war contracts; however,
conditioning on the counts from the Census of Business reveals that these elasticities are
primarily explained by the fact that places with more economic activity also have more
accommodations.

                                               3
    We also find that Green Book prevalence is positively correlated with the number of
Confederate symbols in a county, which would suggest that more Green Book establishments
may proxy for racial animus; however, they are not associated with another measure of racial
animosity­black lynchings­once we account for the prevalence of all accommodations from
the Census of Business. This result is at odds with the existing literature that has found
areas with more historical lynchings to have more Confederate streets (Williams, 2019).
    At the state-level, we use the legislative changes made to discrimination and anti-
discrimination laws across the United States by 1950 to understand how Green Book pres-
ence is related to legal segregation in the U.S. We digitize nearly 2000 instances, originally
compiled by Murray (1950), that describe either the strengthening or weakening of discrim-
inatory legislation within a state. Perhaps unsurprisingly, we find that discriminatory laws
are positively correlated with the presence of informal accommodation listings in the Green
Books, while anti-discrimination laws correlate positively with all industry types.
    The remainder of the paper is outlined as follows. Section 2 provides a background of the
Green Books and describes our digitization process, including a discussion of the procedure
by which we generated a panel of establishments over time, as well as the method we used
to geocode establishment locations. Section 3 presents our findings on regional and city
trends. We discuss selection into the Green Books in Section 4 and the correlates of Green
Book establishments in Section 5. Section 6 provides a brief summary of our findings and
concludes.

2 Assembling the Green Book Data
2.1 A Brief History of the Green Books
The Negro Motorist Green Books (henceforth, Green Books) were a series of travel guides
published during the Jim Crow era, that were created by Victor Hugo Green, an African
American postal employee from Harlem, New York City. Green's objective was to provide
information on businesses that African American motorists could frequent without jeopar-
dizing their safety. Although the Jim Crow laws that segregated the Southern US did not
extend to the North and West, many communities in these areas practiced segregation de
facto.3 The Green Books provided a directory of safe places that African American tourists
could rely upon while traveling.
    The first Green Book was published in 1936 as a ten-page pamphlet containing New York
   3
   By 1960, over 10,000 cities across the North, Midwest, and West had become established "sundown
towns" - localities where African Americans were threatened with violence after nightfall (Loewen, 2009).




                                                   4
City establishments that served African Americans.4 The idea behind the Green Books was
borne from Green's own experience with racial discrimination while traveling with his wife,
Alma, in 1936 (Brown, 2017). During this time period, African American motorists were
often advised to drive below the speed limit and even under the cover of night to avoid
confrontations with police (Sugrue, 2010). At a time when lynchings were still occurring
in the southern US and "sundown towns" barred African Americans from entering after
dark, the threat of racial discrimination on the road was not only uncomfortable for African
American travelers, but could also result in potentially life-threatening encounters.5
    Green's original publication listing non-discriminatory establishments in New York City
in 1936 was so successful that coverage was expanded across the Northeast in the following
year and nationally the year after. While the original intention of the Green Book was to
help African American motorists undertake their journeys safely, by providing listings of
gas stations, hotels, motels, and tourist homes, Green also recognized the importance of the
Green Books for African Americans seeking other types of services within cities, including
restaurants, bars, barber shops and beauty parlors, pharmacies, and more.

        The idea of "The Green Book" is to give the Motorist and tourist a Guide not only
        of the Hotels and Tourist Homes in all of the large cities, but other classifications
        that will be found useful wherever he may be. ­1947 Edition of the Green Book,
        pg. 1.

    Figure 1 provides an example of the entries in the 1956 Green Book. Establishments
were organized by cities within states and, in almost all instances, included exact street
addresses. Information on businesses that were friendly towards African Americans spread
largely through word-of-mouth. In several instances, Green sourced information from the
network of black U.S. postal workers to obtain recommendations from letter carriers across
the U.S. (Khan, 2015; Taylor, 2020). Businesses could also pay to have an advertisement
included in the books. Figure 1(c) includes an example of the types of advertisements that
appeared in the publications.
    Although many shops and services were included in the Green Books, we document that
the vast majority of listings were those providing accommodation, as well as food and bev-
erage establishments (see Figure 2). Publication of the Green Books halted from 1942-1946,
when virtually all domestic resources were diverted to sponsoring America's engagement in
World War II (Landry, 1988). The books continued to be published until 1966; just one
edition was published after the Civil Rights Act outlawed the racial segregation that had
  4
      To our knowledge there are no known copies of this original Green Book.
  5
      See (Loewen, 2009) for a rich discussion of "sundown towns".


                                                     5
once necessitated the Green Books (McGee, 2010). Unfortunately, there is relatively little
narrative history of the Green Books at present. Sorin (2009) and Taylor (2020) provide
the most comprehensive histories of the Green Books.

2.2 Digitization and Cleaning
This paper introduces a county-level panel dataset on the number of establishments that
were friendly towards African Americans­those listed in the Green Books­broken down
by type of business. Using a combination of hand collection and probabilistic matching
techniques we digitize all the entries, including advertisements, in the 21 Green Books that
are published in the New York Public Library's (NYPL) Digital Collections.6 In particular,
we hand-recorded all names, descriptions, and locations, including exact street addresses in
most cases, in each edition of the Green Books. These entries were subsequently checked
and audited for accuracy. The inconsistent formatting of entries across and within Green
Books, largely due to the irregular size and placement of advertisements, and variation in
image quality proved to be ill suited for OCR.
    After collecting and vetting the data, a combination of probabilistic matching and human
verification was used to clean the dataset, which involved matching establishments across
years. Idiosyncrasies of the published volumes make it challenging to rely solely on machine
learning or probabilistic matching techniques (e.g. Levenshtein or Jaro-Winkler distance)
to match observations over time. Table 1 highlights two examples where human judgment
is useful.
    Example 1 is straightforward: the entry for Fresno Motel had the same name and address
between 1957 and 1962, but in the following year its name was slightly different, and the
address became more detailed (an intersection instead of simply a street name). For the
purposes of geocoding businesses and quantifying openings and closures, identifying these
as a match and using the most accurate address are critical, we find that human processing
of the data is well poised to exploit contextual information and make this determination.
    Example 2 makes the challenges of processing the Green Books data even more apparent.
From 1947-52 two related business; "Jim Summers" (a restaurant) and "Summers" (a liquor
store) are listed at addresses on Main Street. In 1953, these two businesses disappear,
and a similarly named establishment, "Summer's Hotel & Court" is listed with the address
721 Adams Street. The following year, "Summer Hotel," which has a slightly different
street number takes its place. In 1955 the street number changes once again. And over
the following two years, either the name or the street address changes. The most likely
   6
     The complete collection can be found here: https://digitalcollections.nypl.org/collections/
the-green-book


                                               6
explanation for this pattern is that the proprietor of "Jim Summers" and "Summers" closed
these businesses in 1952 and the following year a hotel opened on Adams Street; however,
additional contextual information from city directories would be useful for determining if
this hotel was owned by the same proprietor as the aforementioned restaurant and liquor
store. These types of instances are difficult to match with machine learning or probabilistic
matching techniques owing to the changes in addresses and establishment names over the
different editions of Green Books.
    Another issue that arises is print error. There are instances in which an establishment
is listed more than once; sometimes under a "hotels" sub-heading as well as a "general"
businesses sub-heading--but the names are ever so slightly different. For example, in the
1955 edition, in Montgomery Alabama "Hotel Ben Moore" with address "Cor. Hight &
Jackson Sts." appears in bold under the hotels sub-heading. Meanwhile, "Ben Moore, Cor.
High & Jackson" also appears under the non-hotel heading. Having a person double check
the data that was entered is an effective way of filtering out these types of double entries.

2.3 Geocoding Greenbook Establishments
In addition to collecting the list of establishments in each city, we also geocoded their
locations for each year. Here we outline the procedure used to geocode each of the Green
Book establishment addresses. An initial pass was implemented by running all addresses
through the U.S. Census Geocoder.7 This produced either an exact match, a non-exact
match, a tie, or no match. Exact matches occur when one unique address is found that
matches the input address. About 50 percent of the addresses returned an exact match.
Non-exact matches occur if the geocoder was able to locate a similar, but not exact match
to the input address. Ties occur when there are more than one addresses that match the
input address. In some cases, the geocoder is not able to locate the input address. In the
case of a tie or "no match," the input addresses were searched by hand.
    A second pass was implemented by hand checking each address in the Green Books in
Google Maps. Exact matches that returned latitude and longitude coordinates that were
different from the Google Maps coordinates were assumed to be correct if there was less
than a one mile difference between the two sets of points (the addresses from the Geocoder
and Google Maps). Addresses that were above this threshold were rechecked for typos and
historical context. This included addresses that did not return an initial exact match, which
were then matched by hand through Google Maps. The remaining missing addresses were
imputed using a majority rule. For example, if there was no number associated with a given
   7
     The Census Geocoder can be found here: https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/geocoder.
html


                                              7
address, yet the city in which the establishment was located had several establishments on
the same street, then the unnumbered address was geocoded in close proximity to the other
addresses on that street.
    A final high-level error-check was completed by running the coordinates through a fea-
ture manipulation engine to verify that they lay within the state boundaries of the state
corresponding to the coordinates' entry in the Green Books. About 11 percent of addresses
were not able to matched at all, in these instances the centroid of the city was assigned as
the geocoded location of the establishment.
    Overall, our procedure has distinct advantages over automated approaches. First, as
we mention in the previous section, there are idiosyncratic errors in the Green Books that
miscode names and locations of businesses in one year. We are able to detect each of
these errors and correct the corresponding data to ensure that existing and new firms are
appropriately recorded. Second, since our procedure involved checks of addresses against
two sources for geocoding, we have a substantially higher match rate than studies such as
Akbar et al. (2019), who link addresses over subsequent census enumerations. Third, our
method works to ensure that the overall match rate is not driven by urban locations alone, as
a failure to accurately account for rural establishments could result in biased inference from
the data. A number of Green Book locations are in rural areas, and accurately geocoding
them is important for identifying the range of coverage available in the Green Books.

2.4 Green Book Establishments Over Time
Figure 3 plots the total number of Green Book establishments listed in each year.8 One
striking feature is the sharp drop in the number of Green Book establishments after 1955.
This decline was not caused by a reduction in the geographic coverage of the Green Books
or an indiscriminate decrease in listings. Figure 4 displays the number of establishments
by type: service stations, beauty and barber shops, eating and dining places, formal ac-
commodations, informal accommodations, and other establishments. With the exception
of accommodations, all the categories experienced steep declines in the number of listings
after 1955. Meanwhile, formal accommodations actually increased throughout the period of
publication and informal accommodations declined fairly gradually throughout the post-war
period.
    One explanation for this is that the publishers of the Green Books simply sought to
narrow the focus of the guides towards formal lodging. Figure 5 presents evidence in line
with this explanation. Each subplot displays a different industry, where the left vertical
   8
     We exclude 1937 because it only contained advertisements. In subsequent years, businesses were listed
separately based on whether or not they paid for advertisements.


                                                    8
axis indicates the total number of establishments and the right vertical axis is the share
of listings that are advertisements. From these figures, it would appear that there was a
deliberate attempt to drive up advertising revenue from almost all industries, except formal
accommodations.
    An alternative explanation is that the Civil Rights movement could have challenged the
encouragement of African Americans to patronize specific locales. This issue merits further
investigation. But in the absence of a convincing explanation for the drop, we restrict our
attention to the pre-1955 period in the analysis that follows. Throughout the remainder of
the paper we also employ a number of additional data sources which are discussed as they
appear in the paper.

3 The Expansion of Green Book Establishments Across Regions,
       Counties, and Cities
Initially, the Green Book establishments were located in the Southern and Northeastern US,
with a small number of businesses open to serving African Americans in the easternmost
regions of the Midwest. Figure 6(a) shows the location of all Green Book establishments
in 1938, while Figure 6(b) provides a detailed look at establishments in Georgia. By 1955,
Green Book establishments were present in every state in the continental US, aside from
Montana and North Dakota.9 The following subsections investigate the evolution of the
number of Green Book establishments in more detail, including regional patterns in Green
Book expansion and their relationship to residential housing patterns.

3.1 Regional Differences
Figure 7(a) displays the evolution of the number of Green Book establishments in the United
States listed in each year between 1939 and 1955. We start our analysis in 1939 since this is
the first year with nationwide coverage of the Green Books and we end it in 1955 due to the
aforementioned drop in listings, which is not yet well understood. In almost every year, there
were over twice as many Green Book establishments in the Northeast compared to the next
highest region. This difference is explained by the large quantity of listings in New York City
and Newark, where the Green Books originated. Figure 10 displays the geographic dispersion
of Green Book establishments per 1000 black residents in 1950. While the Northeast and
Midwest certainly appear to have a greater density of Green Book establishments in relation
to the African American population, there are a substantial number of counties across the
entire US that do not have any Green Book establishments.
  9
      These states do show up in later editions of the Green Book.



                                                     9
    Given that the Green Book listings are establishments, it is important to consider how
they relate to measures of population density, as this better captures consumer access to
non-discriminatory services. Additionally, the absence of Green Book establishments likely
reveals important information about the geography of discrimination. To describe these
two together, we create a measure for the existence of a Green Book. If a county does
not appear in the Green Books, we infer a count of 0 establishments for that county-year.
Next, we construct a balanced-panel of counties for the duration of the Green Book publi-
cations. To compute the number of Green Book establishments per capita, we divide the
number of establishments by the black population (in 1000s), as measured by the county
population estimates for census years in the ICSPR Historical, Demographic, Economic,
and Social Data (Haines and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research,
2010). From 1938-1941 we use population in 1940 and from 1947-1955 we use population
in 1950.10 Figure 7(b) indicates that, despite the large difference in the number of Green
Book establishments between the North and the rest of the country, on a (black) per capita
basis; the Midwest and, to a lesser extent, the West, had much higher rates of Green Books
penetration.
    Apart from the South, which had a similar level of Green Book establishments to the
Midwest during this period, all regions experienced an increase in establishments per capita.
This is consistent with an interpretation that firms were reluctant to either serve black
customers or, at the very least, advertise themselves as welcoming black customers in areas
that had high levels of racial animus.

3.2 Formal Accommodations in the Green Books and the Total Number of
         Accommodations
As noted earlier, Figure 4 raises a concern that the process by which firms were being listed
in the Green Books may have changed over time. Indeed, the steep drop in listings in 1955
across multiple establishment types indicates that this was the case towards the later part
of the sample, but it could be a concern earlier on as well. For this reason, we also consider
formal accommodations--hotels and motels--separately. These types of businesses did not
experience the steep decline in 1955 and were essentially the raison d'^
                                                                       etre of the Green Books
since the time of their inception. Figure 9 displays the number of formal accommodations
across the US Northeast, West, Midwest, and South. While the ranking of regions mirrors
that of total establishments, the gap between the Midwest and the rest of the country is
significantly smaller. Meanwhile, in contrast to the total establishment count, the number
 10
      Recall that publication of the Green Books halted during WWII.



                                                   10
of formal accommodation listings has an upward trend across all four regions.
    If we consider the number of establishments per 1,000 black residents to be a measure of
access to public accommodations, we can learn about the relative access across US regions;
this measure is presented in Figure 9(b). The main finding is that hotels and motels are more
equally distributed (in per capita terms) across the US than the total number of listings (see
Figure 7(a)). For the most part, the ranking across regions is similar, with the exception of
the West and Midwest which switched places, and are (1) and (2), respectively.
    Since areas with a large number of Green Book listings may also be areas with a large
number of establishments overall (listed and unlisted), we are also interested in under-
standing what share of establishments are non-discriminatory. An additional advantage
of focusing on formal accommodations is that we can obtain an estimate of this value by
digitizing the county-level counts of hotels and motels from the service trade section of the
1935 and 1948 Census of Business.11 Figure 8 provides an example of this data source for
several counties from the state of Alabama. These counts are available for counties that
meet certain population thresholds, so the counties for which we have counts of total ac-
commodations form a subset of the counties for which we have Green Book information.
We match our counts of formal accommodations in the Green Books with the counts of all
accommodations from the Census of Business to construct the share of non-discriminatory
accommodations by county. We use the 1935 Census of Business counts for pre-1941 Green
Book years and the 1948 Census of Business counts for post-1947 Green Book years.
    Figure 9(c) displays the regional trends in the share of non-discriminatory accommo-
dations. Here we can see that the Northeast has the largest share of non-discriminatory
accommodations, while the West had the lowest. Out of all years and regions, the share of
non-discriminatory accommodations did not exceed 3 percent, according to our measure.

3.3 Green Book Business Expansion and Redlined Neighborhoods
Our final objective is to consider how the location and expansion of Green Book establish-
ments is related to related to local characteristics. In the 1930s, the Home Owners Loan
Corporation (HOLC) produced city maps that classified the relative riskiness of lending
across neighborhoods. Maps were drawn for over 200 cities, dividing neighborhoods into
ratings of A (least risky) to D (riskiest).12 These maps were used to inform mortgage
lenders about the risk-profile of different neighborhoods. As a result, subsequent access to
  11
     In 1935 information on hotels is published in a separate volume, but in 1948 it is incorporated in the
services trade volume.
  12
     Some neighborhoods were not given any rating. These were predominantly business districts.




                                                    11
credit was affected by neighborhood clasification.13 We overlay HOLC maps with the exact
location of Green Book establishments to determine the grade of the neighborhood in which
each establishment is located.14 Fifty percent of Green Book establishments are found in
cities for which redlining maps are available.
    Figure 11 displays the location of Green Book establishments in 1956 with the HOLC
map for Newark and the New York City Burroughs. Visually, it appears that the major-
ity of Green Book establishments are located in redlined neighborhoods. Indeed, out of
the establishments that appear in cities for which the georeferenced HOLC security maps
are available, an overwhelming majority of them (69 percent) appear in "D-grade" neigh-
borhoods. Approximately 23 percent occur in neighborhoods that did not receive a rating
from the HOLC, likely business districts, and only 0.15 percent are located in "A-grade"
neighborhoods.15
    We examine trends in the number of Green Book establishments by HOLC grade in Fig-
ure 12, where it is clear that Green Book establishments expanded most quickly in"D-grade"
neighborhoods. Neighborhoods that did not receive a grade, but were located within cities
for which we have HOLC security maps also experienced a reasonably large increase in the
number of establishments, though by 1955 there were still half as many establishments in
"No-grade" neighborhoods in comparison to "D-grade" neighborhoods. "A-grade" neigh-
borhoods experienced almost no growth in Green Book establishments. In fact, in 1955­the
year with the highest number of Green Book establishments in "A-grade" neighborhoods­
there were only 6 Green Book establishments in these highest rated neighborhoods out of
all cities in the U.S. for which the HOLC security maps are available.
    Figure 13 shows how the number of Green Book establishments in each HOLC-grade
neighborhood evolved across industry-type. For each industry, the majority of establish-
ments are found in redlined neighborhoods. That being said, the number of Green Book
establishments grew in nearly all HOLC-grade neighborhoods and across all industries. Two
notable exceptions, include barber shops and gasoline stations, which did not appear in A-
grade neighborhoods at any point between 1938 and 1955.
    We also present these trends across regions within the US in Figure 14. These results
  13
     Aaronson et al. (2018) provide a thorough discussion of the historical debate surrounding the exact
use of HOLC maps by lenders. They find evidence that HOLC classification had causal impacts on home-
ownership rates, house values, and rents that continue to persist.
  14
     The HOLC maps that we use come from the Digital Scholarship Lab at the University of Richmond
which digitized and georeferenced HOLC maps for dozens of cities. These are available here: https:
//dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/
  15
     Note that we restrict our analysis to establishments that matched exactly in the geocoding procedure,
so we are not including establishments that are assigned a latitude and longitude consisting of the centroid
of the city, for instance.



                                                    12
largely mirror those in the country-wide plot in Figure 12, with the exception of the US
South, which did not have any Green Book establishments in "A-grade" neighborhoods.
    Identifying the location of Green Book establishments within cities likely has important
implications for understanding the degree to which variation in Green Book establishments
reflects differences in black business ownership or differences in discriminatory practices
on the part of white owners. Given that the racial composition of a neighborhood was an
explicit determinant of the HOLC grade assigned to a neighborhood (Aaronson et al., 2018),
Green Book establishments in "D-grade" neighborhoods were more likely to be black-owned
compared to those in "No-Grade" (business) districts. Although scholars have discussed
the propensity of some white businesses to locate in predominantly black neighborhoods in
order to subvert the zoning laws that prevented them from operating in white neighborhoods,
these businesses were often in industries that produced negative externalities, such as noise,
pollution, or unsightliness­ not consumer facing businesses (Rothstein, 2017). It would have
been more unusual to find white-owned formal accommodations in predominantly black
neighborhoods.16
    In the next section, we combine aspects of the previous sections to understand the
selection of businesses into the Green Books.

4 Selection into the Green Books
One factor that is crucial to understanding the overall spread in Green Book establishments
is to understand the process by which establishments entered into the Green Books listings.
At the heart of this goal lie two related questions. First, we are interested in understanding
whether we can interpret an increase in Green Book listings as an increase in access to
public accommodations for black customers, or alternatively whether an increase in listings
represents an increase in the propensity to list, perhaps due to an information diffusion
process wherein non-discriminatory business owners were increasingly likely to learn about
the Green Books over time. Second, we want to know whether the rise in Green Book
establishments represent a conscious decision to not to discriminate on the part of white
business owners or an increase in black-business ownership.
    We begin by focusing on the information diffusion process across counties. We then
discuss some of the preliminary work we have done to combine the HOLC grades with newly
collected information on whether or not establishments that appear as new listings in the
Green Books actually existed in previous years' phone books. Combined with information
on red-lining, we expect the latter exercise to inform us on the propensity for black-owned
  16
   We are currently investigating this distinction by comparing the Green Book establishments to the
Negro Business Directory of the State of Wisconsin (1950-1951).


                                                13
and white-owned businesses to appear in the Green Books over time.

4.1 Establishment Growth
A key detail of the Green Book listing process is that listings were crowd-sourced and
free for firms. While firms could pay for an additional advertisement, they did not have
to pay for inclusion in the Green Books. Victor Green leveraged his employment in the
U.S. Postal Service to get recommendations from letter carriers with routes all across the
U.S. (Khan, 2015; Taylor, 2020). In addition, the general public, as well as firms, could
provide recommendations directly. These features give us some confidence that once there
was awareness about the Green Books in a particular county, increases in listings do indeed
measure actual increases in access to public accommodations.
    An additional consideration is about the interpretation of aggregate trends: is the in-
crease in Green Book listings due to expanded geographic coverage or an actual increase
in non-segregated firms in local markets? The first exercise we use to address this issue
is to plot the trend in the share of counties with at least one Green Book establishment
in Figure 15. In general the trend is not consistent with a model of social learning, which
typically follows an S-shaped pattern. It could still be the case that the 1940-1955 time
period was one of gradual diffusion and even in the absence of the Civil Rights Act, a more
rapid expansion of non-discriminatory establishments would have followed; however, this is
not something we are able to empirically evaluate.
    Next, we decompose the establishment count into the number of establishments that
appear in counties that already had at least one Green Book listing in the previous year
and the number that appear in new counties. Figure 16(a) displays this decomposition
over time. The figure suggests that the majority of growth in Green Book establishments
appeared in counties that already had at least one listing. Thus, if social learning explains
some of the rise in Green Book listings, it is likely among businesses that are located within
the same counties as existing businesses, and not due to a diffusion process across counties
more broadly.
    One potential issue with the exercise in Figure 16(a) is that the outcome may be mechan-
ical. As the number of counties with listings increases, we would expect an ever increasing
number of new listings to appear in the growing pool of covered counties. To circumvent
this issue, we conduct a similar decomposition, this time separating counties into two bins:
those that were included in the Green Books in 1939, and those that were not. The results
are shown in Figure 16(b). We find that the majority of the increase in Green Book listings
occurred in counties that were already listed by 1939­which suggests that the increase in
aggregate Green Book listings is an actual expansion in access to public accommodations


                                             14
and not simply an expansion of the geographic coverage of the Green Books.

4.2 Do Green Books Listings Represent New Entry, Switching, or Increased
      Awareness?
A fundamental question is how to interpret the growth of business listings in the Green
Books. Does this increase represent a rise in black-friendly business (new entry), and if so,
is this explained by black-owned businesses; a conscious decision not to discriminate on the
part of white businesses owners (switching); or simply firms that were not discriminating
becoming aware of the Green Books and getting listed (awareness)? Essentially, we want
to understand at a more granular level whether local businesses are learning about the
Green Books or if they are indeed becoming non-discriminatory. For instance, a firm in
one period may be non-discriminatory but is not aware that the Green Books exist as a
mechanism for advertising their business and it decides to advertise once aware. To partially
mitigate this concern, we can restrict our analysis to firms that do not advertise (since the
Green Books included regular listings and paid advertisements, we use only firms listed in
the directory which was not a function of advertising). However, this does not rule out
the possibility that the Green Book editors are also learning about which firms are non-
discriminatory. An innovation we propose to deal with this question is to hire researchers
to look up businesses in historical phone books and city directories located at the Library
of Congress. These phone books are not available online and the majority are available
on microfilm, only. This process will allow us to determine whether a business that is
new to the Green Books in one year existed in the previous year, and since we have the
geocoded address of each Green Book establishments we can examine whether this occurs
disproportionately in neighborhoods rated higher or lower by the HOLC, which we consider
to have informational content about the ownership of the business as red-lined areas were
predominantly served by black businesses. By comparing the tenure of firms in the Green
Books by year and HOLC grade, we expect to gain insight into the change in propensity of
non-discriminatory establishments to be listed in the Green Books over time compared to
the change in the propensity of black businesses to develop over time.
    As a preliminary check, we hired two researchers with experience working with the
Library of Congress phone book collections to complete this procedure for a small sample
of cities and years. Our researchers examined 191 Green Book entries from Atlanta, Los
Angeles, New York City, and St. Louis in 1941 and 1940; and 407 Green Book entries from
Atlanta and New York City in 1948 and 1947. In the 1941 sample, 85 establishments (44
percent) were new to this edition of the Green Book but were not new businesses (i.e., they
appeared in the 1940 phone books). In our 1948 sample, 147 establishments (36 percent)

                                             15
were new Green Book listings but were located in the 1948 and 1947 phone books. This
is consistent with no measurable change, or even a slight decrease, in the likelihood that
an existing firm would become listed in the Green Books over time. We also find that by
red-lined location, new Green Book establishments were increasingly likely to be located
outside of redlined, "hazardous" neighborhoods (HOLC grade of D). In 1941, 14 percent
of the new establishments listed in the Green Books were in non-hazardous neighborhoods,
in 1948, 21 percent of the new Green Book establishments were located in non-hazardous
neighborhoods, suggesting that new locations were less likely to be located in predominantly
black neighborhoods over time.
    Going forward, we will examine the demographics of these neighborhoods in more detail
using information from the 1940 and 1950 Censuses of Population regarding racial compo-
sition at the census tract level. We believe our preliminary analysis using redlining maps
highlights the potential of this methodology for disentangling the growth in new listings due
to changes in discriminatory attitudes and geographic expansion of accommodations versus
the growth in new listings due to businesses learning about the value of listing in the Green
Books.

5 Correlates of Green Book Establishments
As a final objective of this paper, we seek to understand the correlates of Green Book pres-
ence. At the county level, we consider measures of economic development, such as education,
involvement in manufacturing, and WWII military contracting; as well as other measures of
segregation and discrimination that have traditionally been used in the literature, like resi-
dential segregation, lynching, and Confederate symbols. We also introduce a new state-level
dataset that consists of the number of discrimination and anti-discrimination laws passed
by states as of 1950.

5.1 County Characteristics and the Presence of Green Book Establishments
Figures 17 to 22 present elasticities of the number of Green Book establishments and the set
of aforementioned factors. All regression specifications are estimated at the county level­
e.g., number of Green Books listings by county­and both the dependent and independent
variables have been transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function so that they
can be roughly interpreted as elasticities.17 Many of the factors we examine may also be
correlated with city size, economic activity, and consequently the number of establishments
in a given county more generally, these unobservables may have the potential to bias our
  17
    We use the arcsinh transform instead of a log-log specification due to the presence of a large number of
zeros in the dependent variable, as many counties did not have any Green Book listings.


                                                    16
coefficient estimates. Fortunately, by focusing on the set of formal accommodations listed in
the Green Books, we can check whether conditioning on the total number of accommodations
affects these correlations.
    In all figures, elasticities using all Green Book establishments are represented by squares;
estimates restricted to using formal accommodations are represented by circles; estimates
restricted to using formal accommodations and restricting to the sample of counties for
which we also have Census of Business estimates are represented by triangles; and estimates
restricted to using formal accommodations and conditioning on Census of Business estimates
are represented by diamonds. Ultimately, we are interested in understanding whether con-
ditioning on the total number of accommodations from the Census of Business affects our
results; however, we impose each of our restrictions and specification changes in sequence
so that we are able to assess which of the three additional specifications are driving the
changes in coefficient estimates.
    We begin with Figure 17 by showing these elasticities for a set of characteristics that
we take from the 1940 complete count census (Ruggles et al., 2019). Unconditionally, a one
percent increase in the black population is associated with a precise 0.1 percent increase
in the number of Green Book establishments. This coefficient estimate is halved once we
restrict to formal accommodations, and then remains stable using the sample for which
we have Census of Business estimates, as well as conditioning on the number of Census of
Business accommodations. The remainder of the elasticities are estimated conditional on
the black population.
    Given that the Green Book listings were sourced through a network of postal workers,
we may expect places with a higher number of black postal workers to also have more
Green Book establishments. Indeed, we find that, conditional on the black population, a
one-percent increase in the number of black postal workers is associated with a nearly 0.5
percent increase in the number of Green Book establishments.18 This finding suggests that
any analyses that use the Green Books should be mindful of this correlation and account for
it in empirical specifications. Again, restricting to formal accommodations approximately
halves this elasticity estimate, and it remains stable thereafter.
    Another factor that may be an important correlate of the presence of Green Book es-
tablishments is the presence of black migrants within a county. Reminiscent of shift-share
instruments in the migration literature (Boustan, 2009; Derenoncourt, 2019), the share of
black migrants in 1940 may be correlated with the presence of Green Book establishments
if the presence of migrants tends to attract more migrants. As such, we also consider the
  18
    We compute the number of black postal workers by summing over the number of black mail carriers,
post masters, and express messengers and railway mail clerks.


                                                17
relationship between Green Book presence and the share of the black population who are
migrants from out of state, as well as the share of the black population who are migrants
from within state.19 Unconditionally, the presence of both types of migrants is positively
correlated with the number of Green Book establishments; however, in both cases restricting
to an analysis of formal accommodations more than halves our coefficient estimates, and in
the case of between state migration, the coefficient becomes negative once we condition on
the Census of Business hotels. That being said, the share of migrants within state remains
precisely estimated and positively correlated with the number of Green Book establishments.
    Figure 18 examines the relationship between educational attainment and the presence of
Green Book establishments. We estimate the elasticities of Green Book establishments with
respect to the share of the black and white population aged 15-65 with no formal education,
with at least 5 grades of schooling, and with at least 10 grades of schooling. Overall, it
appears that having both an education black and white population is associated with a higher
presence of Green Book establishments, while a greater share of the adult population with
no education is negatively correlated with the presence of Green Book establishments. These
estimates are mostly robust to all sample restrictions and to conditioning on the number
of formal accommodations from the Census of Business, although the latter specification is
less precisely estimated.
    In the next figure, we examine the correlation between county level household charac-
teristics and the presence of Green Book establishments. We use household characteristics
to proxy for wealth or well-being. Figure 19 shows that Green Book presence is negatively
correlated with the percent of blacks who own their own dwelling, which may not be surpris-
ing if the presence of Green Book establishments is also correlated with other segregation
or discrimination laws that prevented African Americans from participating in lending mar-
kets, for instance. That being said, this correlation is not statistically different from zero
and changes very little once we impose our sample restrictions and condition on the Census
of Business estimates.
    Other measures of material well-being, such as the percent of all households who have an
electric light, radio, or fridge in their dwelling are all positively correlated with the presence
of Green Book establishments, but are substantially reduced in magnitude, and some of
which are statistically insignificant once we condition on the number of accommodations
from the Census of Business. It is important to note here that the reduction in the magnitude
of the coefficient estimates is partly due to the focus on accommodations, and partly due to
conditioning on the Census of Business estimates.
  19
   We do not condition on the black population in these specifications because the black population is the
denominator for the share of black migrants.


                                                   18
    Turning to other proxies of economic activity in Figure 20 tell a similar narrative. Green
Book establishments appear more prominently in areas with more involvement in manufac-
turing, as measured by total manufacturing wages, establishments, wage earners, output,
and value added; however this result is also reduced in magnitude once we focus on formal
accommodations, and is further reduced when we condition on the total number of accom-
modations from the Census of Business. US federal government World War II contracts also
tend to be associated with more Green Book establishments. In Figure 21 we show the elas-
ticities of Green Book establishments with respect to war contracts for the supply of combat
equipment, other types of supplies, industrial facilities contracts, and military facilities con-
tracts. In each instance a one-percent increase in the number of contracts is associated with
a 0.04-0.05 percent increase in the number of Green Book establishments. Again, these
elasticities are reduced in magnitude to below 0.01 percent and are, at times, marginally
statistically significant after conditioning on the total number of accommodations.
    Overall, the elasticities of the number of Green Book establishments with respect to vari-
ous measures of economic activity are generally positive and statistically significant, but are
reduced in magnitude and precision when we condition on the total number of accommoda-
tions. Although this change is partially attributed to sample restrictions we have to impose
in order to estimate the conditional elasticities, the majority of the reduction in coefficient
magnitudes can be attributed to the inclusion of the total number of accommodations. This
result suggests that places that have higher levels of economic activity may be marginally
less discriminatory, but are often just areas with more businesses to begin with.
    Figure 22 examines the relationship between segregation in public accommodations and
residential segregation. We present the elasticities of Green Book establishments with re-
spect to three measures of residential segregation: the dissimilarity index, the isolation
index, and the Logan-Parman segregation index.20 All three measures are obtained from
Logan and Parman (2017). Unconditionally, we find areas with a higher Green Book pres-
ence tend to be areas that are also more segregated residentially (higher values of all three
of the segregation indices indicate higher segregation). The elasticities constructed using all
three indices remain positive and statistically significant when we restrict to formal accom-
modations and when we restrict to the Census of Business sample. With the exception of the
dissimilarity index, we also find the elasticities are positive after conditioning on the total
  20
    The dissimilarity index measures the similarity of the distribution of minority residents to that of
non-minority residents within a geographic unit, effectively comparing the percentage of black residents to
the percentage of white residents within the geographic unit. The isolation index measures the "extent
to which minority members are exposed only to one another" (Massey and Denton, 1988). The Logan-
Parman segregation index provides an alternative to these two measures, which may be especially suitable
for historical data. Within a census enumeration, this index uses the location and race of households in
adjacent units to measure segregation in the community.

                                                    19
number of hotels from the Census of Business. We conclude from this figure that areas with
greater levels of residential segregation generally have more Green Book establishments.
    In Figure 23, we examine the relationship between the presence of Green Book establish-
ments and a darker part of American history. Here, we display the elasticities for a number
of proxies for racial animus or discrimination. In line with the work of Williams (2019),
we use the number of Confederate symbols in a county.21 First, counties with more Green
Book establishments also have more Confederate symbols--statues, plaques, and roads or
public building named in honour of Confederate soldiers and politicians. Although there is
a gain in precision when formal accommodations are considered separately, the correlation
with Confederate symbols is largely unchanged across specifications.
    Next, we consider the relationship between Green Book establishments and historical
violence against blacks, captured by the cumulative number of black lynchings in a county,
up to 1936. These measures are from the database collected in Cook (2012a) and expanded
on more recently. We find, conditional on the black population, lynchings against blacks
to be be negatively correlated with the total count of Green Book establishments.22 The
point estimate for black lynchings is negative across all four specifications. That said, the
elasticity between formal Green Book accommodations and historical lynchings of blacks
is smaller in magnitude than the elasticity between all Green Book establishments and
historical lynchings of blacks. This estimate changes little when we restrict to counties
that also have Census of Business estimates, but we cannot reject that the correlation is
zero at the 10 percent significance level when we condition on the total number of formal
accommodations. Finally, we find a small positive elasticity of Green Book establishments
with respect to White Lynchings; however, this estimate is marginally significant and is a
precisely estimated 0 when we impose any of the sample restrictions.
    In light of the impact that conditioning on the total number of firms has on the estimated
elasticities, we conclude that the local level of market competition (as measured by the
number of firms) played an important role in the provision of public accommodations to
African American customers during this period, and should be taken into account in any
empirical analysis using the Green Books data.
  21
     The Confederate symbols are collected from the Southern Poverty Law Centre's collection: https:
//www.splcenter.org/20190201/whose-heritage-public-symbols-confederacy.
  22
     It turns out without conditioning on the black population, historical lynchings is positively correlated
with the presence of Green Book establishments. These results are unreported, but available upon request.




                                                     20
5.2 State-Level Discrimination Laws and the Presence of Green Book Es-
       tablishments
This section evaluates the relationship between the presence of Green Book establishments
and state-level variation in laws relating to discrimination. In 1950, African American
activist and lawyer, Pauli Murray, published a volume, titled, "States' Laws on Race and
Color." Murray's 746-page book, which Thurgood Marshall later termed the "bible" of
Brown v. Board of Education, listed all the laws passed in the United States that were
related to segregation and discrimination.23 We digitize all entries in "States' Laws on
Race and Color" to construct a state-level dataset of the number of laws passed related to
segregation or discrimination. For our purposes, we focus on anti-discrimination laws and
discriminatory laws.24 As an example of an anti-discrimination law described in Murray
(1950), in 1944 the state of Maine passed a statute prohibiting life insurance companies
from discriminating between individuals of the same class of insurance risk. Alternatively,
an example of a law upholding discrimination includes a statute from Maryland passed in
1935 that prohibited marriage between whites and African Americans.
    We present scatter plots of the relationship between the number of discriminatory laws
by 1950 and the number of Green Book establishments in 1950 in Figure 24. A linear
regression of the number of Green Book establishments on the number of discriminatory
laws produces a slope coefficient of 0.45, suggesting that an additional discriminatory law is
associated with nearly 0.5 more Green Book establishments, on average. Interestingly, we
also find a positive correlation between anti-discrimination laws and the number of Green
Book establishments in Figure 25. With a slope coefficient of 3.13, this relationship is much
stronger, suggesting an additional anti-discrimination law is associated with just over 3 more
Green Book establishments.
    The fact that both anti-discrimination and discriminatory laws are positively correlated
with the number of Green Book establishments presents a puzzle, which can partially be
addressed by a breakdown of these correlations by industry. Figures 26 and 27 display
these plots. Beginning with the industry-level plots for discriminatory laws in Figure 26 re-
veals that informal accommodations may be driving the positive correlation between Green
Book establishments and discriminatory laws in Figure 24. Intuitively, we might expect
a large number of informal accommodations to arise in areas with a greater level of de
  23
     See the description in The New Yorker 's "Many Lives of Pauli Murray": https://www.newyorker.
com/magazine/2017/04/17/the-many-lives-of-pauli-murray.
  24
     Both anti-discrimination and discriminatory laws include acts of assembly, assembly bills, constitutional
changes, executive orders, general acts, house bills, house resolutions, joint resolutions, regional compacts,
resolutions, and statutes.



                                                     21
jure segregation or discrimination. Turning to formal accommodations, eating and drink-
ing establishments, and barber and beauty shops we see almost no relationship between
discrimination laws and the number of Green Book establishments. On the other hand,
Figure 27 shows a strong, positive correlation between the number of anti-discrimination
laws and Green Book establishments for all industries.

6 Conclusion
The Green Books present an unprecedented historical account of segregation in public ac-
commodations during Jim Crow. By digitizing and geocoding the location of all establish-
ments listed in these publications, we are able to provide new insights into the geography
and correlates of this type of discrimination. While the number of non-discriminatory public
accommodations increased nationwide between 1939 and 1955, this growth was largest in
the Northeast. On a per-capita basis (based on the number of African American residents),
the midwest vastly exceeded the rest of the country over this same time period in terms of
access to non-discriminatory public accommodations. Combining our counts of Green Book
formal accommodations with newly digitized values of the number of accommodations by
county across the United States reveals that the Northeast also had the largest share of
non-discriminatory public-accommodations. Within cities, Green Book establishments were
disproportionately located in areas that were traditionally excluded from lending markets
due to the practice of redlining, wherein the Home Owner's Loan Corporation drew residen-
tial security maps which cautioned lenders from providing loans in certain neighborhoods.
    In general, the presence of Green Book establishments is positively correlated with a
wide range of factors that proxy for economic activity: educational attainment, household
characteristics like having an electric light, radio, or fridge, involvement in manufacturing,
and the number of WWII contracts. That being said, many of these correlations are reduced
substantially when we restrict our analysis to formal accommodations and condition on the
total number of accommodations from the U.S. Census of Business. Thus, the presence
Green Book establishments appears to be positively correlated with economic activity insofar
as economic activity generates businesses more broadly, and likely not entirely due to a
fundamental difference in the propensity to discriminate in these areas.
    Overall, our analysis presents several new facts related to access to non-discriminatory
public accommodations during the pre-Civil Rights Act era, which had previously been
undocumented. We also provide a series of recommendations for researchers wishing to use
the Green Book data moving forward.




                                             22
References
Aaronson, D., D. Hartley, and B. Mazumder (2018). The effects of the 1930s HOLC "redlin-
  ing" maps. Working Paper .

Akbar, P. A., S. Li, A. Shertzer, and R. P. Walsh (2019). Racial segregation in housing
 markets and the erosion of black wealth.

Ananat, E. O. (2011). The wrong side(s) of the tracks: The causal effects of racial segregation
 on urban poverty and inequality. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (2),
 34­66.

Ananat, E. O. and E. Washington (2009). Segregation and black political efficacy. Journal
 of Public Economics 93 (5-6), 807­822.

Boustan, L. (2009). Competition in the promised land: Black migration and racial wage
  convergence in the North, 1940-1970. The Journal of Economic History 69 (3), 756­783.

Brown, D. L. (2017, June 1). Life or death for black travelers: How fear led to `The Negro
  Motorist Green-Book'. The Washington Post . Accessed: Oct. 2, 2017.

Card, D. and J. Rothstein (2007). Racial segregation and the black-white test score gap.
  Journal of Public Economics 91 (11-12), 2158­2184.

Cook, L. D. (2012a). Converging to a national lynching database: Recent developments and
  the way forward. Historical Methods 45 (2), 55­63.

Cook, L. D. (2012b). Overcoming discrimination by consumers during the age of segregation:
  The example of Garrett Morgan. Business History Review 86 (2), 211­234.

Cutler, D. M. and E. L. Glaeser (1997). Are ghettos good or bad? The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics 112 (3), 827­872.

Derenoncourt, E. (2019). Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the Great Migration.
  Working Paper .

Gil, R. and J. Marion (2019). Why did firms practice segregation? Evidence from movie
  theaters during Jim Crow.

Haines, M. R. and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (2010, 5).
  Historical, demographic, economic, and social data: The United States 1790-2002.

Khan, E. M. (2015, Aug). The `Green Book' legacy, a beacon for black travelers. New York
 Times .

Landry, B. (1988). The New Black Middle Class. University of California Press.

Loewen, J. W. (2009). Sundown towns and counties: Racial exclusion in the south. Southern
  Cultures 15 (1), 22­47.


                                              23
Logan, T. D. and J. M. Parman (2017). The national rise in residential segregation. The
  Journal of Economic History 77 (1), 127­170.

Massey, D. S. and N. A. Denton (1988). The dimensions of residential segregation. Social
 Forces 67 (2), 281­315.

McGee, C. (2010, Aug. 22). The open road wasn't quite open to all. The New York Times .
 Accessed: Oct. 1, 2017.

Murray, P. (Ed.) (1950). States' Laws on Race and Color. Cincinnati, Woman's Division of
 Christian Service, Board of Missions and Church Extension, Methodist Church.

Roback, J. (1986). The political economy of segregation: The case of segregated streetcars.
  The Journal of Economic History 46 (4), 893­917.

Rothstein, R. (2017). The Color of Law. New York, NY: Liveright Publishing Corporation.

Ruggles, S., S. Flood, R. Goeken, J. Grover, E. Meyer, J. Pacas, and M. Sobek
  (2019).    IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset].  Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
  https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0 .

Sorin, G. S. (2009). "Keep Going:" African Americans on the Road in the Era of Jim Crow.
  Ph. D. thesis, University at Albany, State University of New York.

Sugrue, T. J. (2010). Driving while black: The car and race relations in modern america.
  Accessed: Oct.2, 2017.

Taylor, C. (2020). Overground Railroad: The Green Book and the Roots of Black Travel in
  America. New York, NY: Abrams Press.

Wilkerson, I. (2010). The Warmth of Other Suns. Vintage Books.

Williams, J. (2019). Confederate streets and black-white labor market differentials. Working
 Paper .




                                            24
A Tables

                          Table 1: Idiosyncratic Greenbook Entries

Example                    Year        Establishment   Address              City         Type
Fresno Motel               1957 - 1962 Fresno Motel    Hwy. 99              Fresno, CA   Lodging
                                       Fresno          Hwy. 99 and
                           1963                                             Fresno, CA   Lodging
                                       Hacienda        Clinton

                                                       719
Summer's Hotel & Resto.    1947-52     Jim Summers                          Camden, AR   Restaurant
                                                       S. Main St
                                                       715
                           "           Summers                              Camden, AR   Liquor store
                                                       1/2 S. Main Street
                                       Summer's        721 Adams
                           1953                                             Camden, AR   Lodging
                                       Hotel & Court   Street
                                                       754 1/2 Adams
                           1954        Summer Hotel                         Camden, AR   Lodging
                                                       St. S. W.
                                                       740 Adams
                           1955        Summer Hotel                         Camden, AR   Lodging
                                                       Ave. S.W.
                                       Summers Hotel   740 Adams                         Lodging &
                           1956                                             Camden, AR
                                       & Restaurant    Avenue S.W.                       Resto.
                                       Summer's        750-754 1/2
                           1957                                             Camden, AR   Lodging
                                       Hotel & Motel   Adams Ave.




                                             25
B Figures




                  (a) Front page                     (b) Example from Georgia




                              (c) Example of an advertisement

Figure 1: Sample of the Green Book publications from the year 1956 and the state of
Georgia. Reproduced from the New York Public Library Digital Collections.




                                            26
              Eating/Drinking Places




                    Formal Lodging




                   Informal Lodging




                Barber/Beauty Shop




                    Gasoline Station




                              Other



                                       0   5,000    10,000        15,000



Figure 2: Frequency of establishments in all years listed by type of establishment.




                                              27
                                            4000
                 Number of Establishments




                                            3000




                                            2000




                                            1000
                                                   1940   1945   1950          1955   1960   1965
                                                                        Year


Figure 3: Number of Green Book establishments listed for the United States in each publi-
cation of the travel guides.




                                                                 28
                                 1200                                                                                            800




                                 1000
      Number of Establishments




                                                                                                      Number of Establishments
                                                                                                                                 600
                                  800




                                  600
                                                                                                                                 400


                                  400




                                  200                                                                                            200
                                        1940     1945      1950          1955   1960   1965                                                1940     1945   1950          1955   1960   1965
                                                                  Year                                                                                            Year


                                          (a) Formal Accommodations                                                                        (b) Informal Accommodations

                                                                                                                                 800
                                 200




                                                                                                                                 600
                                 150
      Number of Establishments




                                                                                                   Number of Est.
                                                                                                                                 400
                                 100




                                  50                                                                                             200




                                   0                                                                                               0
                                        1940    1945       1950          1955   1960   1965                                                1940     1945   1950          1955   1960   1965
                                                                  Year                                                                                            Year



                                               (c) Service Stations                                                                         (d) Beauty and barber shops

                                 800                                                                                             1500




                                 600
      Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                                 1000
                                                                                                   Number of Est.




                                 400



                                                                                                                                  500

                                 200




                                   0                                                                                                   0
                                        1940    1945       1950          1955   1960   1965                                                1940     1945   1950          1955   1960   1965
                                                                  Year                                                                                            Year



                                                        (e) Other                                                                                 (f) Eating and dining

Figure 4: Number of Green Book establishments listed for the United States in each publica-
tion of the travel guides. Each subplot displays a different establishment category. Beauty
and barber shops also include beauty schools; Eating and dining include all restaurants
and cafes; Formal accommodations include hotels and motels; Informal accommodations
includes tourist homes, boarding houses, camps, and other lodging; Other includes all other
establishments that did not fit clearly into one of the above categories.



                                                                                              29
                                  1200                                                                                                                    800
                                                                                             .2                                                                                                                        .06


       Number of Establishments   1000




                                                                                                                               Number of Establishments
                                                                                             .15
                                                                                                                                                          600




                                                                                                      Share Advertising




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Share Advertising
                                   800                                                                                                                                                                                 .04



                                                                                             .1

                                   600
                                                                                                                                                          400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .02

                                                                                             .05
                                   400




                                   200                                                       0                                                            200                                                          0
                                         1940    1945     1950          1955   1960   1965                                                                          1940    1945    1950          1955   1960   1965
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                      Year


                                           (a) Formal Accommodations                                                                                                 (b) Informal Accommodations

                                                                                                 1                                                        800                                                              1
                                  200



                                                                                                 .8                                                                                                                        .8
                                                                                                                                                          600
                                  150
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                               Number of Establishments
                                                                                                      Share Advertising




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Share Advertising
                                                                                                 .6                                                                                                                        .6

                                                                                                                                                          400
                                  100

                                                                                                 .4                                                                                                                        .4



                                   50                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                 .2                                                                                                                        .2




                                    0                                                            0                                                          0                                                              0
                                         1940   1945      1950          1955   1960    1965                                                                         1940    1945    1950          1955   1960    1965
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                      Year


                                                (c) Service Stations                                                                                                  (d) Beauty and barber shops

                                  800                                                                                                                     1500                                                         .25
                                                                                                 .4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                  600
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                               Number of Establishments




                                                                                                 .3
                                                                                                                                                          1000
                                                                                                      Share Advertising




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Share Advertising
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .15

                                  400
                                                                                                 .2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                                                           500

                                  200                                                            .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .05




                                    0                                                            0                                                              0                                                      0
                                         1940   1945      1950          1955   1960    1965                                                                         1940     1945   1950          1955   1960   1965
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                      Year


                                                        (e) Other                                                                                                          (f) Eating and dining

Figure 5: Number of Green Book establishments listed for the United States in each pub-
lication of the travel guides. Each subplot displays a different establishment category, as
well of the share of listings of that category that were advertisements. Beauty and barber
shops also include beauty schools; Eating and dining include all restaurants and cafes; For-
mal accommodations include hotels and motels; Informal accommodations includes tourist
homes, boarding houses, camps, and other lodging; Other includes all other establishments
that did not fit clearly into one of the above categories.


                                                                                                                          30
                                                         Georgia




(a) All Green Book locations in continental USA (1938)   (b) All Green Book locations in Georgia (1938)


                                                         Georgia




(c) All Green Book locations in continental USA (1955)   (d) All Green Book locations in Georgia (1938)

Figure 6: Location of Green Book establishments in 1938 and 1955 in continental USA and
state of Georgia.




                                                  31
                                  2000




                                  1500
     Number of Establishments




                                  1000




                                   500




                                        0
                                            1935          1940                   1945                  1950   1955
                                                                                Year

                                                                 Midwest   Northeast    South   West



                                              (a) Number of establishments, regional breakdown

                                  150
     # Est. Per 1,000 Black Pop




                                  100




                                   50




                                    0
                                        1935             1940                   1945                   1950   1955
                                                                                Year

                                                                 Midwest   Northeast    South   West



                                  (b) Establishments by black population, regional breakdown

Figure 7: The evolution of Green Book establishments by region.




                                                                           32
Figure 8: An example of the county-level hotel information from the 1935 Census of Business.




                                            33
                                                  400




                                                  300




                       Number of Establishments
                                                  200




                                                  100




                                                    0
                                                        1935           1940                  1945                  1950   1955
                                                                                             Year

                                                                              Midwest   Northeast   South   West



                                                               (a) Number of formal accommodations

                                                   .2




                                                  .15
                       Number of Establishments




                                                   .1




                                                  .05




                                                   0
                                                        1935           1940                  1945                  1950   1955
                                                                                             Year

                                                                              Midwest   Northeast   South   West



                                           (b) Formal accommodations by black population

                                                  .03
                       Share GB Establishments




                                                  .02




                                                  .01




                                                   0
                                                        1935           1940                  1945                  1950   1955
                                                                                             Year

                                                                              Midwest   Northeast   South   West



                     (c) Share of total accommodations that are listed in the
                     Green Books

Figure 9: Total number of formal accommodations, formal accommodations per 1,000 black
population, and share of all accommodations that are listed in the Green Books, split by
region.
                                                                                        34
Figure 10: The number of Green Book establishments per 1000 African American residents
in 1950.




                                         35
Figure 11: Redlining and the location of Green Book establishments in New York, NY, and
Newark, NJ in 1956.




                                          36
                           1500
Number of Establishments




                           1000




                                                                                      A
                            500
                                                                                      B


                                                                                      C

                                                                                      D


                                                                                      No Grade
                              0
                                     1938       1942       1946      1950      1954
                                                        Year


                             Figure 12: Number of establishments over time by HOLC grade.




                                                          37
                                                                                                                       600
                            250




                            200
 Number of Establishments




                                                                                            Number of Establishments
                                                                                                                       400

                            150




                            100                                             A                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                       200
                                                                            B                                                                                         B


                             50                                             C                                                                                         C

                                                                            D                                                                                         D


                                                                            No Grade                                                                                  No Grade
                                 0                                                                                       0
                                     1938    1942      1946   1950   1954                                                     1938   1942        1946   1950   1954
                                                    Year                                                                                      Year


                                            (a) Barber Shops                                                                    (b) Eating and Drinking

                                                                                                                       150
                            200




                            150
 Number of Establishments




                                                                                            Number of Establishments



                                                                                                                       100




                            100

                                                                            A                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                        50
                                                                            B                                                                                         B

                             50
                                                                            C                                                                                         C

                                                                            D                                                                                         D


                                                                            No Grade                                                                                  No Grade
                                 0                                                                                       0
                                     1938    1942      1946   1950   1954                                                     1938   1942        1946   1950   1954
                                                    Year                                                                                      Year


                                     (c) Formal Accommodations                                                               (d) Informal Accommodations

                            80                                                                                         250




                                                                                                                       200
                            60
 Number of Establishments




                                                                                            Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                       150

                            40


                                                                            A                                          100                                            A

                                                                            B                                                                                         B
                            20
                                                                            C                                           50                                            C

                                                                            D                                                                                         D


                                                                            No Grade                                                                                  No Grade
                             0                                                                                           0
                                     1938    1942      1946   1950   1954                                                     1938   1942        1946   1950   1954
                                                    Year                                                                                      Year


                                              (e) Gasoline                                                                                  (f) Other

Figure 13: Number of establishments over time by HOLC grade and by industry.




                                                                                       38
                           800                                                                                    150




                           600
Number of Establishments




                                                                                       Number of Establishments
                                                                                                                  100



                           400


                                                                       A                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                   50
                                                                       B                                                                                                            B
                           200
                                                                       C                                                                                                            C

                                                                       D                                                                                                            D


                                                                       No Grade                                                                                                     No Grade
                             0                                                                                      0
                                 1938   1942      1946   1950   1954                                                           1938          1942           1946      1950   1954
                                               Year                                                                                                   Year


                                        (a) Northeast                                                                                           (b) South

                                                                                                                  200

                           400




                                                                                                                  150
Number of Establishments




                                                                                       Number of Establishments




                           300




                                                                                                                  100
                           200

                                                                       A                                                                                                            A

                                                                       B                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                   50
                           100
                                                                       C                                                                                                            C

                                                                       D                                                                                                            D


                                                                       No Grade                                                                                                     No Grade
                             0                                                                                      0
                                 1938   1942      1946   1950   1954                                                    1938          1942           1946          1950      1954
                                               Year                                                                                                   Year


                                         (c) Midwest                                                                                                (d) West

Figure 14: Number of establishments over time by HOLC grade and by region.




                                                                                  39
                  .16




                  .14




                  .12
  Share w/ 1 GB




                   .1




                  .08




                  .06


                        1935   1940    1945            1950            1955
                                       Year


Figure 15: The share of counties with at least one Green Book establishment.




                                      40
                                               4000

                    Number of Establishments
                                               3000



                                               2000



                                               1000



                                                    0
                                                     1935               1940                      1945                     1950    1955
                                                                                                  Year

                                                       Total No. of Establishments No. Est. in New Counties N. Est. in Existing Counties


                                                                (a) Total number of establishments

                                     4000




                                     3000
    Number of Establishments




                                     2000




                                     1000




                                                0
                                                        1940                       1945                             1950            1955
                                                                                                  Year

                                                                               Included in 1939      Not incl. in 1939



  (b) Green Book establishments in "1939 incumbent" and "new entrant"
  counties

Figure 16: Geographic coverage and Green Book listings growth




                                                                                          41
                                .6



                                .4
         Coefficient Estimate




                                .2



                                 0



                                -.2
                                        Black           # Black          Share Migrated   Share Migrated   5
                                      Population     Postal Workers        B/W States       W/I State


                                           All Establishments         Formal Accommodations

                                           Formal + in COB            Formal + Cond. on COB


Figure 17: Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from separate sinh - sinh
regressions of the number of Green Book listings on a set of correlates in 1940. Regres-
sions are estimated at the county level and estimates are conditional on the log of the black
population (with the exception of the elasticity with respect to the black population). Co-
efficient estimates marked "All Establishments" regress the total number of Green Book
establishments on each measure of discrimination/segregation. "Formal Accommodations"
restrict the analysis to formal lodging. "Formal + In COB" restricts the analysis to formal
lodging and only includes counties for which we also have data from the 1935 Census of
Business (some were omitted due to disclosure rules). "Formal + Cond. on COB" restricts
the analysis to formal accommodations in counties for which we have Census of Business
data and conditions on the total number of hotels in these counties.




                                                                42
                            4



                            2
     Coefficient Estimate




                            0



                            -2



                            -4
                                  % Black     % Black           % Black            % White        % White       % White
                                 No School   >= 5 Grades      >= 10 Grades        No School      >=5 Grades   >= 10 Grades


                                                     All Establishments      Formal Accommodations

                                                     Formal + in COB         Formal + Cond. on COB



Figure 18: Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from separate sinh - sinh
regressions of the number of Green Book listings on a set of correlates in 1940. Regres-
sions are estimated at the county level and estimates are conditional on the log of the black
population (with the exception of the elasticity with respect to the black population). Co-
efficient estimates marked "All Establishments" regress the total number of Green Book
establishments on each measure of discrimination/segregation. "Formal Accommodations"
restrict the analysis to formal lodging. "Formal + In COB" restricts the analysis to formal
lodging and only includes counties for which we also have data from the 1935 Census of
Business (some were omitted due to disclosure rules). "Formal + Cond. on COB" restricts
the analysis to formal accommodations in counties for which we have Census of Business
data and conditions on the total number of hotels in these counties.




                                                                          43
                                .8



                                .6
         Coefficient Estimate




                                .4



                                .2



                                0
                                      % Blacks        % With             % With         % With
                                     Own Dwelling    Electricity         Radio          Fridge

                                           All Establishments        Formal Accommodations

                                           Formal + in COB           Formal + Cond. on COB


Figure 19: Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from separate sinh - sinh
regressions of the number of GB listings on measures of material wellbeing in 1940. Re-
gressions are estimated at the county level and estimates are conditional on the log of the
black population. Coefficient estimates marked "All Establishments" regress the total num-
ber of Green Book establishments on each measure of discrimination/segregation. "Formal
Accommodations" restrict the analysis to formal lodging. "Formal + In COB" restricts the
analysis to formal lodging and only includes counties for which we also have data from the
1935 Census of Business (some were omitted due to disclosure rules). "Formal + Cond. on
COB" restricts the analysis to formal accommodations in counties for which we have Census
of Business data and conditions on the total number of hotels in these counties.




                                                                44
                                .25


                                 .2
         Coefficient Estimate




                                .15


                                 .1


                                .05


                                 0
                                      Total        #           # Wage         Total    Total Value
                                      Wages       Est.         Earners       Output      Added

                                          All Establishments        Formal Accommodations

                                          Formal + in COB           Formal + Cond. on COB


Figure 20: Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from separate sinh - sinh
regressions of the number of GB listings on the prevalence of manufacturing in 1940. Re-
gressions are estimated at the county level and estimates are conditional on the log of the
black population. Coefficient estimates marked "All Establishments" regress the total num-
ber of Green Book establishments on each measure of discrimination/segregation. "Formal
Accommodations" restrict the analysis to formal lodging. "Formal + In COB" restricts the
analysis to formal lodging and only includes counties for which we also have data from the
1935 Census of Business (some were omitted due to disclosure rules). "Formal + Cond. on
COB" restricts the analysis to formal accommodations in counties for which we have Census
of Business data and conditions on the total number of hotels in these counties.




                                                               45
                                .08



                                .06
         Coefficient Estimate




                                .04



                                .02



                                 0
                                         Supply         Supply           Facilities     Facilities
                                      Combat Equip.      Other           Industrial     Military

                                            All Establishments        Formal Accommodations

                                            Formal + in COB           Formal + Cond. on COB


Figure 21: Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from separate sinh - sinh
regressions of the number of GB listings on WWII contracts. Regressions are estimated
at the county level and estimates are conditional on the log of the black population. Co-
efficient estimates marked "All Establishments" regress the total number of Green Book
establishments on each measure of discrimination/segregation. "Formal Accommodations"
restrict the analysis to formal lodging. "Formal + In COB" restricts the analysis to formal
lodging and only includes counties for which we also have data from the 1935 Census of
Business (some were omitted due to disclosure rules). "Formal + Cond. on COB" restricts
the analysis to formal accommodations in counties for which we have Census of Business
data and conditions on the total number of hotels in these counties.




                                                                 46
                                 2



                                1.5
         Coefficient Estimate




                                 1



                                 .5



                                 0

                                      Dissimilarity          Isolation        Logan-Parman
                                         Index                 Index              Index

                                        All Establishments        Formal Accommodations

                                        Formal + in COB           Formal + Cond. on COB


Figure 22: Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from separate sinh - sinh
regressions of the number of GB listings on measures of segregation in 1940. Regressions
are estimated at the county level and estimates are conditional on the log of the black
population. Coefficient estimates marked "All Establishments" regress the total number
of Green Book establishments on each measure of discrimination/segregation. "Formal
Accommodations" restrict the analysis to formal lodging. "Formal + In COB" restricts the
analysis to formal lodging and only includes counties for which we also have data from the
1935 Census of Business (some were omitted due to disclosure rules). "Formal + Cond. on
COB" restricts the analysis to formal accommodations in counties for which we have Census
of Business data and conditions on the total number of hotels in these counties.




                                                             47
                                .2



                                .1
         Coefficient Estimate




                                 0



                                -.1



                                -.2
                                        Number of                Black              White
                                      Confed. Symbols          Lynchings          Lynchings

                                          All Establishments        Formal Accommodations

                                          Formal + in COB           Formal + Cond. on COB


Figure 23: Coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from separate sinh - sinh
regressions of the number of GB listings on measures of discrimination in 1940. Regressions
are estimated at the county level and estimates are conditional on the log of the black
population. Coefficient estimates marked "All Establishments" regress the total number
of Green Book establishments on each measure of discrimination/segregation. "Formal
Accommodations" restrict the analysis to formal lodging. "Formal + In COB" restricts the
analysis to formal lodging and only includes counties for which we also have data from the
1935 Census of Business (some were omitted due to disclosure rules). "Formal + Cond. on
COB" restricts the analysis to formal accommodations in counties for which we have Census
of Business data and conditions on the total number of hotels in these counties.




                                                               48
                      600




                                             NY                            Equation for the line of best fit is:
                                                                           Y = 74.89 + .45 X
                      500
         Number of Establishments
                            400




                                        NJ
                   300




                                        OH

                                                  MO                                      TX
          200




                                                                      NC
                                             CA
                                     PA
                                    MI                                                                     VA
                                    MA
                      100




                                               IN          SC    AR                              LA
                                                                 GA
                                             IL       WV        FL
                                       CO KS DC WA KY        TN                 OK
                                    CT                      MS
                                                             MD
                                     MN IA      NE
                                            AZ
                                            DE
                                    ME
                                    RI    SD NM
                                       VTWI  OR
                                             UT
                                             NV WYID    AL
                      0




                                     NH
                                    ND        MT

                                    0              25       50               75                 100                125
                                                        Number of Discriminatory Laws


Figure 24: This figure displays state-level counts of the number of laws related to dis-
criminatory practices on the horizontal axis and state-level counts of the number of Green
Book establishments on the vertical axis. These counts are measured as of 1950. Counts
of discrimination laws were collected by the authors from compiling the work of Murray
(1950).




                                                                 49
                      600




                                                                     NY     Equation for the line of best fit is:
                                                                            Y = 42.93 + 3.13 X
                      500
         Number of Establishments
                            400




                                                                            NJ
                   300




                                             OH

                                        MO    TX
          200




                                        NC
                                                   CA
                                             MI     PA
                                        VA
                                                   MA
                      100




                                          AR
                                           SC
                                     GA LA            IN
                                          WV
                                           FL                                         IL
                                     OK
                                     DCKY   TN
                                         KS WACO
                                    MSMD
                                          NE MN CT
                                         IA
                                     AZ
                                    DE
                                     AL            NM
                                     SD
                                    VT
                                     ID ME
                                        NV
                                        UTWY OR RI     WI
                      0




                                    ND NH
                                        MT

                                    0               25          50              75               100                125
                                                         Number of Anti-Discrimination Laws


Figure 25: This figure displays state-level counts of the number of laws related to anti-
discrimination on the horizontal axis and state-level counts of the number of Green Book
establishments on the vertical axis. These counts are measured as of 1950. Counts of
discrimination laws were collected by the authors from compiling the work of Murray (1950).




                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                            40
                                              NY


                     80
                                                                                                                                                                       NY
                                                                                                                                                                OH
                                                                                                                                                                NJ                                                                  VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX
                                                                                                                                                                MI




                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                               SC
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                               Number of Establishments
                                                                                                                                                                                                MS
                           60


                                         MI
                                                                                                                                                             PA
                                                                                                                                                            MA

                                         NJ                                                                                                                                  MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AR                       LA




                                                                                                                                         20
                                         PA                                                                                                                            KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GA
               40




                                                                                                                                                                         ILIN                           NC
                                         OH                                                                                                                              DC                     TN
                                              CA
                                                                                                                                                                                   KY
                                                    MO                                                       VA                                                  CO                                  FL        OK
                                                                                                  TX                                                              IA
                                     MA        IL                                                                                                                      CA




                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                        NM              WV
                     20




                                                                  WV           AR                      LA                                                   CT                            AL
                                                                               GA NC     OK                                                                            NE                       MD
                                                                        MD                                                                                         AZ WYWA
                                                                        TN
                                     CT       DEIN WA                      FL                                                                                MN     NV    ID
                                     ME                            AL SC
                                                                       MS                                                                                   RIVTWI
                                      MNCO KS  DCNE                                                                                                         ME SD DE
                                        VT AZ  UT
                                              NM                                                                                                             NH     OR
                                                                                                                                                                    UT
                                                                                                                                                                    MT
                                     RI  IASD
                                           WI  OR WYID KY
                     0




                                                                                                                                            0
                                     ND
                                      NH       NV
                                               MT                                                                                                           ND

                                     0                  25            50               75              100        125                                       0                 25             50               75              100        125
                                                                  Number of Discriminatory Laws                                                                                          Number of Discriminatory Laws



                                              (a) Formal Accommodations                                                                                              (b) Informal Accommodations




                                                                                                                                            80
                                              CA
                     20




                                                                                                                                                                       NY

                                         OH




                                                                                                                                                       60
                            15
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                               Number of Establishments
                                                                                    NC
                                                                                                                                                                OH                                                       TX
                                                                                                                                                                             MO
                                                                                                                                                                NJ                                        NC
                                         NJ
                                                                        SC                        TX                                     40
                10




                                              NY                                                             VA
                                                    NE
                                                    MO
                                                                                                                                                            MA
                                                                                                       LA
                                                                               AR
                                         MI    IL                        MS    GA                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                PA                                   AR
                     5




                                                                                         OK                                                                                                                                         VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GA
                                      MNCO                WV                                                                                                                       KY          SC
                                     CT
                                     MA
                                      PA         IN WA                                                                                                               IN WA                                     OK
                                                                                                                                                               IA  DC
                                         IA    DC                              FL
                                                                                                                                                            CTCO KSIL                   WV      TN FL                         LA
                                           SD DE
                                              AZ
                                             KS        KY                TN
                                                                         MD                                                                                  MI   AZ
                                                                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                                                                                                   OR                           MD
                                                                                                                                                            RI SD NM                            MS
                     0




                                                                                                                                            0




                                     ME
                                     ND
                                     RI
                                      NHVTWI NMOR
                                               UT
                                               NV
                                                MTWYID      AL                                                                                              ME
                                                                                                                                                            ND
                                                                                                                                                             NH
                                                                                                                                                             MN
                                                                                                                                                              VTWI UT
                                                                                                                                                                   NV
                                                                                                                                                                    MTNE ID
                                                                                                                                                                      WY                  AL

                                     0                  25            50               75              100        125                                       0                 25             50               75              100        125
                                                                  Number of Discriminatory Laws                                                                                          Number of Discriminatory Laws



                                                        (c) Service Stations                                                                                           (d) Beauty and barber shops
                                                                                                                                            300
                     100




                                              NY

                                                                                                                                                                       NY
                                80
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                             Number of Establishments
                                                                                                                                                200
                      60




                                         NJ                                                                                                                     NJ
                                                    MO                              NC
           40




                                                                                                                              100




                                              CA                                                                                                                OH
                                         OH                                                       TX
                                                   IN
                                                                               FL                                                                                         MO                                             TX
                     20




                                      MN
                                     MA
                                                                          TN   AR                                                                            PA
                                      MI                          WV           GA                            VA                                                    CA                         NC
                                     CTCO          NE                                    OK            LA                                                                                                                     LA
                                                    WA                  SC                                                                                              IN           SC                                             VA
                                                                                                                                                             MI                            AR
                                      PA      KSDC
                                                IL           KY           MD                                                                                   CO     IL
                                                                                                                                                                      DC      KY WV        GA
                                                                                                                                                                                       MD FL
                                        IA                               MS                                                                                 MA  IA  KS     WA          TN
                                                                                                                                                            CT
                                                                                                                                                             MN DE       NE                                    OK
                                     RI
                                     ME   SD AZ
                                             DE
                                              OR
                                        VTWI NM                                                                                                             RI    SD AZ
                                                                                                                                                                      OR
                                                                                                                                                                     NM  WYID      AL MS
                     0




                                                                                                                                            0




                                     ND
                                      NH      UT
                                              NV
                                              MT WYID              AL                                                                                       ND
                                                                                                                                                            ME
                                                                                                                                                             NHVTWI   NV
                                                                                                                                                                      UT
                                                                                                                                                                       MT

                                     0                  25            50               75              100        125                                       0                 25             50               75              100        125
                                                                  Number of Discriminatory Laws                                                                                          Number of Discriminatory Laws



                                                                   (e) Other                                                                                                 (f) Eating and dining

Figure 26: This figure displays state-level counts of the number of laws related to dis-
crimination on the horizontal axis and state-level counts of the number of Green Book
establishments on the vertical axis. These counts are measured as of 1950 and plots are
shown for each category of industry. Counts of discrimination laws were collected by the
authors from compiling the work of Murray (1950).



                                                                                                                        51
                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                NY


                     80
                                                                                                                                                                                                NY
                                                                                                                                                             VA      OH                                NJ
                                                                                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                                                                    MI




                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                   SC
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                            Number of Establishments
                                                                                                                                                             MS
                           60


                                                MI
                                                                                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                                                                                              MA

                                                                                       NJ                                                                    MO
                                                                                                                                                                 AR
                                                                                                                                                                  LA




                                                                                                                                      20
                                                         PA                                                                                                     KS
                                                                                                                                                             GA
               40




                                                                                                                                                              NC                   IN                           IL
                                                 OH                                                                                                          DC    TN
                                                         CA
                                                                                                                                                              KY
                                         MO
                                         VA                                                                                                                  OK FL CO
                                                    TX                                                                                                          IA
                                                              MA                                IL                                                                 CA




                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                               WV      NM
                     20




                                               AR
                                               WV
                                                LA                                                                                                        AL       CT
                                      OK
                                      GANC                                                                                                                  MD NE
                                        MD TN                                                                                                             AZ WY WA
                                     DE     FL WA CT    IN                                                                                                ID NV MN
                                     MS
                                      AL NE SC                                                                                                           VT           RI  WI
                                      DC ME
                                          KS MNCO                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                          SD ME
                                     VT
                                      AZ UT
                                        KY            NM WI                                                                                                  MT
                                                                                                                                                             UT
                                                                                                                                                            NH    OR
                                      SD
                                      ID  IA
                                           WY   OR   RI
                     0




                                                                                                                                         0
                                     NDNHNV
                                         MT                                                                                                              ND

                                     0                    25               50              75            100   125                                       0                  25             50              75            100   125
                                                                    Number of Anti-Discrimination Laws                                                                              Number of Anti-Discrimination Laws



                                              (a) Formal Accommodations                                                                                       (b) Informal Accommodations




                                                                                                                                         80
                                                         CA
                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                NY

                                                 OH




                                                                                                                                                    60
                            15
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                            Number of Establishments
                                         NC
                                                                                                                                                                    OH
                                                                                                                                                                    TX
                                                                                                                                                             MO
                                                                                                                                                              NC                                       NJ
                                                                                       NJ
                                            SC TX                                                                                     40
                10




                                      VA                                        NY
                                      MO NE
                                                                                                                                                                             MA
                                             LA
                                           AR
                                     MS
                                      GA      MI                                                IL                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                          VA AR             PA
                     5




                                      OK
                                                                                                                                                          GA
                                           WVMN CO                                                                                                          KY SC
                                                WA CT
                                                    PAMA IN                                                                                               OK IA WA
                                                                                                                                                          DC
                                                                                                                                                                              IN
                                      DC IA FL                                                                                                                KS
                                                                                                                                                               WV
                                                                                                                                                                FL
                                                                                                                                                                 LA
                                                                                                                                                                  TNCO CT                                       IL
                                      SD
                                     DE
                                      AZMD
                                        KYKS TN                                                                                                           AZ
                                                                                                                                                         DE MD MI OR
                                                                                                                                                         MS
                                                                                                                                                          SD              RI
                                                                                                                                                                           NM
                     0




                                                                                                                                         0




                                     ND
                                      AL
                                      ID
                                     VT  MT
                                         UT
                                        NH
                                         NV
                                         MEWY OR RI   NM WI                                                                                              ND
                                                                                                                                                         VT
                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                                                          IDNH
                                                                                                                                                             UT
                                                                                                                                                             NV
                                                                                                                                                             MT
                                                                                                                                                             MENE MN
                                                                                                                                                               WY              WI

                                     0                    25               50              75            100   125                                       0                  25             50              75            100   125
                                                                    Number of Anti-Discrimination Laws                                                                              Number of Anti-Discrimination Laws



                                                          (c) Service Stations                                                                                    (d) Beauty and barber shops
                                                                                                                                         300
                     100




                                                                                NY

                                                                                                                                                                                                NY
                                80
       Number of Establishments




                                                                                                                          Number of Establishments
                                                                                                                                             200
                      60




                                                                                       NJ                                                                                                              NJ
                                         MO
                                          NC
           40




                                                                                                                           100




                                                         CA                                                                                                         OH
                                                 TX
                                                 OH
                                                                   IN
                                               FL                                                                                                            MO    TX
                     20




                                               MN    MA
                                           AR TN                                                                                                                        PA
                                      GA
                                      VA   WV MI CT                                                                                                         NC         CA
                                      OK NE  LAWA
                                                CO                                                                                                               LA
                                            SC                                                                                                            VA AR SC            IN
                                      DCKYKS                                                    IL                                                        GA
                                                                                                                                                          DCKY
                                                                                                                                                            MD WV
                                                                                                                                                                FLMI                                            IL
                                     MSMD IA
                                                   PA                                                                                                         KS TN
                                                                                                                                                              IA    CO
                                                                                                                                                                    WA
                                     DE
                                      SD ME
                                      AZ                                                                                                                  OK
                                                                                                                                                         MS
                                                                                                                                                          AZ   NE MN CT MA
                                           WY OR RI   NM WI                                                                                              DE
                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                                                          SD
                                                                                                                                                          ID   WY     OR RINM
                     0




                                                                                                                                         0




                                     ND
                                      ID
                                      AL
                                     VT  MT
                                        NH
                                         UT
                                         NV                                                                                                              VT
                                                                                                                                                         ND NH
                                                                                                                                                             UT
                                                                                                                                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                             NV
                                                                                                                                                             MT                WI

                                     0                    25               50              75            100   125                                       0                  25             50              75            100   125
                                                                    Number of Anti-Discrimination Laws                                                                              Number of Anti-Discrimination Laws



                                                                        (e) Other                                                                                          (f) Eating and dining

Figure 27: This figure displays state-level counts of the number of laws related to anti-
discrimination on the horizontal axis and state-level counts of the number of Green Book
establishments on the vertical axis. These counts are measured as of 1950 and plots are
shown for each category of industry. Counts of discrimination laws were collected by the
authors from compiling the work of Murray (1950).



                                                                                                                     52
