                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE LONG-LASTING EFFECTS OF LIVING UNDER COMMUNISM ON ATTITUDES
                    TOWARDS FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                    Christine Laudenbach
                                     Ulrike Malmendier
                                  Alexandra Niessen-Ruenzi

                                      Working Paper 26818
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26818


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We would like to thank Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln, Mariassunta Giannetti, Mark Grinblatt,
Michael Haliassos, Rawley Heimer, Zwetelina Iliewa, Alex Wagner, and seminar and conference
participants at the Universities of Bonn, Berkeley, Chicago, Columbia, Frankfurt, Harvard, MIT,
Stanford, UCLA, Wharton, the 4nations cup conference, the Helsinki Finance Summit, the NBER
Summer Institute in Political Economy 2019, the Sloan-NOMIS Workshop at NYU, the
Tinbergen Institute, and the International Conference on Household Finances 2018 for helpful
comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christine Laudenbach, Ulrike Malmendier, and Alexandra Niessen-Ruenzi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-lasting Effects of Living under Communism on Attitudes towards Financial Markets
Christine Laudenbach, Ulrike Malmendier, and Alexandra Niessen-Ruenzi
NBER Working Paper No. 26818
March 2020
JEL No. D03,D14,D83,D84,E21,G11

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the long-term effects of living under communism and its anticapitalist doctrine on
households' financial investment decisions and attitudes towards financial markets. Utilizing
comprehensive German brokerage data and bank data, we show that, decades after Reunification,
East Germans still invest significantly less in the stock market than West Germans. Consistent
with communist friends-and-foes propaganda, East Germans are more likely to hold stocks of
companies from communist countries (China, Russia, Vietnam) and of state-owned companies,
and are unlikely to invest in American companies and the financial industry. Effects are stronger
for individuals exposed to positive "emotional tagging," e.g., those living in celebrated showcase
cities. Effects reverse for individuals with negative experiences, e.g., environmental pollution,
religious oppression, or lack of (Western) TV entertainment. Election years trigger further
divergence of East and West Germans. We provide evidence of negative welfare consequences
due to less diversified portfolios, higher-fee products, and lower risk-adjusted returns.

Christine Laudenbach                            Alexandra Niessen-Ruenzi
Goethe University Frankfurt                     University of Mannheim
60629 Frankfurt am Main                         Business School
Germany                                         L 5, 5 68161
laudenbach@finance.uni-frankfurt.de             Mannheim
                                                Germany
Ulrike Malmendier                               niessen@bwl.uni-mannheim.de
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26818
1    Introduction

Almost 30 years after Germany's Reunification, the persistent differences in beliefs, attitudes, and
decision-making between East and West Germans remain striking. Whether we measure the presence
of women in the workplace or xenophobia, preferences for state interventions or spending habits,
the corresponding statistical maps of Germany clearly delineate the former border. As echoed in
the international media covering East and West Germans three decades after the fall of the Berlin
wall, why do "walls in their heads" remain?1
    One important difference that has received less attention concerns attitudes towards capital
markets and financial investment. East Germans are lagging behind in wealth accumulation far
more than lower income levels and higher unemployment rates can explain.2 These differences are
strongly correlated with differences in financial investment, in particular stock-market participation.
    In this paper, we analyze to what extent the persistent differences in financial decision-making
are explained by the extent of individuals' prior exposure to communism, in particular how pos-
itively or negatively an individual has experienced living under communism. We document large
and persistent differences in stock-market and other financial investment not only between East and
West Germans, but also within East Germany and across different types of stocks: While stock-
market investment is significantly lower in East Germany, stocks from communist countries attract
significantly more East German ownership, and stocks of American companies and the financial
industry significantly less. Moreover, the decision to abstain from investing in the stock market is
coupled with negative attitudes towards financial markets. Within East Germany, those with rela-
tively positive experiences, such as living in one of the celebrated "showcase cities," continue to shy
away from capital markets, while those with relatively negative experiences, such as environmental
pollution, religious oppression, or lack of access to Western TV entertainment, embrace the stock
market significantly more. These differences in financial decisions have significant implications for
individual wealth build-up.
    1
      See New York Times, 2/13/2018, "Germans Quietly Pass an Equinox of Unity, but the Walls Remain", or
Washington Post, 10/3/2016, "Germany reunified 26 years ago, but some divisions are still strong."
    2
      Median net wealth is EUR 24,800 in the East, but ranges from EUR 55,700 to EUR 112,500 in similar-sized
regions in the West according to a 2018 survey of 45,000 Germans, conducted by the German online bank Comdirect,
cf. Sueddeutsche Zeitung, August 1, 2018, "Wo Deutschland wieder geteilt ist."




                                                       1
       What explains the persistent negative attitude of East Germans towards stock-market invest-
ment, on average, as well as the significant correlation with positive and negative past experiences?
Prior research has found personal lifetime experience to be an important driver of financial risk
taking. In the stock market, for example, investment is strongly influenced by market returns expe-
rienced over one's lifetime so far, both on the extensive and the intensive margin.3 In our setting,
however, East Germans had virtually no experience with the stock market prior to Reunification.
Their investment choices were limited to a savings account, a type of fixed-income security, and a
form of (life) insurance savings account. As far as capital markets are concerned, East Germans
were exposed only to the communist doctrine, including highly negative views of stock markets as
"the root of all evil".4
       We build on the concept of "emotional tagging" to explain the persistent imprint, and directional
differences, generated by exposure to a communist system. Prior cognitive-science literature docu-
ments the long-term effects of ideological and emotional priming on behavior (Richter-Levin and
Akirav (2003)). As also argued in memory research (Kahana (2012), Wachter and Kahana (2019)),
an important predictor of decision-making is its "context." If a decision is similar to a previous
situation it will trigger recall of this previous experience and its context, and the corresponding
behavior. The context of a decision includes the time and location, in which a decision is made
(cf. Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2019)), but also the "internal states" of the agent, such as
emotions and concerns that form the "cognitive milieu" in which the agent is learning and making
financial decisions (cf. Wachter and Kahana (2019)).
       Here, we argue that communist messaging and the negative or positive emotional context of
living under communism have a lasting influence on citizens. Specifically, we link the experience
with the anti-capitalist (communist) regime of the GDR to individuals' long-term willingness to
invest in capital markets and investigate variation by intensity and direction of exposure. Consistent
with Laudenbach, Malmendier, and Niessen-Ruenzi (2019), we argue that the negative or positive
   3
     See, e. g., Malmendier and Nagel (2011) and Malmendier, Pouzo, and Vanasco (2019). Similarly, personal invest-
ment outcomes (e. g., Strahilevitz, Odean, and Barber (2011), Kaustia and Kn¨    upfer (2008)) or the local environment
(e.g., Laudenbach, Loos, and Pirschel (2017), Kaustia and Kn¨  upfer (2012)) also affect investment in the corresponding
asset market.
   4
      See, e. g., Handelsblatt, 11/08/2014, "Millionaires not wanted."




                                                           2
emotional context of living under communism is an important contextual dimension shaping episodic
memory.

   Germany is a unique testing ground for long-lasting exposure effects since it was divided into two
parts, a capitalist and a communist system, after World War II, but reunified almost 30 years ago.
People in the Western part lived in a capitalist system, where the German Exchange in Frankfurt re-
opened under American protectorate in 1945. People in East Germany (the former GDR), instead,
lived in a communist system, were excluded from stock-market participation, and were exposed to
strongly negative views about capitalism in general, and the stock market in particular. Relative to
other communist countries, the GDR stood out in its intense propagation of the communist doctrine,
arguably because it could not legitimize itself as a "national state" like the other communist regimes
(Haury (2004)): Germans were living on both sides of the border, and West Germany publicly
claimed to represent all Germans. As we will show later, survey results suggest that exposure to the
communist doctrine matters even today: Significantly more East than West Germans think that
investing in the stock market is simply immoral.

   We first develop a theoretical framework to illustrate how past exposure may shape long-lasting
attitudes towards the stock market. In the model, West Germans learn about the stock market
from their direct observations. East Germans have no direct experience with the stock market, and
learn about the stock market through signals from the government, such as doctrine or ideology.
Due to this learning process, beliefs towards the stock market are different at Reunification and
continue to differ afterwards, even as East and West Germans receive the same signals. That is,
our model captures the observed slow adjustment and convergence. The framework also highlights
the potential drivers of heterogeneity within East Germany. These include intensity of exposure to
government signals prior to Reunification, emotional tagging of the government's signals, and the
effect of a resurgence of pro-communist signals during election years (triggers).
   We test these predictions on both brokerage and bank data, augmented by numerous other data
sources. The core data is a novel and comprehensive data set from the brokerage entity of a large
German branch bank. It provides detailed holding, transaction, and demographic information for
about 200,000 clients from 2004 to 2012. The data is thus larger than most of the data sets in the




                                                   3
household finance literature.5 The size of the data matters in our context as we aim to analyze not
only East-West but also within-East differences. Only 20% of the German population live in East
Germany. Identification requires enough investors in each geographic region, e. g., to use regional
proxies for emotional tagging. Taking the parent company of the broker together with the bank data,
our analysis uses data from financial institutions that command a 50% market share in Germany.
Importantly, this share does not remarkably differ between East and West.
       Our first main result is that East Germans exhibit a significantly lower willingness to take stock-
market risk, both at the extensive and the intensive margin. Even though East Germans face the
same investment universe and the same legal and regulatory framework as West Germans, their
stock-market participation is 15.6 pp lower and, conditional on participating, they hold 7.2 pp less
stocks in their portfolios.
       We replicate these findings on data from a large private bank, that also includes individuals'
cash holdings and further wealth controls. Both in terms of statistical significance and in terms
of economic magnitude, the estimated effects are very similar across those data sets. We also find
significant differences in participation for the (arguably more homogeneous) subset of investors
living in East and West Berlin, and for a subset of individuals living in two comparable, similar-size
cities closely located on each side of the former border.
       We also show that East-West differences in wealth and income, both at the individual and ag-
gregate level, are unable to account for the stock-market participation gap. First, we control for
investors' income, savings, and portfolio values through flexible functional forms. The point esti-
mates for the stock-market participation gap remains virtually unaffected. Second, we show that
individuals who moved from the former GDR to West Germany after Reunification invest signifi-
cantly less than West Germans even though they share the same aggregate economic environment,
and self-selected into it.
       Furthermore, we demonstrate that potential differences in trust, risk tolerance, familiarity with
stocks, and financial literacy are unable to account for much of the stock-market participation
   5
    For comparison, the well-known Odean (1999) data comprises 78,000 individual investors. Other examples include
Hoechle, Ruenzi, Schaub, and Schmid (2018) (40,000 clients of a Swiss retail bank), Laudenbach, Loos, and Pirschel
(2017) (50,000 investors), and Meyer and Pagel (2019) (103,000 clients of an online bank).




                                                        4
gap. East and West German investors even hold similar stock-market expectations, ruling out that
potentially more pessimistic expectations among East Germans drive our results.
   Having addressed these traditional determinants of stock-market participation, we turn to our
research hypothesis that the observed differences might constitute the long-lasting effects of living
under Communism earlier in life. We first present results of a survey we fielded in July 2018. Survey
results show that East German investors display a higher propensity to express pro-communist
attitudes. Furthermore, survey respondents' pro-communist attitudes are strongly associated with
abstinence from the stock market. Relatedly, results from our broker data show that East Germans
invest significantly less than West Germans in firms perceived as particularly capitalist, namely
financial institutions or firms located in the US, but more in firms located in (formerly) communist
countries, as well as formerly state-owned German companies.
   With these correlations at hand, we test whether the intensity of exposure to communist signals
is reflected in differences in investors' stock-market participation within East Germany. We exploit
both temporal and spatial variation in the exposure to communism. In line with prior findings in
Fuchs-Sch¨
         undeln and Masella (2016) that the length of exposure to a communist system matters for
the strength of its impact, we show that the stock-market participation gap between East and West
is larger for older individuals who were exposed to the communist doctrine of the GDR for a longer
time. In terms of geographic variation, we exploit the fact that West Germans that lived close to
the former inner-German border had the opportunity to visit relatives in the East who also lived
close to the border. This so-called "Kleine Grenzverkehr" ('small border traffic') led East Germans
in those areas to receive potentially countervailing signals. Indeed, we find that for East Germans
living close to the inner-German border, the stock market participation gap is smaller, while it is
bigger for those living further away from the border.
   The core of our research question lies in exploring not only the exposure to communism itself, but
on how an individual has experienced the communist system. As discussed earlier, the emotional
context of an experience determines how it is anchored in memory. According to the emotional-
tagging concept, emotionally arousing events are not only remembered better (since emotionally
dependent information is modulated into enhanced memory, Richter-Levin and Akirav (2003)), but
it also matters whether an experience is tagged with positive or negative emotions, as the affective



                                                 5
system determines which components from the collection of processed information are preserved in
memory (Bergado, Lucas, and Richter-Levin (2011)).6
       We test whether citizens with plausibly more negative experiences under the communist system
exhibit weaker exposure effects, and whether those with plausibly more positive experiences exhibit
stronger exposure effects. First, we use environmental pollution as a proxy for a more negative
experience of living under communism. In spite of the communist regime's claim to protect the
environment in the interest of peoples' well-being, the GDR had the highest levels of dust and
sulfur dioxide emissions across all European countries (Petschow, Meyerhoff, and Thomasberger
(1990)). Air pollution was both high on average and varied across the GDR. In the "air-hygienic
heavily polluted territories," almost every second child suffered from respiratory diseases.7 Thus,
East Germans living in highly polluted areas should be more likely to have negative emotions tagged
to their experience with communism. Correspondingly, we find that the stock-market participation
gap is significantly less pronounced in areas that were highly polluted during GDR times.
       Second, we utilize religious oppression. As common in communist systems, religious life was
heavily suppressed in the GDR (M¨
                                uller, Pollack, and Pickel (2013)). We conjecture that religious
people are likely to form negative views about the communist system and hold more positive views
about Western countries, which honor the freedom of religion. Consistently, we find that differences
between East and West German stock-market investment are significantly mitigated in counties
with high levels of religiosity: East Germans embrace capital markets more.
       Third, we exploit exogenous variation in access to West German TV. Previous literature has
shown that resistance to the communist system was higher in regions of the GDR that did not
have access to West TV, which may at first seem surprising. As has been documented, though,
West TV was a major source of entertainment for East Germans, the lack of which resulted in
lower satisfaction with the GDR and hence a higher resistance to the political system (Kern and
Hainmueller, 2009).8 Access to West TV depended on the area of living; for example, TV signals
   6
      Building on an older literature on mood congruence and state dependence in the 1970s and 1980s (e.g., Wein-
gartner, Miller, and Murphy (1977), Isen et al (1978), Blaney (1986)), modern neurological foundations of mood and
memory emphasize the role of the amygdala in reconsolidating emotional memory traces (Dolan (2002), Richter-Levin
and Akirav (2003), LaBar and Cabeza (2006)).
   7
     Cf. www.bundesregierung.de/breg-de/aktuelles/wahrheit-ueber-verschmutzung-der-umwelt-336222.
   8
      Exposure to West German TV in the East has also been linked to consumption of advertised goods (Bursztyn
and Cantoni, 2016), aspirations (Hyll and Schneider, 2013), fertility rates (B¨
                                                                              onisch and Hyll, 2015), entrepreneurship



                                                          6
from the West could not be received in some low valleys. Since access to West TV is exogenous
to other potentially confounding variables, we follow Bursztyn and Cantoni (2016) and use it as a
natural experiment to examine whether our main result is weaker for investors living in these areas
without access to Western TV entertainment. We find this to be the case.
    Vice versa, we investigate whether our results are stronger for individuals whose experience with
the communist system was likely tagged with positive emotions. A first example is the experience of
living in one of the GDR's "showcase" cities. Those cites were renamed with communist names under
the GDR regime, and the act of renaming was accompanied by festivals, significant press coverage,
and visits of domestic and foreign politicians. These celebrations and expressions of national pride
likely tagged the communist experience of residents in renamed cities with positive emotions. For
example, the administration of the city of Chemnitz, which was renamed to "Karl-Marx-Stadt," had
a flagship role in promoting communist ideology and a very high number of voluntary state-security
collaborators (Horsch (1997)). In our analyses, we confirm that our results are more pronounced for
investors living in renamed cities.
    Variation in the support for the secret surveillance system (STASI) is interesting in and of itself.
Extensive research has documented that the dominant motivation for serving as a voluntary, unof-
ficial collaborator (Inoffizieller Mitarbeiter, IM) was political ideology, rather than other plausible
reasons such as monetary incentives or extortion (Mueller-Enbergs, 1995). We show that our base-
line results are stronger for regions with a high number of voluntary state-security collaborators. In
addition, we use data from a survey conducted in 2014 on how positive individuals view the former
political GDR system. Again, we find lower levels of stock-market participation in regions with a
more positive attitude towards the former GDR.
    Lastly, the GDR regime saw sports as a means to transport communist ideology and demonstrate
the superiority of socialism over the capitalist system. The Olympic games in particular were used to
evoke a feeling of "us against them," and Olympic winners were celebrated as national heroes. With
this in mind, we use an alternative proxy for positive emotional tagging of communist experience:
living in the same municipality as an Olympic champion. In line with our conjecture, our baseline
effect is indeed stronger for individuals in the same municipality as an Olympic champion.
(Slavtchev and Wyrwich, 2017), beliefs about the determinants of success (Hennighausen, 2015), and crime (Friehe,
M¨uller, and Neumeier, 2017).



                                                       7
   Next, we test the conjecture that the long-term effect of emotional tagging is stronger when
anti-capitalist messages sent by left-wing political parties are more salient. According to salience
theory (Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012)), limited attention prevents decision makers from
considering all relevant information, and salient aspects are overweighed. We postulate that anti-
capitalist messages are more salient in years of federal elections, when public attention is focused on
political topics and pre-election debates provide a forum for anti-capitalist messaging. Consistent
with salience theory, we find a significantly higher reluctance of East Germans to invest in the stock
market in election years.
   Finally, we provide evidence that the differences in financial investment are costly to East Ger-
mans. Their portfolios are less diversified, their portfolio returns are lower, and a higher share of
their liquid funds are invested in high-fee products of the bank.
   Overall, our findings suggest a long-lasting effect of exposure to the communist doctrine on
financial decision-making even decades later, and in particular of emotionally tagged experiences.
Individuals living in regions with pro-communist views are particularly averse to participate in the
stock market, and pay a high price in terms of foregone wealth accumulation, lack of diversification,
and excess fees.

   Our paper contributes to several strands of research. In addition to the literature on memory,
experience effects, and salience cited above, our analysis closely relates to a literature in political
economy and labor economics suggests that political and labor-market experiences have long-lasting
effects through different channels, such as the formation of preferences and norms, or due to frictions
in post-experience adjustment (Alesina and Fuchs-Sch¨
                                                    undeln (2007), Lichter, L¨
                                                                             offler, and Siegloch
(2019)). Fuchs-Schuendeln and Schuendeln (2015), for example, argue that the time a person has
lived under a democratic system determines her political preferences for democracy. Our analysis of
the long-term effects of experiencing communism and its emotional tagging combines the thrust of
the finance literature and the political economy literature on experience effects. It further sheds light
on the deeper underlying debate on how experiences are weighted and suggests that experiences
tagged with strongly positive or negative emotions are most relevant for behavior.




                                                   8
2    Theoretical Framework

We first present a theoretical framework to relate past experiences of living in East versus West
Germany to persistent differences in attitudes toward the stock market, decades after Reunification.
Building on the prior literature on experience effects, we model long-lasting exposure effects through
a beliefs channel. As in prior research, we note that preference might also be influenced by experi-
ences. In fact, the distinction is fluid: Agents appear to act as if their beliefs were overly determined
by personal exposure; but this is just one way to capture the (re-)wiring (synaptic tagging effects)
generated by previous experiences.


Setup.    Agents are learning about the value of investing in the stock market, which is either good
(G) or bad (B ). We can interpret these states of the world either in terms of monetary value and
expected returns, or in terms of the ideologically shaped social value of investing in the stock market.
Here, we do not differentiate between these dimensions, but we do so in our empirical analysis, where
we analyze along which dimension East and West Germans hold systematically different beliefs.
    We assume that the true state is G, and all agents start with a prior P (G) = P (B ) = 0.5.
    Before Reunification, West Germans receive signals t  {g, b} in each period t about the true
state from their observation of the stock market, with p(t = g |G) = p(t = b|B ) = ,   (0.5, 1].
East Germans, in contrast, have no access to the stock market. They receive government signals
st  {g, b}, which may be distorted by the communist doctrine. For simplicity, we model the East
German government as sending only b signals.
    We assume that East Germans believe a fraction q  [0, 1] of government signals to be true,
and a fraction 1 - q to have no information value. Varying q we can increase or decrease East
Germans' propensity to believe in government signals. In the empirical analysis, we will show that
the inclination to subscribe to the government's messaging about the stock market is related to
past lifetime experiences under the communist system. The more positive personal circumstances
have been, the higher is the likelihood to endorse the government views and incorporate its signals.
We label this effect as emotional coloring (or, emotional tagging). In the theoretical analysis, we
simply assume that a fraction q of signals are incorporated in East Germans' belief updating, and
a fraction 1 - q is disregarded.


                                                   9
      After Reunification, both formerly-East and West Germans have exposure to the stock market,
and receive the true signals t . When receiving a (trusted) signal t at time t, individuals update
beliefs applying Bayes' rule to their prior Pt-1 to form the posterior:

                                                           p(t |B )Pt-1 (B )
                    Pt (B |t , Pt-1 (B )) =                                              .
                                              p(t |B )Pt-1 (B ) + p(t |G)(1 - Pt-1 (B ))

East vs. West Germany.          Given differences in observed signals, we can characterize the beliefs of
East and West Germans at the time of Reunification. Assume there are n1 periods pre-Reunification,
in which East Germans receive only bad (government) signals, while West Germans receive g1 good
and b1 bad signals, with n1 = g1 + b1 and g1 > b1 . Then, beliefs of East Germans, PR,East , and
beliefs of West Germans, PR,West , at Reunification are

                                           qn1
                     PR,East (B ) =                                                      0.5,
                                   qn1 + (1 - )qn1
                                        (1 - )g1 -b1
(1)                  PR,West (B ) = g1 -b1                                              < 0.5.
                                           + (1 - )g1 -b1

Result 1 At Reunification, there is a wedge in beliefs about the value of investing in the stock
market, with West Germans having more favorable views than East Germans.

      The framework further captures why East and West Germans continue to have differing beliefs
post-Reunification. As they start off from different beliefs at Reunification, they do not instantly
converge to the same belief. Assume that there are n2 periods post-Reunification, in which all
Germans receive g2 good signals and b2 bad signals, with g2 > b2 . Then beliefs in East and West
Germany are

                                                        qn1 +b2 -g2
                        PR+n2 ,East (B ) =
                                              qn1 +b2 -g2 + (1 - )qn1 +b2 -g2
                                                        (1 - )(g1 +g2 )-(b1 +b2 )
                       PR+n2 ,West (B ) =
                                              (g1 +g2 )-(b1 +b2 ) + (1 - )(g1 +g2 )-(b1 +b2 )

While the posteriors of both West Germans and East Germans become more positive
(PR+n2 ,West (B ) < PR,West (B ) and PR+n2 ,East (B ) < PR,East (B )), it is also straightforward to show
that PR+n2 ,East (B ) > PR+n2 ,West (B ):


                                                         10
Result 2 After Reunification, there continues to be a wedge in beliefs between East and West Ger-
mans.

   We establish this baseline result empirically in Section 4.

   In the following, we extend the model to discuss heterogeneity in (i) the intensity of exposure
to government signals, (ii) the inclination to believe government signals (emotional tagging), and
(iii) trigger points (resurgence of anti-capitalist signals after Reunification).

Intensity of Exposure. We derive comparative statics for citizens with more or less exposure to
signals prior to Reunification by varying the size of n1 . If we scale the number of signals prior to
Reunification by a factor of  > 1, West Germans receive on net ( - 1)(g1 - b1 ) additional positive
signals and their beliefs move towards G:

                              (1 - )(g1 +g2 )-(b1 +b2 )
                                                                    < PR+n2 ,West (B ).
                    (g1 +g2 )-(b1 +b2 ) + (1 - )(g1 +g2 )-(b1 +b2 )

East Germans instead receive  - 1 additional b signals, and their beliefs move towards B :

                                    (qn1 +b2 )-g2
                                                              PR+n2 ,East (B ).
                         (qn1 +b2 )-g2 + (1 - )(qn1 +b2 )-g2

Hence, more pre-unification signals result in a larger East-West gap after Reunification.

Result 3 The wedge in post-Reunification beliefs between East and West is increasing in exposure
n1 to signals pre-Reunification.

   In Section 5.1, we will use variation in age as a proxy for exposure to pre-unification signals.

Emotional Tagging. Next, we analyze comparative statics with respect to East German's incli-
nation to believe in government signals q :

                                                                 (1-)             qn1 +b2 -g2
                d                                          log           n1 1-
                                                                             
                                                                               
                   [PR+n2 ,East (B ) - PR+n2 ,West (B )] =                              2       <0
                dq                                                    1- qn1 +b2 -g2
                                                                 1+    


Result 4 The wedge in post-Reunification beliefs between East and West is increasing in East
Germans' inclination to believe in government signals pre-Reunification (q ).

                                                     11
   Whether an East German citizen subscribes to the government's messaging depends on several
factors. Our main emphasis here is the role of prior lifetime experiences, and in particular its emo-
tional tagging. In the empirical analysis (Section 5.2), we exploit variation in the exposure to good
experiences (e.g., living in a renamed "showcase" city) and bad experiences (e.g., religious oppres-
sion, air pollution, no access to Western TV entertainment) to show that the post-Reunification gap
in stock-market investment is indeed larger for East Germans whose experience under communism
was likely tagged more positively, and smaller for those who likely had more negative emotions
tagged to their experiences.

Trigger Points. So far, we have assumed that after Reunification all citizens receive true signals
t from their observations of the stock market in all periods t; the (distorted) messaging of the
communist government disappears.
   We now consider the possibility that there may be times when anti-capital-markets messaging
resurges. Specifically, during election years, media outlets give space to the messaging of all political
parties including the successor of the former ruling party in the East, the Socialist Unity Party of
Germany (SED). While both East and West Germans are exposed to those (say, via discussion
rounds on TV), the communist party tended to target the East. Moreover, East Germans will plau-
sibly overweigh the communist doctrine, compared to West Germans, as it is part of their memory
database (Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012)). As a result, East Germans might incorporate
such messaging, when it resurges, more than West Germans.
   Consider the scenario that, after n1 periods pre-reunification and n2 periods post-reunification,
there is an election year, in which the communist party sends an additional b signal. We assume
that East Germans incorporate the signal with probability q , while West Germans disregard it:

                                                  (qn1 +b2 +q)-g2
   PR+n2 ,East (B |bR+n2 , R+n2 ) =                                           > PR+n2 ,East (B |R+n2 ).
                                      (qn1 +b2 +q)-g2 + (1 - )(qn1 +b2 +q)-g2


Result 5 In post-Reunification election years, when an additional st = b signal is sent, the East-
West gap in beliefs becomes larger than in a non-election year.

   In Section 5.3, we find that the East-West gap becomes larger in federal election years.


                                                    12
3     Data and summary statistics

3.1   Brokerage data

For our main analysis, we obtain security holdings and demographic information on a representative
sample of 230,229 retail investor accounts from June 2004 to December 2012. Data are provided
by a German brokerage associated with a large bank present in almost all counties of Germany.
The data include investor characteristics like age, gender, marital status, a client's zip code, and
account-related data such as the date the account was open or closed (if applicable). Figure 1
displays the distribution of investors in our sample across Germany. The sample closely matches
population densities across the country, including highly populated areas such as the Ruhr Valley.
We typically exclude 1,179 investors living in the city of Berlin, which originally had an Eastern
and a Western part, but use these clients for a robustness test later. Our final sample consists of
192,606 clients, for whom all personal as well as regional control variables are available.
    Summary statistics of our brokerage data are displayed in Panel A.1 of Table 1. 20.4% of clients
in our sample live in East Germany (the former GDR). 52.6% of investors are male, 58.2% are
married, and the average age is 60 years. The average account has been open for six years and two
months, and has a portfolio value of EUR 25,965. Stock-market participation (stocks and equity
funds) is high, at 82%, because most brokerage accounts are opened with the purpose to trade
stocks or hold equity in retirement savings plans. The fraction of stocks held among stock-market
participants is 73%. Investors hold on average 14.7% bonds (of which roughly 65% are government
and public bonds, and 35% corporate bonds). Only 3.8% of the sample observations involve clients
holding passive investments such as index funds or ETFs. A detailed description of all variables
contained in the brokerage data set is provided in Appendix-Table A1, Panel B.
    Panel B.1 of Table 1 reports differences between East and West German investors. The raw
differences in investment behavior are striking: East Germans participate significantly less in the
stock market than West Germans (61% vs. 87%), hold a significantly lower fraction of stocks con-
ditional on stock-market participation (67% vs. 74%), and hold significantly more bonds (30% vs.
11%). However, we also observe that East and West German investors differ in characteristics that
are related to stock-market participation. For example, West German investors hold significantly



                                                 13
larger portfolios, live in counties with higher GDP per capita and higher real estate wealth, and
receive higher income. Our main analysis tests whether the differences in stock-market participation
between East and West Germans holds controlling for systematically differing factors relevant for
stock-market participation.


3.2   Supplemental data

We use numerous additional sources of data, listed in Appendix-Table A1, Panel A, in order to
account for other factors that influence stock-market participation. We use investors' zip code to
merge these data. Thus, investors living in the same zip code area are linked to the same geographical
factors, such as the number of local firms, or county-level real-estate wealth obtained from the SAVE
survey.
    In addition, we fielded two waves of a representative survey via the polling firm NorStat, in
July and December 2018. The survey data are used to asses East and West Germans' stock-market
expectations, as well as their attitudes towards capital markets and the economic system.


4     Stock-market participation in East and West Germany

One characteristic of the communist doctrine is that it aims to induce negative views on competing
economic systems. For example, Lenin (1919) emphasized the "necessity of a relentless war on the
capitalists." In his supplement to Marx's third volume of "The Capital", Friedrich Engels charac-
terized the stock exchange as "the most prominent representative of capitalist production itself"
where "the capitalists take away each other's accumulated capital, and which directly concerned the
workers only as new proof of the demoralizing general effect of capitalist economy." (Marx (1894)).
In Panel A of Figure 2, we show various example of this type of propaganda.
    In this section, we test whether individuals who lived under the GDR regime and were exposed
to its anti-capitalist propaganda formed negative attitudes towards the stock market, and whether
these attitudes result in lower stock-market participation even three decades later.




                                                 14
4.1      Baseline result

To examine differences in stock-market participation between East and West German investors, we
estimate the following logit regression:


(2)              P (yit = 1|Easti , xit , zc(i),t , t ) = ( + Easti +  xit +  zc(i),t + t ),


where the indicator yit equals 1 if investor i holds stocks or equity funds in her portfolio in year
t. Our main independent variable, Easti , is a dummy variable equal to one if an investor lives in
East Germany.9 The estimation controls for individual-level characteristics xit , including gender,
age, marital status, the number of months an account has been open, and the value of an investor's
portfolio as a proxy for wealth. We also control for proxies of local economic activities zc(i),t . The
latter includes the number of banks in an investor's county (to rule out supply-side effects), and
the number of people living in a given municipality (to capture differences between urban and rural
areas). It also includes real-estate wealth at the county level, the fraction of inhabitants in a county
with a high-school degree, the county's GDP, and the number of local firms per zip-code area (to
capture differences in local economic development, education, and wealth). Finally, t are year fixed
effects. We calculate robust standard errors, clustered by municipality.
       Average marginal effects are reported in column (1) of Table 2. We find that East German
investors are 15.6 pp less likely than West German investors to participate in the stock market. The
difference is significant at the 1% level and economically meaningful. Given an average stock-market
participation rate of 81.9% in the brokerage sample, living in East Germany is associated with a
19% lower probability of investing in the stock market. In robustness checks, we find that the effect
is robust and significant for each year in our sample.
       Among the control variables, a few estimates are worth emphasizing. Consistent with prior
literature, we find that female investors are less likely to participate in the stock market. The same
is true for older investors, which likely reflects generational differences. Longer client relationships
(measured by the time of opening of the account) predict higher participation in the stock market.
The one estimate that seems at first puzzling is the negative coefficient of portfolio size. That is,
   9
    This information is available as of the time the account is opened. For a subset of investors, examined in a later
analysis, we observe whether they have moved from East to West Germany.



                                                         15
wealthier investors appear to be less likely to participate in the stock market. However, subsampling
by portfolio size, we find that this estimate is driven by a specific form of retirement savings common
in Germany, where investors deduct a small amount of money from their earnings and invest it in
just one broadly diversified equity fund every month. Many investors in our sample opened their
brokerage account for retirement saving purposes and appear to follow such a monthly savings plan.
If we drop small portfolio values below 5,000 Euro, the coefficient turns significantly positive, while
the coefficient of interest is unaffected. Overall, being from East Germany is a stronger predictor of
stock-market participation than most of the other control variables, including gender and portfolio
value.
      Turning to the intensive margin, we examine the amount invested in the stock market conditional
on participation. We estimate the following OLS regression:


(3)                          yit =  + Easti +  xit +  zc(i),t + t + it ,


where yit now refers to the portfolio share invested in stock or equity funds. We include the same
vectors of control variables xit and zc(i),t as in equation 2. Results in column (2) of Table 2 show
that, conditional on stock-market participation, East Germans hold significantly fewer stocks in
their portfolios (-7.2 pp) than West Germans. This translates into a 9.9% difference relative to the
average fraction of stocks in investors' portfolios. In column (1) of Appendix-Table A2, we show
that this difference persists also unconditional on stock-market participation.
      Finally, we turn to bond investment. We re-estimate equation (3) with the fraction of bonds
held in an investor's portfolio as the dependent variable. Bonds in our sample are 65% government
bonds and 35% corporate bonds. As shown in column (3) of Table 2, we find that the fraction of
bonds is 16.0 pp higher in East German portfolios than among West German investors. Compared
to the mean among West German investors, East Germans hold more than twice as many bonds
in their portfolios. One possible explanation is that the fixed-income feature of bonds makes them
more similar to the mortgage-backed assets and life-insurance savings account that were available
to investors in the former GDR, and are thus less stigmatized for representing capitalism. In line
with this conjecture, we find in unreported results that East Germans, conditional on investing in




                                                  16
bonds, hold a significantly lower fraction of corporate bonds (25%) compared to West Germans
(30%), and a higher fraction of government bonds (75% vs. 70%, respectively).

    We perform several robustness checks that aim at further ensuring a similar institutional envi-
ronment for the East and West Germans compared in the analysis.


Berlin as a case study. First, we restrict the sample to individuals living in Berlin, which was
split into two parts after World War II. While East Berlin belonged to the GDR, West Berlin was
part of the Federal Republic of Germany. The two parts of the city were separated by the Berlin
Wall, and inhabitants had no regular access to the other part of the city. Thus, the Berlin serves as
a suitable testing ground for our main hypothesis.
    We define a new dummy variable, East Berlin, which is equal to one if an individual lives in
East Berlin. We then run the same regressions as in Table 2 on the subsample of individuals living
in Berlin.10 Results are reported in Appendix-Table A3 and confirm the stock-market participation
gap between East and West Germans. Specifically, investors from East Berlin are 5.4 pp less likely
to participate in the stock-market. Relative to the average stock-market participation of brokerage-
account holders in Berlin (90%), this difference amounts to 6%. Thus, the economic magnitude of
the effect is less pronounced than for the entire country. This is not surprising given that many
parts of East Berlin (for example, Prenzlauer Berg and Friedrichshain) are nowadays inhabited by
many West Germans. We do not find that people in East Berlin hold significantly smaller fractions
of stocks conditional on participating in the stock market (column 2), but that the fraction of bonds
in their portfolios is 2.3 pp higher (column 3).


Two matched cities as a case study. As an alternative to comparing East and West Berlin,
we identify two "matched cities" of comparable size, Eisenach and Bad Hersfeld, that are located
at similar distances to the former West German border. The city of Eisenach is located in East
Germany with a distance of 29.8 kilometers to the former inner-German border. It has about 43,000
inhabitants, and 224 observations from this city are included in our database. The city of Bad
Hersfeld is located in West Germany with a distance of 30.8 kilometers to the former border. It
  10
     Note that we cannot include control variables like GDP per capita, real-estate wealth, and high-school degree,
available only at the county level. At the same time, these controls are less important given the restriction to Berlin.


                                                          17
has about 30,000 inhabitants, and 350 observations from this city are included in our database.
The distance between the two cities is 59.8 kilometers, a 40 minute drive. Both cities are well-
known tourist destinations and have comparable industry structures, dominated by medium-sized
businesses. (Eisenach has a focus on automotives, Bad Hersfeld on textiles and logistics.)
   We re-estimate the regression from Appendix-Table A3 on the restricted sample of individuals
living in either Eisenach or Bad Hersfeld. Even though this regression is only based on 574 obser-
vations, we still observe significantly lower stock-market participation in East Germany (average
marginal effect: -0.129, t-statistic: -3.25). Eisenach investors also hold a smaller fraction of stocks
in their portfolios conditional on participating in the stock market (coefficient: -0.136, t-statistic:
-1.80), and a larger fraction of bonds (coefficient: 0.167, t-statistic: 3.68).


Selection.    Next, we perform several robustness tests to address selection concerns.
   A first concern is possible differential selection into the brokerage firm among East and West
German clients. To carefully address this concern, we obtain access to a panel data set on brand
usage, brand perception, and brand satisfaction provided by the international data and analytics
group YouGov. The panel consists of over 70,000 respondents, who are asked about their residence
(state), their perception of different banks and brands (including the bank of our brokerage entity)
as well as the name of the bank where they hold their main account. This allows us to assess the
bank-brand perception in East and West Germany and additionally look at answers for a group of
East and West German respondents who are clients at our brokerage bank.
   Figure 3 depicts the results. Generally, the market share of our bank is not significantly different
between East and West German respondents (p-value for current customers: 0.21; p-value for former
customers: 0.92). East and West German respondents do not differ in brand and advertisement
awareness of the bank either: In both parts of the country, 88-89% generally know the bank and
25% report to have seen advertisements in the last two weeks. A slightly higher fraction of East
Germans than West Germans (24% compared to 21%) report to have talked to friends and family
about the bank. The general evaluation of the bank brand on a five point scale (I hate it, I do not
like it, it's ok, I like it, I love it) among bank clients also does not differ significantly (p = 0.40).
   A second concern regarding the brokerage data is that we only observe stock-market participation
conditional on having an online brokerage account. The gap in stock-market participation may be

                                                    18
different in the overall population, when including individuals who do not invest at all and only hold
cash. To address this concern, we make use of an additional data set of 6,903 randomly drawn clients
from a large German bank from June 2017. This data set includes investors who have not opened
a brokerage account and only hold cash on a regular savings account.11 Summary statistics on the
bank data set are provided in Appendix-Table A4. 18.0% of clients live in East Germany. Stock-
market participation is only 12.5% on average. Partly, the low rate reflects that, in this sample, we
define participation as the percentage of clients holding any single stocks; the data does not allow
us to define a precise equity measure including funds and other assets. If clients participate in the
stock market, they hold 71% stocks in their portfolios.
       To assess the differences between East and West Germans, we again estimate a logit regression
where the dependent variable is equal to one if an investor participates in the stock market (in-
dependent of having opened a portfolio). Standard errors are clustered at the county level, since
information on a more granular place of residence is not available. Results are reported in Table 3.
       Column (1) of Table 3 shows that the average East German investor is 5.5 pp less likely to
participate in the stock market than a West German investor. The difference is significant at the 1%
level and economically meaningful: Given a 12.5% stock-market participation in our bank sample,
living in East Germany is associated with a 44% lower probability to be invested in the stock
market. In column (2), we use a specification which is directly comparable to our brokerage data.
Conditional on having a portfolio, East German clients in this data set are 14.5 pp less likely to
participate in the stock market, which corresponds to a 20.4% lower participation rate relative to
the baseline probability of 71% in this sample. This magnitude is very similar to the one in our
brokerage data (19%). Finally, column (3) shows that, conditional on having a portfolio and being a
participant, the fraction of stocks is 15.4 pp lower for clients in East Germany than clients in West
Germany. In column (2) of Appendix-Table A2, we show that this difference holds also unconditional
on stock-market participation. We do not observe bond holdings in the bank data and thus cannot
examine differences in the fraction of bonds held by East and West German investors.
       Taken together, in both data sets, we find pronounced differences in stock market participation
between East and West Germans almost 30 years after Reunification. In economic terms, the coef-
  11
    In addition, we have access to the respective monthly average account balances from January 2016 to August
2017. We use the annual average of these monthly account balance snapshots in our later analysis.



                                                     19
ficient estimates suggest a gap of about 19% (brokerage data) to 20% (bank data) after including
control variables.


4.2      Potential Mechanisms

What explains the persistent gap in stock-market participation between East and West Germany?
In the following we consider several distinct mechanisms: (i) differences in wealth and income, (ii)
differences in trust, familiarity, risk tolerance and financial literacy, (iii) and differences in stock-
market expectations as well as attitudes towards the economic system.


Wealth and income. Although the above analysis includes a large set of individual- and geo-
graphic control variables, one might hypothesize that the stock-market participation gap between
East and West Germans can be accounted for by further (unobserved) differences in wealth and
income. Such differences might reflect aggregate economic conditions or individual-level differences.
      We provide two additional pieces of evidence to assess this hypothesis.
      First, in terms of aggregate economic conditions, we use survey data on a subset of investors
that allows us to identify individuals who moved from East to West Germany after the fall of the
Berlin Wall in 1989. These individuals are currently exposed to the same economic environment as
West Germans, but experienced a different economic system in the past.
      Average marginal effects for the bank data set are reported in Table 4. Column (1) shows that
movers from East Germany are 35.1 pp less likely to invest in the stock market compared to West
Germans. In column (2), we exclude all East Germans and only compare West Germans to East
Germans who have moved and now live in West Germany. These movers are 12.4 pp less likely to
participate in the stock market. In columns (3), we refine our mover variable and identify investors
who have lived in West Germany for a minimum of twenty years, i.e., they moved at or shortly after
German Reunification. We find a stock-market participation gap of 21.4 pp.
      Our second piece of evidence targets individual-level differences rather than aggregate economic
conditions: We leverage the bank data and include refined proxies of investors' income, savings,
and portfolio values. In Appendix-Table A5, we re-run the same regressions as in Table 3, but
additionally include squared and cubic terms of investors' income, savings, and portfolio values.12
 12
      The latter can only be included in columns (4) and (5), which conditions on investors having a portfolio.


                                                          20
The point estimates in columns (2) and (3) are remarkably robust. We still observe East Germans
to participate significantly less in the stock market, with point estimates similar in magnitude to
those in Table 3. Similarly, conditional on participation, the fraction of stocks held by East Germans
is significantly higher and the fraction of bonds significantly lower than among West Germans.
       Relatedly, we also run a placebo test on the differences between North and South German in-
vestors, excluding East Germany. Since wealth and income is higher in Southern Germany (i. e.,
Bavaria and Baden-Wuerttemberg) than in the North,13 similar to the East-West difference, we
would expect North Germans to participate less in the stock market than South Germans if unob-
served wealth or income were the main driver of stock-market participation in Germany. We do not
find this to be the case (coefficient on the placebo dummy: -0.001, z -statistic: -0.01).
       We conclude that East-West differences in stock-market participation cannot plausibly be ac-
counted for by differences in income and wealth.


Trust, risk tolerance, familiarity and financial literacy.                  Next, we investigate whether dif-
ferences in trust, risk tolerance, familiarity, and financial literacy might explain the significant
differences between East and West Germans' investment behavior. For simplicity, we focus on stock-
market participation in the following analyses, but report all results for the fraction of stocks and
bonds in the Appendix of this paper as well.
       Risk tolerance and trust are known to exert significant influence on investment behavior (Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2006)), and prior research has found East Germans to be more risk averse
and to trust others less than West Germans (Heineck and S¨
                                                         ussmuth (2013); Fuchs-Schuendeln and
Haliassos (2015)). To test whether risk tolerance and trust drive the stock-market participation gap
between East and West Germans, we consider the following two proxies: First, the brokerage firm
assesses the risk attitude of their clients when they open their account, on a scale ranging from
1 (conservative) to 3 (speculative). We obtain these data for a sub-sample of 48,123 investors.14
Second, we use a measure of trust in the stock market, measured on a 7-point Likert scale, in a
survey obtained from the bank data (see Appendix-Table A1, Panel B).
  13
   See http://www.bhls.eu/vergleich-norddeutschland-sueddeutschland.html.
  14
   Univariate statistics in Panel B of Table 1 show that West Germans are significantly more risk tolerant than East
Germans (1.74 versus 1.49 on average), confirming our survey results reported below.




                                                        21
       In columns (1) and (2) of Table 5, we add the controls for risk tolerance and trust to our baseline
specification. Risk tolerance has the expected positive influence on stock-market participation, but
we still observe a significant stock-market participation gap between East and West German in-
vestors of 17.2 pp. Similarly, trust positively predicts stock-market participation, but the estimated
gap between East and West Germans still amounts to 20.2 pp after including the corresponding
control. Appendix-Table A6 shows that, conditional on these controls, East German investors also
hold a lower fraction of stocks in their portfolios, while they hold a higher fraction of bonds.
       Next we address whether differences in familiarity or financial literacy might explain the re-
sults. People in East Germany were not exposed to financial markets for 40 years and thus, after
Reunification, they were not familiar with most of the financial products offered to West German
investors (Fuchs-Schuendeln and Haliassos (2015)). We investigate whether differences in familiarity
with stocks as well as differences in financial literacy between East and West Germans potentially
account for the stock market participation gap. In columns (3) and (4) of Table 5, we include
survey-based measures of familiarity ("The stock market is a closed book to me") and the basic
financial literacy score of van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011) as additional control variables.
Both variables are aggregated at the county level. We still observe a stock-market participation gap
of 18.6 to 19.2 pp between East and West German investors that is not explained by the addition of
these variables. On the intensive margin, East German investors hold about 9 pp fewer stocks and
about 20 pp more bonds in their portfolios conditional on these controls (Appendix-Table A6).15
       Finally, we add data on net-income brackets, as assessed by the brokerage firm at account
opening, as a further (complementary) control. Brackets range from 1 (below 1,000 Euro per month)
to 4 (above 3,000 Euro per month), and are available for a sub-sample of 48,123 investors. For
comparison, in our bank data the median income is 1,326 Euro; so the lower three income bins
should capture typical income levels. As shown in column (5) of Table 5, East German investors are
estimated to be 23.2 pp less likely to participate in the stock market than West German investors
even after controlling for income differentials. They also hold 15.2 pp fewer stocks in their portfolios,
and 20.6 pp more bonds conditional on this additional control (Appendix-Table A6).
  15
    Relatedly, we have also considered differences in the access to the stock market, for example through employee
stocks. While we do not have information on whether investors in our sample hold employee stocks, data from the
German stock institute (DAI) suggest that the fraction of employee stock holders in East and West Germany does
not differ much between 1997 and 2016 (22% vs. 20%).


                                                       22
    In column (6) of Table 5, we include all additional controls at the same time. Even though the
resulting intersection of observations drops to 117,288, we still estimate a significant stock-market
participation gap of 12.8 pp between East and West German investors, which amounts to 24.5%
relative to the mean stock-market participation in this sample. Similarly, also the results on the
intensive margin hold up when all additional variables are included (see Appendix-Table A6).


Stock-market expectations and attitudes towards capital markets.               Given that differences
in wealth and income, trust, risk tolerance, familiarity, and financial literacy fail to account for
much of the stock-market participation gap, we return to the explanation proposed in our model
­ differences in beliefs about the value of investing in the stock market. Such differences in beliefs
may be twofold: East and West Germans might have different expectations about the return to
investing in the stock market. Alternatively, they might differ in their ideological attitudes towards
the economic system and thus in their beliefs about the social value of investing in the stock market.
    To systematically test for these two mechanisms, we conducted a representative survey among
1,598 Germans in July 2018 with the German polling institute NorStat. For consistency, we exclude
69 survey respondents living in Berlin and our final sample consists of 1,529 survey respondents. Re-
assuringly, 24.4% of West Germans, and 18.7% of East Germans responded that they have invested
or are currently invested in the stock market. The difference between East and West Germans is
statistically significant (p-value 0.054). In economic terms, the corresponding participation gap is
24.2%, in line with our estimates from both of the other databases in the previous section.
    Regarding stock-market expectations, we ask three questions. First, we elicit the expected de-
velopment of stock values over the next months. Second, we ask whether respondents think the
stock market is currently over-, under-, or correctly valued. For both questions, we do not detect
significant differences between East and West Germans. Finally, we ask what average annual return
a respondent would expect if he had invested in the stock market for 30 years. East Germans ex-
pect an average of 11.9%, while West Germans expect an average of 13.5%. The difference is not
statistically significant.




                                                 23
       To corroborate these results, we use data of 1,872 respondents in a stock-market sentiment survey
run by the German market research institute Sentix Behavioral Indices.16 Respondents are asked
whether their midterm (6 months) return expectations about the DAX are bullish (-1), neutral
(0), or bearish (1). We construct monthly averages, separately for East and West Germans, from
September 2016 to August 2018.17 Figure 4 depicts the results: Stock-market expectations of East
and West Germans are very similar. Results from a two-sided t-test do not reveal any significant
differences in stock-market expectations between East and West Germans (p-value: 0.31).
       In sum, we do not find systematic differences between East and West Germans with regards to
their stock-market expectations. This is in line with the same findings in Goldfayn and Wohlfahrt
(2019) based on the PHF survey of the Deutsche Bundesbank.
       We also note that the realized returns of the German stock market after reunification were very
positive: An investor who invested in the German stock-market index DAX in 1990 and held the
index until 2018 earned a return of 7.5% p.a.18 Hence, East Germans' lower willingness to invest
in the stock market is also unlikely to be driven by bad experiences they made in the stock market
after Reunification.
       With neither expected nor realized returns able to account for differences in stock-market partic-
ipation between West and East Germans, we next consider whether attitudes towards the economic
system and towards the stock market can explain these differences. In the NorStat survey described
above, we also included a battery of survey questions measuring anti-capitalist attitudes (anti-stock
market attitudes) among East and West Germans. In Panel A of Figure 5, we show the fraction of
survey respondents agreeing with each of the following statements, separately for East and West
Germany.19 The statements are: (i) "In a capitalistic system, the rich get richer and the poor become
poorer." (ii) "Capitalism creates coldness among people." (iii) "Capitalism should be restricted."
(iv) "If the communist ideal was realizable, I would prefer it." (v) "Investing in the stock market is
immoral." (vi) "I generally reject investing in the stocks market."
  16
     The survey is conducted weekly among more than 4,000 respondents, including institutional and private investors,
but the place of residence is known for only 1,899 respondents. We hand collected corresponding zip codes to assign
them to East (8% of respondents) or West Germany. An unambiguous assignment was possible for 1,872 respondents.
  17
     The data set includes 84,785 estimates. Monthly averages are calculated based on all estimates within a given
month. Results are robust to using only the first wave at the beginning of the month.
  18
     See DAI return triangles (2019) on www.dai.de/en/what-we-offer/studies-and-statistics/return-triangles.
  19
     We continue to exclude participants from Berlin who might either live in the former East or West.



                                                         24
   The figure indicates that East Germans consistently show a higher propensity to express anti-
capitalist, anti-stockmarket or pro-communist attitudes. For instance, while only 40% of West Ger-
mans agree with the statement that "Capitalism should be restricted," 51% agree in East Germany.
The results are indicative that differences in anti-capitalist and pro-communist attitudes are pre-
vailing between East and West Germany.


Attitudes towards capital markets and stock-market investment.                    To further assess
whether these attitudes can account for the absence of East Germans investing in the stock market,
we launched a second survey with NorStat in December 2018, this time exclusively in a represen-
tative sample of 1,600 East Germans. The additional observations from East Germany permit a
refined analysis on differences within East Germany. We include a battery of questions capturing
respondents' attitudes towards capitalism and communism on either a 4- or 5-point Likert scale, and
elicit again stock-market participation. (All statements are spelled out in Panel B of Appendix-Table
A7.) In Panel B of Figure 5, we assess for East Germans the link between stock-market participation
and pro-communist attitudes. The figure plots average marginal effects on the standardized survey
responses from logit regressions with stock-market participation as the dependent variable and a rich
set of demographic controls including gender, age, income brackets, education, employment status,
and state fixed effects. The figure reveals that stronger pro-communist and anti-capitalist attitudes
predict stock-market participation within East Germany. We calculate robust standard errors. The
relationship is strong and significant for each of the statements. In other words, the communist
ideology, which was strongly promoted via political propaganda in East Germany, appears to have
a long-lasting impact on how East Germans think about the economic system and on their decision
to invest in the stock market.


Preferences for type of stocks.      The communist ideology of the GDR aimed at legitimizing and
differentiating itself from Western Germany. It sought to strengthen communist views and criticized
the economic system of capitalist countries such as the US. Panel A of Figure 2 shows some examples
of the posters and propaganda material criticizing the US and capitalism. In addition, the GDR
authorities conveyed positive views about other communist countries, such as Russia, China, or




                                                 25
Vietnam. Panel B of Figure 2 displays some of the posters demonstrating friendship with the
communist allies.
       As a further indication of the GDR regime's success in priming communist views on its people
and its long-lasting impact on household investment, we show that these views are reflected in
the types of stocks, in which East and West Germans invest in today. Appendix-Table A8 lists
the top ten stocks, in terms of holdings in our data, of US stocks, finance stocks, and Russian,
Chinese, and Vietnamese shares. Among the "capitalist stocks," the top ten US stocks are well-
known companies like Microsoft or Apple. The top ten stocks belonging to the financial industry
are predominantly major German banks, financial advisory firms, and insurance companies. With
respect to Russian and Chinese firms, the top ten holdings are predominantly stocks of state-
owned companies belonging to the energy or basic materials sector.20 Overall, stocks of communist
countries are held by 4,812 investors (3%) in our sample. Investments in stocks of firms in these
countries are often conducted via American or Global Depository Receipts (ADRs or GDRs). Given
the prevalence of state-owned firms in this subset, we also consider German state-owned companies
more broadly as a proxy for "less capitalist" investment.
       Table 6 shows results from regressions of the fraction of stocks held in "capitalist" (US, finance)
or "anti-capitalist"(communist countries, state-owned enterprises) stocks on the East dummy and
our usual set of controls. We find that, conditional on stock-market participation, East German
investors hold a 7.6 pp lower share of financial companies and a 4.8 pp lower share of US firms
than investors from West Germany. At the same time, they hold a 10.4 pp higher share of stocks
of companies located in Russia, China, or Vietnam, and a 4.1 pp higher share of stocks of (for-
merly) state-owned German companies. All differences between East and West German investors
are statistically significant at the 1% level.21 In other words, we detect a long-lasting influence of
the anti-capitalism message even in the choice of stocks among East Germans, conditional on them
participating in the stock market. The reversal of sign for the more "communist" stocks, which East
  20
     There is only one Vietnamese stock in our sample. It belongs to an asset management company that invests in
previously state owned firms in Vietnam. This stock is held by 68 different customers in our sample.
  21
     To mitigate concerns that differences in risk-aversion rather than exposure to propaganda drive our results, we re-
estimate all regressions and include county-level risk aversion as an additional control variable. Results (not reported)
are robust.




                                                           26
Germans are more likely to invest in, is particularly interesting and helpful in addressing remaining
concerns about unobservables inducing a uniformly lower inclination to invest in stocks.


5     Exposure to Communist Ideology

Our baseline results show that East German investors express a lower willingness to invest in the
stock-market, both on the extensive and on the intensive margin, and especially with respect to more
capitalist stocks (US, finance). They also display a higher willingness to invest in communist-country
or state-owned companies, paired with attitudes that are generally more pro-communism.
    The emphasis of this study lies, however, not only on the exposure to communism itself, but on
differences among East Germans. We argue that it is crucial how an individual has experienced the
communist system--how intensely, and whether positive or negative emotions are associated with it.
First, we will show that East Germans who were more exposed to anti-capitalist GDR propaganda
(timewise or due to geographic differences) are even less willing to take stock-market risk. Second,
we will show that the stock-market gap diminishes when the experience of the communist system is
tagged with negative emotions, e. g., due to religious oppression or severe air pollution experienced
while living in the GDR. Vice versa, the gap is stronger among East German investors who plausibly
had more positive experiences, like those living in a "renamed" (showcase) city.
    Appendix-Table A9 shows the cross-correlations of the various measures of exposure to com-
munist ideology that we will introduce in this section, and the low values reveal that our mea-
sures capture different aspects of communist experience. For example, we calculate a correlation of
-0.015 between living in a religious area and a celebrated showcase city. The differences in exposure
also break the link between experiences in the former GDR and the economic situation today, as
Appendix-Table A9 also reveals. For example, the correlation between living in an area with high
GDP per capita and in a renamed city is only 0.03, and the correlation with living in an area where
a high fraction of people are religious is only -0.02.


5.1   Intensity of exposure

We test for heterogeneous effects due to variation in the intensity of exposure to the communist
system (corresponding to the theoretical Result 3 in Section 2) along two margins: temporal and

                                                   27
geographical. For simplicity, we focus on stock-market participation, but report results for the
fractions of stocks and bonds in Appendix-Table A10.
   On the temporal dimension, we hypothesize that our results will be stronger for East Germans
who have lived in the GDR for a longer time and who thus have had more exposure to its communist
ideology. In Table 7, we re-estimate our baseline model (2) of stock-market participation, but include
an interaction between the East dummy and an indicator for individuals who have experienced the
GDR system for longer, proxied for by being 50 years old or older. The estimated coefficient of
the interaction term indicates that the baseline effect is indeed more pronounced for older East
Germans. They are 17.1 pp less likely to participate in the stock market than their counterparts
from West Germany, controlling for age. In an alternative specification, we have also run the main
regression model separately for different age brackets. Coefficients on the East dummy are always
negative and statistically significant. We also find that the differences in the amount of stock and
bond holdings are more pronounced for older East Germans, amounting to 9 pp for stock holdings
and 18 pp for bond holdings (Appendix-Table A10).
   On the geographic dimension, we exploit the 1972 "Kleiner Grenzverkehr" (Small Border Traffic)
travel agreement between the GDR and the FRG. The agreement allowed West Germans from
areas close to the border to visit GDR areas close to the border for up to 30 days a year (9 days
a quarter, one day at a time) to visit relatives, as well as for touristic reasons. The "border circle"
regions belonging to the travel agreement are displayed in Figure 6. The radius of this circle was
approximately 100 kilometers. East Germans living close to the former border to West Germany
were thus more exposed to West German influences from relatives and other travelers. In fact, it
is welld-documented that the GDR closely monitored the "border circle" for potential threats to
the political stability. According to regular reports by the secret police (STASI) on the "political
and ideological situation at the border," negative opinions on the GDR system were expressed more
frequently, which the GDR attributed to "hostile attempts of manipulation by relatives and friends
from West Germany, [...] leading to negative sentiment in these areas [...] and eventually attempts
to escape" (Ministry of State Security (1961), GDR Borderpolice (1960)).
   Returning to the relation between exposure intensity and stock-market attitudes, we conjecture
that the non-participation results are weaker for investors living close to the border to West Ger-



                                                  28
many, as they are more likely to have experienced both the political propaganda of the GDR as
well as countervailing influences from West Germany. Or, to frame it in terms of our theoretical
model in Section 2, we consider East Germans outside the "small border traffic" as being exposed to
relatively more signals from the GDR prior to Reunification than East Germans inside the border
region.
   To test this hypothesis, we re-estimate our baseline model (2) but include an additional inter-
action between the East dummy and an indicator equal to one for all investors living outside the
border circle area, i.e., more than 100 kilometers away from the former border to West Germany.
Results are presented in column (2) of Table 7. We find that our main results are indeed more pro-
nounced for East Germans living further away from the West German border: they are less likely
to participate in the stock market at both, the extensive and intensive margin and the fraction of
bonds in their portfolios is larger (see also Appendix-Table A10).
   In column (3) of Table 7, we include all interactions as well as the baseline variable differenti-
ating between East and West German investors. We find that both interaction coefficients remain
significant ­ the baseline stock-market gap remains stronger for older East Germans and those living
further away from the former border to West Germany.


5.2   Emotional tagging of communist experience

The most novel contribution of this study to the literature on memory and experience effects is that
we develop and test the "emotional tagging" hypothesis. This hypothesis builds on the literature
in cognitive sciences that shows that emotions determine how strongly an experience is anchored in
memory (Dolan (2002), Richter-Levin and Akirav (2003), LaBar and Cabeza (2006)). In our con-
text, we test whether the emotional tagging of past experiences matters for their encoding and hence
their long-run impact. If so, then the impact of communist propaganda on stock-market investment
today will be affected not only by its intensity, but also by how the communist system was expe-
rienced. That is, two East Germans exposed to the communist system may respond with different
behaviors, depending on whether their experience was tagged with positive or negative emotions. In
our theoretical framework in Section 2, positive emotions towards the GDR translate into a higher




                                                29
propensity to believe in the government's anti-capitalist signals (higher q ) and hence amplify the
stock-market participation gap. Vice versa, negative emotions attenuate the participation gap.


Negative emotional tagging:        We consider three sources of negative emotional tagging.
   The first source is air pollution. The GDR had the highest levels of dust and sulfur dioxide
emissions among all European countries, resulting in significant increases of respiratory diseases
and skin problems like eczema, with children being particularly affected (Petschow, Meyerhoff, and
Thomasberger (1990)). After the German Reunification in 1990, the German Ministry of Environ-
mental Affairs issued a press release that identified 18 environmental emergency projects to stop
environmental pollution in 16 GDR municipalities that needed immediate action because of out-aged
power plants, filter plants, or chemical plants. We investigate whether East Germans living in these
heavily polluted municipalities, who may have more more negative associations with communism,
display a higher willingness to invest in the stock market than other East Germans.
   The second source of plausibly negative emotions towards the communist doctrine is religious
suppression. As common in communist systems, religion was viewed as a tool of the ruling class
to oppress the working class ­ "Religion is the opium of the people" (Marx, 1843). While religious
groups were not entirely outlawed, religious property was frequently confiscated and believers ha-
rassed. We conjecture that East Germans in more religious areas are more likely to have had a
negative experience with the communist system. We investigate heterogeneity of our main effect by
the fraction of catholic and protestant citizens in a county.
   Third, we employ a measure of negative experience derived from differential access to West Ger-
man television. This measure exploits that some regions in the GDR were either too distant from
the Western border and from the television tower in West Berlin to receive Western TV signals, or
were located in low valleys or valleys behind mountains that blocked TV broadcasting signals. A
famous example is the district of Dresden, situated in the Elbe valley, which became known as the
"valley of the clueless" (Stiehler, 2001). Prior literature has documented that the quasi-exogenous
access to Western TV induced higher awareness of Western brands and consumption goods among
East Germans (Bursztyn and Cantoni, 2016), but also, maybe more surprisingly, higher satisfac-
tion with their lives, a reduction in the number of applications to emigrate, and fewer attempts
to escape the GDR (Kern and Hainmueller, 2009). The latter results may at first seem counter-

                                                 30
intuitive: Shouldn't Western TV to induce pro-capitalism and pro-Western attitudes? The reason
for the increased satisfaction with life in the GDR twofold: First, a typical East German consumer
of Western TV tuned into entertainment, such as crime shows, to relax after work, rather than
political news (B¨
                 osch and Classen, 2015). Second, the German TV channels did not aim to expose
East Germans to pro-Western political opinions, differently from, say, American radio projects such
as "Voice of America" or "Radio Liberty" (Uttaro, 1982). As a result, the availability of such enter-
tainment after a day of work in the (state-guaranteed) job increased consumers' satisfaction with
their work-life balance in the GDR, rather than their skepticism towards the political system (Kern
and Hainmueller, 2009).22 In fact, Chen and Yang (2019) document the same media consumption
pattern in communist China: When provided with free access to uncensored internet, students go
to entertainment websites rather than acquiring political information from foreign news outlets.
       Regardless of the reason, what matters for our analysis is that the data shows that East Germans
with access to Western TV were more satisfied with the political system of the GDR. Vice versa,
not having access to Western TV predicts less satisfaction and a lower willingness to follow the com-
munist doctrine. We investigate heterogeneity of our main effect by an indicator for municipalities
in the East that did not receive signals from Western TV stations.
       Panel A of Table 8 shows the estimated effects of these three types of variation in exposure.
In each column, we interact one of the three indicators of negative emotional tagging with the
East dummy. The estimate in column (1) reveals that the stock-market participation gap of East
Germans is 6.8 pp smaller in heavily polluted counties. Similarly, East Germans in more religious
areas (column 2) and those without access to West TV (column 3) also exhibit a significantly smaller
participation gap. These results support the view that East Germans who plausibly experienced
communism more negatively are more positively inclined towards capital markets and, as a result,
are more open to investing in the stock market than other East Germans.23
  22
     In addition, Meyen (2003) argues that exposure to Western TV, including its entertainment, increased the aware-
ness of the dark side of capitalism by making the potential downside of a capitalistic society with high levels of crime,
homelessness, or unemployment more salient.
  23
     Results on the fractions of stocks and bonds in Appendix-Table A11 portray a similar, albeit weaker picture.




                                                           31
Positive emotional tagging:            We identify four sources of positive emotional tagging of the GDR
system, i. e., of positive GDR experiences that might have increased East Germans' susceptibility
to communist propaganda and hence would amplify our main result.
       First, we consider living in one of the GDR's celebrated and "renamed" showcase cities. When
the communists assumed power in the newly founded GDR, they renamed numerous squares, streets,
football stadiums, and steel works to immortalize communist heroes. One of the most prominent
acts, however, was to rename an entire city.24 The act of renaming a city was celebrated publicly with
thousands of workers participating in marches and getting together on the big squares of the city.
The celebrations and expressions of national pride likely tagged the experience with communism
positively for East Germans in the five renamed cities.25
       Our second and third proxies of positive emotional tagging are somewhat different in nature.
The second measure is the fraction of voluntary state-security collaborators in a county. It is well-
documented that the dominant motivation for serving as a collaborator was political and ideological,
rather than monetary or extortionary (Mueller-Enbergs, 1995). Hence, we hypothesize that, in coun-
ties with a high number of voluntary STASI collaborators, particularly many citizens identified with
the communist doctrine. Naturally, it is possible that this proxy is also correlated with negative ex-
periences (for those who were policed). Lichter, L¨
                                                  offler, and Siegloch (2019) show, for example, that
a higher spy density has negative long-term effects on trust, political participation and, ultimately,
economic performance (income). The prediction is thus less clear ex ante.
       Our third proxy exploits regional variation in contemporary perceptions about the GDR's po-
litical strengths. In 2014, the German polling institute "Infratest" conducted a survey asking: "If
you compare today's social and political conditions to those in the former GDR, do you think the
political system of the GDR had unique strengths?" (Options were "yes," "no," or "I do not know.")
The fraction of respondents in a county who answered "yes" provides a revealed measure of positive
past experiences associated with the GDR system.
  24
     The cities were selected by a central committee of politicians. For example, Chemnitz was renamed "Karl Marx
Stadt" to celebrate the 135th anniversary of Karl Marx. Originally, this name had been assigned to Eisenh¨
                                                                                                         uttenstadt;
but after Stalin's death in 1953, Eisenh¨uttenstadt was spontaneously renamed Stalinstadt, and then Chemnitz was
given the name "Karl Marx Stadt".
  25
     The five renamed cities are Chemnitz, Eisenh¨uttenstadt, Kriegsdorf, Neuhardenberg, and Werminghoff.




                                                        32
   Finally, we consider the experience of sports-related celebrations. For the GDR's political leader-
ship, athletic prowess was an important tool to prove their system's superiority to Western liberalism
and promote national pride. According to Wiese (2007), "the GDR and the FRG not only competed
for medals, but also fought a battle of ideologies in the Olympic arena." The general strategy to
concentrate on specific disciplines proved successful since East German athletes won a total of 192
gold medals between 1968 and 1989 compared to 67 for West Germany. We conjecture that people
living in a place that produced an Olympic champion were particularly proud and positive about
the GDR. Therefore, we collect zip-code level data on the place of birth of all GDR Olympic cham-
pions in the Wikipedia lists for Olympic summer and winter games. We define a dummy variable
indicating if an investor is from the same birth place (i.e., municipality) than an Olympic champion
of the GDR, and zero otherwise. We multiply the dummy variable with an inverse population rank,
because we expect the pride effect to form more strongly in smaller communities, where being an
Olympic champion stood out even more.
   In Panel B of Table 8, columns (1) to (4), we include all four proxies separately in our regression,
interacted with the East dummy. The estimates reveal that East Germans living in a renamed
city show significantly lower stock-market participation (13.2 pp less) than other East Germans.
Moreover, stock market participation is also significantly lower for East Germans in counties with a
higher fraction of STASI volunteers and those that exhibit a more positive perception of the GDR
system today. We also find that investors living in municipalities of Olympic champions exhibit lower
stock market participation. Results are similar for stock and bond holdings (see Appendix-Table
A11), with three out of four proxies being also statistically significant.


5.3   Trigger points: Election years

In this section, we examine time-series variation in the stock-market participation gap between
East and West Germans. As discussed in our theoretical framework in Section 2, a resurgence in
anti-stock market signals might increase the gap in beliefs between East and West. This prediction
builds on salience theories (e. g., Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012)), according to which limited
cognitive resources lead to decision makers overweighting particularly salient aspects of the decision
problem. In our context, we ask whether there are times in which East Germans' memories of the



                                                  33
communist system are particularly salient and trigger their reluctance to invest in the stock market
more than at other times, when other topics dominate the public debate.
       We hypothesize that years of federal elections fall into this category. They are a time when
political attitudes are most salient and public attention is devoted to who should govern and run
the country. Consistent with the framework and concepts of salience in Bordalo, Gennaioli, and
Shleifer (2019), elections may provide cues that trigger automatic retrieval of past experiences with
political systems. That is, East Germans may receive (or pay attention to) more signals from pro-
communist politicians, family, and friends, while West Germans retrieve their past experiences with
the capitalist system of the FRG.
       To test whether the stock-market participation gap between East and West Germans is larger
in election years, we interact the East dummy with an indicator for federal election years in our
sample (i.e., 2005 and 2009). We then estimate the same regression as in Table 2, but additionally
include this interaction term. (Note that the level effect of election years is incorporated into the
year fixed effects). Result are reported in Table 9. They show that our baseline effect is indeed
amplified in election years, with the interaction term being statistically significant at the 1% level.
We also tested and confirmed that the results hold if we consider the first election year, i.e. 2005,
separately to mitigate concerns that effects in 2009 may be confounded by the financial crisis.
       In unreported results, we also find that the effect of positive emotional tagging on stock-market
participation (see Table 8) is significantly amplified in election years. This result is in line with the
view that elections trigger recall of the GDR's communist ideology, which is then followed by East
Germans with positive experience. Following the doctrine by not investing in the stock market thus
appears to happen because (i) communist ideology is now more salient (Bordalo, Gennaioli, and
Shleifer (2012)), and (ii) because it is in line with the positive tagging of experiences with the GDR
(Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2019)).26
  26
    We also find that the negative emotional tagging effect is weakened in election years. If elections indeed trigger
the recall of communist norms, there may be a stronger neglect of signals that are contrary to them and, as a result,
a smaller stock market participation gap between East and West Germans.




                                                         34
6         Financial implications: Portfolio returns, fees, and diversifica-
          tion

Finally, we provide several pieces of evidence that East German investors' exposure to communist
ideology and their resulting reluctance to invest in the stock market is costly. Lower life-time in-
vestment in the stock market should generally lead to lower financial wealth as investors forgo the
equity risk premium. Thus, the differences in stock-market investment that we document on the
micro level may partly explain why there are still such large large wealth differences between East
and West Germans on the macro level, with East Germans' total wealth being less than half that
of West Germans (Grabka (2014)).
         In our data, we are able to estimate several aspects of differences in returns and costs between
East and West German investors. First, we compare monthly portfolio returns. We obtain monthly
return data (including dividends) from Thomson Reuters Datastream. We calculate monthly port-
folio returns on holdings derived from the monthly position statements on a security-by-security
level for each investor. For each month in our sample, we calculate both equal- and value-weighted
returns for all investors belonging to the "East German portfolio" or the "West German portfolio,"
respectively. We then compute the difference return of a portfolio that is long in the East-German
portfolio and short in the West-German portfolio less the risk-free rate and regress it on the excess
market return, the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model and the Carhart (1997) four-factor
model. In our regressions, we use the global risk factors obtained from Kenneth French's data li-
brary.27 Alternatively, we use German risk factors developed by the Center for Financial Research
in Cologne.       28   We observe that East Germans earn significantly lower returns than West Germans,
irrespective of whether portfolios are equal- or value weighted (Panel A, Table 10). Monthly perfor-
mance alphas vary between ­0.07% and ­0.11%.
         In the next step, we examine other differences in portfolio characteristics between East and
West-German investors. First, we analyze whether an investor holds passive investments, i.e., index
funds and/or ETFs in her portfolio, as these assets generally have lower fees compared to actively
managed funds. Second, we examine how many different assets East and West German investors
    27
         The global risk factors are from mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/index.html.
    28
         The German risk factors can be obtained here: https://www.cfr-cologne.de/. Our results are robust.



                                                           35
hold in their portfolios (diversification). Third, we calculate the average fund fees an investors
pays for all-equity funds in her portfolio in a given year. To further capture the extent of portfolio
diversification, we compute the Herfindahl index of all stock holdings in a given portfolio. Finally, we
compute the fraction of bank-owned products included in an investor's portfolio, which are typically
associated with a higher total expense ratio (Bucher-Koenen, Hackethal, Koenen, and Laudenbach,
2018).We then run the same regressions as before and use one of these portfolio characteristics as
the dependent variable. Results are presented in Panel B of Table 10.
    Results in column (1) show that East German investors are significantly less likely to hold
index funds or exchange traded funds. The economic magnitude is large: East German investors are
26.32% less likely to hold passive investments. We also find that, relative to the average number
of assets in our sample, East Germans hold 33.07% fewer assets in their portfolios (column 2). In
addition, East German investors hold more expensive funds. Relative to the mean fee in our sample
(1.375%), they pay 3.71% higher fees on their equity funds (column 3). With respect to portfolio
diversification, we find that the Herfindahl index for stock holdings is significantly higher for East
German investors' portfolios, indicating that these portfolios are less diversified (column 4). Finally,
we find that investors in East Germany are 7.45% more likely to hold bank-owned products than
investors in West Germany.


7    Discussion and Conclusion

Our analysis shows that East Germans, who have lived under the communist system, have a per-
sistently lower willingness to take stock-market risk, even almost 30 years after Reunification. An
exception are stocks of companies from communist countries and of other state-owned companies.
The results are particularly strong for those East Germans whose experiences with the communist
system of the GDR are associated with positive emotions, and are significantly weaker if not reversed
for those with negative experiences under the communist system. Experiences with a communist
system are costly: East German investors earn lower returns, hold less diversified portfolios, more
expensive equity funds, and fewer passively managed assets. These results provide a micro-level
foundation for macroeconomic growth differentials between East and West Germany.



                                                  36
       An interesting question that arises from our findings is how individuals in other transition
economies responded to the introduction of a stock market. Does experience with a communist sys-
tem always negatively affect people's willingness to participate in the stock market? What happens
if the communist party reverses its own course and promotes (their version of) the stock market, as
was the case in China?
       In the GDR, the party's communist doctrine never fundamentally changed. After Reunification,
the capitalist system of the FRG including its stock market, legislation, and governance system
were immediately established. For our empirical analysis, this is essential, as it rules out that
weaker investor protection or governance standards drive lower stock market participation in East
Germany.
       In other communist countries, change happened more gradually and within the system. For
example, in China, the communist regime remained in place and transformed the economy stepwise
to "state capitalism", thus, the Party's doctrine changed over time. The Party itself established a
stock market in 1990. About 60% of the average Chinese company's shares are nontradable shares
held by the government itself (Pistor and Xu (2005)). In addition, the Chinese government created
incentives for firms to raise equity capital via IPOs, thus signaling that it does not condemn stock
markets or investing in shares of companies. As a result, Chinese people do not face a conflict between
political ideology and investing in stocks. Indeed, they have more positive views on the stock market,
although participation is still very low and amounts to 8-9% (Lucarelli and Palomba (2007), Liang
and Guo (2015)). This may be due to weak shareholder-rights protection and corporate-governance
(Goetzmann and Koell (2005).
       In contrast, the transition in Russia resembled more closely the case of the GDR. After the fall
of the iron curtain, Russia quickly abolished price controls and interest-rate controls. Many firms
were privatized in the 1990s, and the proceeds accrued to a small number of oligarchs. As a result,
Russians perceived "capitalism just how the Soviets had warned, with a few people requisitioning
all the ladders and the vast majority left to be devoured by snakes."29 Russia's stock market was
established in 1992, but even in 2015, stock-market participation of the general population reached
only 0.8% (Bank of Russia (2015)).
  29
    https://www.theguardian.com/inequality/2017/apr/25/unequal-russia-is-anger-stirring-in-the-global-capital-of-
inequality



                                                       37
   Comparing these transition economies, it appears that quick changes from a planned to a market-
based economy lead to large adaption problems. Since the new system contradicts the values and
experiences that people acquired, they seem reluctant to accept the new system and its rules for
decades to come, with adverse effects on people's financial well-being. Establishing these differences
systematically is a promising area of future research.




                                                 38
References

Alesina, A., and N. Fuchs-Sch¨
                             undeln, 2007, "Goodbye Lenin (or Not?): The Effect of Communism
  on People's Preferences," American Economic Review, 97(4), 1507­1528.

Bank of Russia, 2015, "Guidelines for the Development of the Russian Financial Market 2016-2018,"
  Report.

Bergado, J. A., M. Lucas, and G. Richter-Levin, 2011, "Emotional Tagging - A simple hypothesis
  in a complex reality.," Progress in Neurobiology, 94, 64­76.

B¨
 onisch, P., and W. Hyll, 2015, "Television role models and fertility: Evidence from a natural
  experiment," Working paper.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer, 2012, "Salience Theory of Choice under Risk," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 127, 1243­1285.

       , 2019, "Memory, Attention, and Choice," Working Paper.

B¨
 osch, F., and C. Classen, 2015, Bridge over troubled water? Deutsch-deutsche Massenmedien.
  Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht GmbH.

Bucher-Koenen, T., A. Hackethal, J. Koenen, and C. Laudenbach, 2018, "Do Seemingly Smarter
  Consumers Get Better Advice?," Working Paper.

Bursztyn, L., and D. Cantoni, 2016, "A Tear in the Iron Curtain: The Impact of Western Television
  on Consumption Behavior," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 98, 25­41.

Carhart, M. M., 1997, "On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance," Journal of Finance, 52(1),
  57­82.

Chen, Y., and D. Y. Yang, 2019, "The Impact of Media Censorship: 1984 or Brave New World?,"
  American Economic Review, 109, 2294­2332.

Dolan, R. J., 2002, "Emotions, Cognition, and Behavior," Science, 298, 1191­1194.




                                                39
Fama, E. F., and K. French, 1993, "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), 3­56.

Friehe, T., H. M¨
                uller, and F. Neumeier, 2017, "The effect of Western TV on crime: Evidence form
  East Germany," Working paper.

Fuchs-Schuendeln, N., and M. Haliassos, 2015, "Does product familiarity matter for participation?,"
  Working paper.

Fuchs-Schuendeln, N., and M. Schuendeln, 2015, "On the endogeneity of political preferences: Evi-
  dence from individual experience with democracy," Science, 347(6226), 1145­1148.

Fuchs-Sch¨
         undeln, N., and P. Masella, 2016, "Long-Lasting Effects of Socialist Education," Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 98, 428­441.

GDR Borderpolice, 1960, "Bericht u
                                 ¨ber die Lage in der Landwirtschaft im Grenzgebiet an der
  Staatsgrenze West der DDR," Report.

German Ministry of Environmental Affairs, 1990, "Vertr¨
                                                      age f¨
                                                           ur 18 DDR-Umweltschutzprojekte
  unter Dach und Fach - T¨
                         opfer erwartet schnell wirksame Verbesserungen.," Press Release.

Goetzmann, W. N., and E. Koell, 2005, "The History of Corporate Ownership in China: State
  Patronage, Company Legislation, and the Issue of Control," NBER Working paper.

Goldfayn, O., and J. Wohlfahrt, 2019, "Expectation Formation in a New Environment: Evidence
  from the German Reunification," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Grabka, M. M., 2014, "Private Verm¨
                                  ogen in Ost- und West- deutschland gleichen sich nur langsam
  an," DIW Working Paper No. 40/201.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2006, "Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?," Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 23­48.

Haury, T., 2004, "Von ,den Finanzkapitalisten` zu ,den Zionisten` - das "werkt¨
                                                                              atige Volk" und seine
  Feinde," Unsere Feinde - Konstruktion des Anderen im Sozialismus, pp. 107­126.



                                                 40
Heineck, G., and B. S¨
                     ussmuth, 2013, "A different look at Lenin's legacy: Social capital and risk
  taking in the Two Germanies," Journal of Comparative Economics, 41, 789­803.

Hennighausen, T., 2015, "Exposure to television and individual beliefs: Evidence from a natural
  experiment," Journal of Comparative Economics, 43(4), 956­980.

Hoechle, D., S. Ruenzi, N. Schaub, and M. Schmid, 2018, "Financial Advice and Bank Profits,"
  Review of Financial Studies, 31, 4447­4492.

Horsch, H., 1997, "Hat nicht wenigstens die Stasi die Stimmung im Land erkannt? MfS und SED
  im Bezirk Karl-Marx-Stadt," Working paper.

Hyll, W., and L. Schneider, 2013, "The causal effect of watching TV on material aspirations: Ev-
  idence from the "valley of the innocent"," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 86,
  37­51.

Kahana, M. J., 2012, Foundations of Human Memory. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Kaustia, M., and S. Kn¨
                      upfer, 2008, "Do investors overweight personal experience? Evidence from
  IPO subscriptions," Journal of Finance, 63(6), 2679­2702.

       , 2012, "Peer performance and stock market entry," Journal of Financial Economics, 104(2),
  321­338.

Kern, H. L., and J. Hainmueller, 2009, "Opium for the Masses: How Foreign Media Can Stabilize
  Authoritarian Regimes," Political Analysis, 17, 377­399.

LaBar, K. S., and R. Cabeza, 2006, "Cognitive neuroscience of emotional memory," Nature, 7,
  54­64.

Laudenbach, C., B. Loos, and J. Pirschel, 2017, "Recent Experiences and Risk Taking: Trading
  Responses to Changes in the Local Environment," Working Paper.

Laudenbach, C., U. Malmendier, and A. Niessen-Ruenzi, 2019, "Emotional Tagging and Belief For-
  mation - The Long-Lasting Effects of Experiencing Communism," American Economic Journal:
  Papers & Proceedings, 109, 567­571.

                                                41
Lenin, W. I., 1919, The State: A Lecture Delivered at the Sverdlov University. Progress Publishers,
  Moscow.

Liang, P., and S. Guo, 2015, "Social interaction, Internet access and stock market participation -
  An empirical study in China," Journal of Comparative Economics, 43, 883­901.

Lichter, A., M. L¨
                 offler, and S. Siegloch, 2019, "The Long-Term Costs of Government Surveillance:
  Insights from Stasi Spying in East Germany," Journal of the European Economic Association,
  forthcoming.

Lucarelli, C., and G. Palomba, 2007, "Investor's Behaviour in the Chinese Stock Exchanges: Em-
  pirical Evidence in a Systemic Approach," Working paper.

Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel, 2011, "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect
  Risk Taking?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 373­416.

Malmendier, U., D. Pouzo, and V. Vanasco, 2019, "Investor Experiences and Financial Market
  Dynamics," Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Marx, K., 1843, Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right. Deutsch­Franz¨
                                                                      osische Jahrb¨
                                                                                   ucher.

                                                   ¨
       , 1894, Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Okonomie. Buch III, erster Theil. Herausgegeben
  von Friedrich Engels. Verlag von Otto Meissner, Hamburg.

Meyen, M., 2003, Denver Clan und Neues Deutschland. Mediennutzung in der DDR. Berlin: Ch.
  LinksVerlag.

Meyer, S., and M. Pagel, 2019, "Fully Closed: Individual Responses to Realized Capital Gains and
  Losses," Working paper.

Ministry of State Security, G., 1961, "Bericht u
                                               ¨ber die politisch-ideologische Lage im Grenzgebiet,"
  Report.

Mueller-Enbergs, H., 1995, "Warum wird einer IM? Zur Motivation bei der inoffiziellen Zusammenar-
  beit mit dem Staatssicherheitsdienst," in: Zersetzung der Seele. Psychologie und Psychotherapie
  im Dienste der Stasi. CEP Europ¨
                                 aische Verlagsanstalt.

                                                42
M¨
 uller, O., D. Pollack, and G. Pickel, 2013, Religi¨
                                                   os-konfessionelle Kultur und individuelle Reli-
  giosit¨
        at: Ein Vergleich zwischen West- und Ostdeutschland. Springer Verlag.

Odean, T., 1999, "Do Investors Trade Too Much?," American Economic Review, 89(5), 1279­1298.

Petschow, U., J. Meyerhoff, and C. Thomasberger, 1990, Umweltreport DDR. Bilanz der Zerst¨
                                                                                         orung.
  Kosten der Sanierung. Strategien f¨      ¨
                                    ur den Okologischen Umbau. Frankfurt am Main.

Pistor, K., and C. Xu, 2005, "Governing Stock Markets in Transition Economies: Lessons from
  China," American Law and Economics Review, 7, 184­210.

Richter-Levin, G., and I. Akirav, 2003, "Emotional Tagging of memory formation - in the search
  for neural mechanisms.," Brain Research Reviews, 43, 247­256.

Slavtchev, V., and M. Wyrwich, 2017, "TV and Entrepreneurship," IWH Discussion Papers.

Stiehler, H. J., 2001, Leben ohne Westfernsehen: Studien zur Medienwirkung und Mediennutzung in
  der Region Dresden in den 80er Jahren. Leipziger Universit¨
                                                            atsverlag.

Strahilevitz, M., T. Odean, and B. Barber, 2011, "Once Burned, Twice Shy: How Na¨
                                                                                ive Learn-
  ing, Counterfactuals, and Regret Affect the Repurchase of Stocks Previously Sold," Journal of
  Marketing Research, 48, 102­120.

Uttaro, R. A., 1982, "The Voices of America in International Radio Propaganda," Law and Con-
  temporary Problems, 45(1), 103­122.

van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie, 2011, "Financial Literacy and Stock Market Participa-
  tion," Journal of Financial Economics, 101, 449­472.

Wachter, J. A., and M. J. Kahana, 2019, "A retrieved-context theory of financial decisions," Working
  paper.

Wiese, R., 2007, "Sport, a state secret - shielding of the competitive sports system in the GDR,"
  Historical Social Research, 32(1), 154­171.




                                                43
                    Figure 1: Distribution of Investors across Germany
The figure shows the number of brokerage clients per zip-code area. The sample period is June 2004 to
December 2012.




                                                 44
                                     Figure 2: The Art of Propaganda
This figure shows propaganda posters that were used by the communist regimes to promote anti-capitalist,
anti-American, pro-Russian, and pro-Vietnamese attitudes.




                      Panel A: Communist Propaganda against the Stock Market
               Source: V. Ivanov, Vigilance is our weapon, Moscow 1953. Artur Grimmer 1955 in Monika Gibas (2004)




                                 Panel B: Communist Propaganda pro Allies
           Source: Landesarchiv Baden-W¨
                                       urttemberg, Deutsches Historisches Museum, Stadtgeschichtliches Museum Leipzig




                                                              45
                         Figure 3: Sample Selection (Brokerage Bank)
This figure shows survey results provided by the international data and analytics group YouGov regarding
the bank to which the sample brokerage belongs. Respondents state whether (a) they are customers of the
bank, (b) they are former customers of the bank, (c) they generally know this bank, (d) they have seen
advertisements of this bank within the last two weeks, (e) they have talked to a friend or family member
about this bank (f) they generally like this bank. Answers to (f) are given on a 1 ("I hate it") to 5 ("I love
it") scale. In this figure, answers are shown separately for respondents in East and West Germany. None of
the answers differ significantly between East and West Germans.




                                                     46
                                                     Figure 4: Stock-Market Return Expectations
The figure shows average German Stock Index (DAX) return expectations over the next six months, separately
for East (N=148) and West German (N=1,724) respondents, based on answers to a survey conducted by the
market research firm Sentix Behavioral Indices GbR. Respondents are asked about their midterm (6 months)
return expectations about the DAX being bullish (-1), neutral (0), or bearish (1). Places of residence for
respondents are available since September 2016. Monthly averages are constructed for East and West Germany
separately based on all responses (four waves) within a given month.

                                                          Midterm Stock Market Expectations (DAX)
                                               .4
   bullish (-1), neutral (0), or bearish (1)
    Average stock market expectations




                                               .2



                                                0



                                               -.2



                                               -.4
                                                Sept 16       Feb 17          Juni 17     Nov 17   April 18

                                                                                 West Germany
                                                                                 East Germany




                                                                         47
     Figure 5: Attitudes towards Economic Systems and Stock-Market Participation
Panel A indicates attitudes towards economic systems in a survey of 1,529 Germans (1,283 West Germans
and 246 East Germans) conducted by the opinion-poll institute Norstat in July 2018. The figure shows the
fraction of people agreeing to the statements listed on the horizontal axis. Panel B shows average marginal
effects on pro-communist attitudes in logit regressions with stock market participation as the dependent
variable. The sample includes 1600 East Germans surveyed by Norstat in December 2018. The independent
variables are standardized survey responses capturing attitudes towards communism. Survey responses were
elicited on a 4-point or 5-point Likert scale. The controls are gender, a categorical variable for age (6 groups),
a categorical variable for income bracket (10 groups), a categorical variable for education (7 groups), a
categorical variable for employment status (9 groups), and state fixed effects. The precise wording of the
questions for both panels is in Appendix-Table A7.

Panel A: Agreement to statements on socialism, capitalism and stock markets

                       1



                       .8
   Fraction Agreeing




                       .6



                       .4



                       .2

                                                                                                      West
                                                                                                      East
                       0
                            Capitalism Capitalism Capitalism Socialism Investing Rejecting
                             Creates    Creates Should be       is         is   Stock Markets
                            Inequality Coldness Restricted Preferrable Immoral in general




                                                             48
                                      Figure 5: cont'd
Panel B: Stock market participation and pro-communist attitudes




                                             49
                                Figure 6: Small Border Traffic Zone
This figure shows the areas of East and West Germany that belonged to the "Kleiner Grenzverkehr", i.e.,
the "small border traffic" zone. FRG residents living in cities and districts listed as "close to the border"
could visit areas listed as part of the "border circle of the GDR". Source: Ministry of Intra-German Relations
(Bundesministerium f¨   ur innerdeutsche Beziehungen).




                                                     50
                     Table 1: Summary Statistics (Brokerage Sample)

Panel A shows the number of observations, mean, standard deviation (sd), median (p50), 1st per-
centile (p1), and 99th percentile (p99) of all variables in the brokerage sample. The sample period is
2004-2012. Panel B shows East and West averages, the differences, and the corresponding p-values.
All variables are defined in Appendix-Table A1, Panel B.



 Panel A: Summary statistics
                                          Obs.          Mean     sd        p50       p1        p99
                                          (1)            (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
 1. Brokerage account data (individual-level)
 East                                  839,680      0.204       0.403      0.000    0.000     1.000
 Gender (1=male)                       839,680       0.526      0.499      1.000    0.000     1.000
 Investor age (in years)               839,680      59.56       15.64     59.00     23.00     94.00
 Married (1=yes)                       839,680       0.582      0.493      1.000    0.000     1.000
 Time account is open (in months)      839,680      74.223     32.576     74.000    7.000    137.00
 Portfolio value (in Euro)             839,680      25,965     132,268   4,923.47   0.000    304,837
 Stock-market participation (1=yes) 839,680         0.819       0.385      1.000    0.000     1.000
 Fraction of stocks if participant     687,464       0.725      0.391      1.000    0.000     1.000
 Fraction of bonds                     839,272       0.147      0.328      0.000    0.000     1.000
 Passive investments (1=yes)           515,856      0.038       0.192      0.000    0.000     1.000
 N. of assets in portfolio             839,680       4.442      6.921      2.000    1.000     31.000
 Income (1=low, 4=high)                170,824       2.399      0.929      2.000    1.000     4.000
 Risk tolerance (1=low, 3=high)        176,270       1.683      0.557      2.000    1.000     3.000
 Fund fees (in %)                       60,690      1.375       0.495      1.500    0.070     2.400
 Portfolio concentration (Herfindahl) 622,777       0.689       0.331      0.815    0.070     1.000
 Fraction of bank-owned products        90,215      0.416       0.375      0.285    0.000     1.000

 2. Geographic controls
 Real-estate wealth (in Euro)            839,680    152,667    153,658   132,773     0.000    767,913
 Number of local banks                   839,680     95.067    54.157    87.000     25.000    330.00
 Total population                        839,680    125,258    231,429    32,468     1,105   1,353,186
 GDP per capita                          839,680     26,927     11,031    23,919    14,649     69,566
 Number of local firms                   839,680    906.577    620.185   779.000    55.000     2,866
 High-school degree                      839,680     0.160      0.060     0.146     0.076      0.363
 Trust (1=low, 7=high)                   684,441      3.221      0.710     3.143     1.500      5.500
 Familiarity (1=high, 7=low)             699,126     3.583      1.161     3.438      1.000     7.000
 Financial literacy (0=low, 3=high)      698,373     2.679      0.327     2.750      1.000     3.000




                                                   51
                                       Table 1: cont'd

Panel B: Differences
                                         East         West       Difference   p -value
                                        German       German
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)
1. Brokerage account data
Gender (1=male)                          0.395        0.587        -0.191      0.000
Investor age (in years)                 62.532       56.348        6.184       0.000
Married (1=yes)                          0.601        0.577         0.024      0.000
Time account is open (in months)        69.124       75.531        -6.407      0.000
Income (1=low, 4=high)                   2.109        2.516         -.407      0.000
Risk tolerance (1=low, 3=high)           1.494        1.744         -.249      0.000
Portfolio value (in Euro)              20,248.83    27,431.85    -7,183.02     0.000
Stock-market participation (1=yes)       0.609        0.873        -0.264      0.000
Fraction of stocks if participant        0.671        0.735        -0.063      0.000
Fraction of bonds                        0.304        0.107         0.197      0.000
Passive investments (1=yes)              0.018        0.043        -0.025      0.000
N. of assets in portfolio                3.185        4.764        -1.579      0.000
Fund fees (in %)                         1.450        1.363         0.087      0.000
Portfolio concentration (Herfindahl)     0.738        0.681        0.057       0.000
Fraction of bank-owned products          0.440        0.412         0.028      0.009

2. Geographic controls
Real-estate wealth (in Euro)           92,850.15    168,012.30   -75,162.17    0.000
GDP per capita                         19,698.93     28,933.56    -9,234.63    0.000
Number of local firms                   949.47        893.18         56.29     0.480
High-school degree                       0.137         0.165        -0.028     0.000
Trust (1=low, 7=high)                    3.005         3.260       ­0.255      0.000
Familiarity (1=high, 7=low)              3.783         3.546         0.237     0.020
Financial literacy (0=low, 3=high)       2.609         2.692        -0.083     0.237




                                             52
           Table 2: Differences in Investment Behavior (Brokerage Sample)
All estimations use the brokerage data from June 2004 to December 2012. The coefficients are
average marginal effects from a logit regression in column 1, and OLS estimates in columns 2 and
3. Stock-market participation (in column 1) is an indicator equal to one if an investor holds stocks
or equity funds in her portfolio in a given year. Fraction of stocks (in column 2) is conditional on
stock-market participation. In column (3), the sample is restricted to accounts with bond holding
information. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives in East Germany. All variables
are described in detail in Appendix-Table A1, Panel B. The z -statistics (in column 1) and the
t -statistics (in columns 2 and 3) are based on standard errors clustered by municipality.

                       Sample :                        Brokerage Sample
        Dependent Variable :      Stock-market          Fraction of stocks     Fraction of bonds
                                  participation           if participant
                                       (1)                      (2)                   (3)
 East                                ­0.156                 ­0.072                  0.160
                                     (­13.47)                (­7.80)                 (9.77)
 Gender (1=male)                      0.073                  0.051                 ­0.081
                                      (22.76)                (16.08)               (­22.14)
 Investor age                        ­0.110                  0.029                  0.141
                                     (­19.05)                 (3.25)                (15.71)
 Married (1=yes)                      0.042                  0.026                 ­0.041
                                      (19.26)                 (8.14)               (­12.79)
 Ln(Portfolio value)                 ­0.011                  0.042                  0.034
                                      (­8.37)                (33.83)                (21.92)
 Ln(Number of local banks)             0.007                ­0.019                  0.020
                                       (0.81)                (­2.56)                 (2.43)
 Ln(Total population)                  0.008                   0.005               ­0.010
                                       (1.63)                 (1.64)                (­2.85)
 Time account is open                 0.124                 ­0.021                 ­0.096
                                      (38.70)                (­6.84)               (­19.01)
 Ln(Real estate wealth)              ­0.009                   ­0.002               0.003
                                      (­6.65)                (­1.47)                 (3.55)
 High-school degree                    0.133                   0.013               ­0.232
                                       (1.23)                 (0.22)                (­2.61)
 Ln(GDP per capita)                    0.029                  ­0.014                 0.023
                                       (1.90)                (­1.08)                 (1.62)
 Ln(Number of local firms)             0.004                 ­0.006                  ­0.004
                                       (0.83)                (­1.74)                (­0.79)
 Year FE                                 yes                    yes                    yes
 Pseudo/Adj. R2                         0.19                   0.09                   0.25
 West mean                             0.873                   0.735                  0.107
 Observations                         839,680                687,464                839,272


                                                  53
                Table 3: Differences in Investment Behavior (Bank Sample)
Results in this table are based on cross-sectional bank data from June 2017. We report average
marginal effects from logit regressions in columns (1) and (2), and OLS estimates in column (3).
Stock-market participation is an indicator equal to one if an investor holds stocks in her portfolio in a
given year. Stock-market participation in column (2) is conditional on having a portfolio, and fraction
of stocks in column (3) is further conditional on stock-market participation. Information on bond
holdings are not available in the bank sample. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives
in East Germany. All variables are described in detail in Appendix-Table A1, Panel B. z -statistics
(columns (1)&(2)) and t -statistics (column (3)) are based on standard errors clustered by county.

                   Sample :                                Bank Sample
     Dependent Variable :        Stock-market              Participation            Fraction stocks
                                 participation              if portfolio             if participant
                                      (1)                       (2)                        (3)
 East                              -0.055***                 -0.145***                 -0.154***
                                     (-4.08)                   (-4.23)                   (-4.80)
 Gender (1=male)                    0.075***                  0.126***                  0.154***
                                      (9.11)                    (4.52)                    (6.10)
 Investor age                       0.007***                  0.017***                   0.010**
                                      (3.39)                    (3.75)                    (2.59)
 Investor age squared               -0.000**                 -0.000***                 -0.000***
                                     (-2.55)                   (-3.44)                   (-2.44)
 Married (1=yes)                      -0.003                    -0.016                    -0.010
                                     (-0.46)                   (-0.61)                   (-0.39)
 Employed (1=yes)                    0.013*                     -0.017                    -0.030
                                      (1.69)                   (-0.62)                   (-1.15)
 Trainee (1=yes)                    -0.055**                    -0.028                   -0.090*
                                     (-2.47)                   (-0.49)                   (-1.75)
 Retiree (1=yes)                      -0.024                     0.058                    -0.039
                                     (-1.15)                   (-0.97)                   (-0.70)
 Online banking (1=yes)             0.145***                 0.180***                   0.211***
                                     (10.82)                    (5.34)                    (6.54)
 Mortgage (1=yes)                   -0.033**                  -0.103**                  -0.111**
                                     (-2.08)                   (-2.27)                   (-2.49)
 Relationship with bank               -0.001                 -0.004***                 -0.005***
                                     (-1.64)                   (-2.89)                   (-4.50)
 Credit score                      -2.519***                    -1.733                    -0.884
                                     (-3.27)                   (-2.01)                   (-1.04)
 Ln(Income)                        -0.013***                    -0.000                 -0.011***
                                     (-9.93)                   (0.919)                   (-3.05)
 Ln(Savings)                       0.026***                     0.004                     -0.001
                                     (15.07)                    (0.76)                   (-0.25)
 Ln(Portfolio value)                                         0.039***                   0.013***
                                                                (9.07)                    (3.54)
 Pseudo/Adj. R2                      0.157                       0.143                     0.148
 Observations                        6,903                       1,445                     1,340

                                                   54
                                         Table 4: Movers
All estimations use the bank data and survey results obtained from the same bank. The coefficients
are average marginal effects from logit regressions, with stock-market participation as the dependent
variable. Stock-market participation is an indicator equal to one if an investor holds stocks in her
portfolio in a given year. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives in East Germany.
Mover is an indicator equal to one if an investor has moved from East to West Germany. Moved
20 years ago is an indicator equal to one if an investor has moved from East to West Germany at
least 20 years ago. In column (2), we exclude all East Germans and only compare West Germans to
former East German investors who have moved to and now live in West Germany. In column (3),
we additionally exclude all East Germans who moved to West Germany later than 20 years ago.
We include the same set of control variables as in Table 3. All variables are described in detail in
Appendix-Table A1, Panel B. The z -statistics are based on standard errors clustered by county.

 Dependent Variable :                           Stock-market participation
             Sample :        Bank Sample                 Bank Sample: West Germans Only
                                   (1)                      (2)                       (3)
 East                          -0.244***
                                 (-2.12)
 Mover                          -0.107*                  -0.124**
                                 (-1.78)                  (-1.83)
 Moved 20 years ago                                                                -0.214**
                                                                                    (-2.36)
 Control variables                yes                       yes                       yes
 Pseudo R2                       0.354                     0.333                     0.327
 Observations                     241                       198                       175




                                                 55
                               Table 5: Alternative Explanations
All estimations use the brokerage data from June 2004 to December 2012. The coefficients are
average marginal effects from logit regressions, with stock-market participation as the dependent
variable. The corresponding results for the fractions of stocks and bonds are reported in Appendix-
Table A6. Stock-market participation is an indicator equal to one if an investor holds stocks or
equity funds in her portfolio in a given year. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives
in East Germany. We include the same set of control variables as in Table 2, and in addition risk
tolerance, ranging from 1 (conservative) to 3 (speculative), in column 1; trust, ranging from 1 (low)
to 7 (high), in column 2; familiarity with the stock market, ranging from 1 (high) to 7 (low), in
column 3; financial literacy ranging from 0 (low) to 3 (high) in column 4; or income ranging from
1 (below 1,000 Euro per month) to 4 (above 3,000 Euro per month) in column 5, as well as all
additional variables jointly in column 6. Risk tolerance and income are measured at the investor
level, and trust, familiarity, and financial literacy at the county level. All variables are described in
detail in Appendix-Table A1, Panel B. The z -statistics are based on standard errors clustered by
municipality.


 Dependent Variable :                             Stock-market participation
               Sample :                                 Brokerage Sample
                             (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)
 East                     ­0.172       ­0.202        ­0.192       ­0.186       ­0.232        ­0.128
                           (­9.29)     (­14.24)      (­13.20)     (­12.88)      (­9.91)       (­5.46)
 Risk tolerance            0.307                                                              0.296
                           (52.56)                                                            (51.28)
 Trust                                  0.016                                                 0.065
                                         (2.13)                                                (3.60)
 Familiarity                                            ­0.008                               0.045
                                                        (­1.53)                                (4.52)
 Financial literacy                                                0.052                      0.124
                                                                    (4.08)                     (5.25)
 Income                                                                         0.072         0.046
                                                                                (20.43)       (12.05)
 Control variables           yes          yes             yes        yes           yes           yes
 Year FE                     yes          yes             yes        yes           yes           yes
 Pseudo R2                   0.20         0.21            0.20       0.21         0.10          0.22
 West Mean                  0.621        0.880           0.880      0.880        0.621         0.607
 Observations              176,270      684,441         699,126    698,373      170,824       117,288




                                                   56
                         Table 6: Capitalist versus Communist Stocks
All estimations use the brokerage data from June 2004 to December 2012. The coefficient estimates
are from tobit regressions where the dependent variable is the fraction of financial companies (column
1), the fraction of US companies (column 2), the fraction of Chinese, Russian, or Vietnamese
companies (column 3), and the fraction of (formerly) state-owned companies (column 4) in an
investor's portfolio. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives in East Germany. We
include the same control variables as in Table 2. All variables are described in detail in Appendix-
Table A1, Panel B. The t -statistics are based on standard errors clustered by municipality level.

                             Financial               US             Chinese,             State-
                               firms               firms           Russian, or           owned
                                                                   Vietn. firms           firms
                                 (1)                  (2)              (3)                  (4)
East                         ­0.076              ­0.048             0.104               0.041
                              (­4.74)             (­2.71)             (4.21)             (3.11)
Gender (1=male)              0.083                0.125             0.143              ­0.047
                              (14.47)             (18.56)             (9.40)           (­14.37)
Investor age                 ­0.279              ­0.265             ­0.190              0.066
                             (­22.49)            (­15.93)            (­6.52)             (8.08)
Married (1=yes)               0.024                ­0.002             ­0.003             ­0.001
                               (4.11)             (­0.31)            (­0.21)            (­0.34)
Portfolio value               0.119               0.066             0.137               0.002
                              (59.71)             (27.16)            (35.63)             (1.96)
Ln(N. of local banks)           0.002               0.015            ­0.008            ­0.022
                               (0.16)              (1.40)            (­0.46)            (­3.27)
Ln(Total population)            0.004              ­0.006              0.007           ­0.006
                               (0.99)             (­1.21)             (1.00)            (­2.30)
Time account is open         ­0.034              0.097              0.060              ­0.040
                              (­7.49)             (14.27)             (4.56)           (­13.28)
Ln(Real-estate wealth)         ­0.003            ­0.005              ­0.005              0.003
                              (­1.10)             (­2.69)            (­1.65)             (1.84)
High-school degree            0.198                0.028            ­0.371               0.034
                               (2.16)              (0.27)            (­2.08)             (0.46)
Ln(GDP per capita)             0.004              0.067             0.095              ­0.040
                               (0.18)              (3.06)             (2.82)            (­2.51)
Ln(N. of local firms)        0.023                 0.012              0.002              ­0.001
                               (4.15)              (1.85)             (0.18)            (­0.39)
Year FE                          yes                 yes                yes                yes
Pseudo R2                      0.096                0.036              0.088             0.019
West Mean                       0.102               0.061              0.005              0.188
Observations                  622,777             622,777            622,777            551,624




                                                 57
                                 Table 7: Intensity of Exposure
All estimations use the brokerage data from June 2004 to December 2012. The coefficients are
average marginal effects from logit regressions, with stock-market participation as the dependent
variable. The corresponding results for the fractions of stocks and bonds are reported in Appendix-
Table A10. Stock-market participation is an indicator equal to one if an investor holds stocks or
equity funds in her portfolio in a given year. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives in
East Germany. In addition to the full set of control variables from Table 2, we include interactions
of the East dummy with an indicator for being 50 years of age or older (in column 1), with an
indicator for locations outside the "Small Border Traffic" zone (Kleiner Grenzverkehr) (in column
2). In column 3, we include both interactions. In columns 2 and 3, we also add the baseline indicator
for being age 50 and above. z -stats based on standard errors clustered by municipality are presented
in parentheses.

 Dependent Variable :                            Stock-market participation
                                   Age                     Distance                      All
                               interaction                interaction               interactions
                                   (1)                        (2)                        (3)
East                            ­0.092                     ­0.120                    ­0.060
                                 (­7.96)                    (­6.51)                   (­3.41)
East × Above 50                 ­0.079                                               ­0.076
                                (­11.32)                                             (­10.73)
East × Distance                                            ­0.054                    ­0.052
                                                            (­2.52)                   (­2.47)
Above 50                         0.036                                               0.034
                                  (7.96)                                               (7.74)
Control variables                   yes                       yes                       yes
Year FE                             yes                       yes                       yes
Pseudo R2                          0.19                      0.19                       0.20
West Mean                         0.873                      0.873                     0.873
Observations                     839,680                    837,121                   837,121




                                                  58
                                  Table 8: Emotional Tagging
All estimations use the brokerage data from June 2004 to December 2012. The coefficients are
average marginal effects from logit regressions, with stock-market participation as the dependent
variable. The corresponding results for the fractions of stocks and bonds are reported in Appendix-
Table A11. Stock-market participation is an indicator equal to one if an investor holds stocks or
equity funds in her portfolio in a given year. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives in
East Germany. In addition to the full set of control variables from Table 2, we include interactions
of the East dummy with different proxies for negative (Panel A) or positive (Panel B) emotional
tagging. In Panel A, these proxies are: an indicator for heavily polluted GDR counties according
to the 1990 report of the German ministry of environmental affairs (in column 1), the fraction of
Catholics and Protestants in a county according to the 2011 census (in column 2), and an indicator
for counties in the former GDR that did not receive West German TV signals (in column 3). In Panel
B, the proxies are: an indicator for cities that were renamed during the GDR regime (in column
1), namely, Chemnitz (Karl-Marx-Stadt), Kriegsdorf (Friedensdorf), Neuhardenberg (Marxwalde),
Werminghoff (Knappenrode), and Eisenh¨     uttenstadt (Stalinstadt); the fraction of voluntary STASI
participation in county during the GDR regime (column 2), the fraction of survey respondents in a
county who state that the former political system of the GDR had many positive aspects (column
3), and an indicator equal to one if an Olympic medal winner as of the Wikipedia list of the GDR's
Olympic champions was born in the same municipality than an East German investor (column 4).
We multiply the Olympic medal indicator with the inverse population ratio to account for higher
visibility in smaller areas. All variables are described in detail in Appendix-Table A1, Panel B.
z -stats based on standard errors clustered by municipality are presented in parentheses.

 Panel A: Negative Emotional Tagging
 Dependent Variable :                            Stock-market participation
                                Pollution                  Religion                 No West-TV
                                   (1)                       (2)                        (3)
 East                           ­0.162                     ­0.274                    ­0.159
                                (­13.52)                    (­7.31)                  (­13.42)
 East × Pollution                0.068
                                  (2.00)
 East × Religion                                           0.006
                                                            (3.74)
 East × No West TV                                                                    0.094
                                                                                       (3.37)
 Control variables                 yes                        yes                       yes
 Year FE                           yes                        yes                       yes
 Pseudo R2                        0.19                       0.20                      0.19
 West Mean                        0.873                      0.873                     0.873
 Observations                    839,680                    839,680                   839,680




                                                  59
                                      Table 8: cont'd

Panel B: Positive Emotional Tagging
       Dependent Variable :                      Stock-market participation
                              Renamed            Voluntary         Liked       Olympic
                                city              STASI            GDR        champion
                                (1)                 (2)             (3)          (4)
East                          ­0.150             ­0.121          ­0.101       ­0.152
                              (­13.67)            (­7.29)         (­7.56)     (--13.77)
East × Renamed city           ­0.132
                               (­3.83)
East × STASI                                     ­0.085
                                                  (­2.55)
East × Liked GDR politics                                        ­0.231
                                                                  (­5.82)
East × Olympic champion                                                       ­0.118
                                                                              (­1.80)
Control variables                yes                yes             yes         yes
Year FE                          yes                yes             yes         yes
Pseudo R2                       0.19               0.19            0.20        0.19
West Mean                       0.873              0.873           0.873       0.873
Observations                   839,680            839,680         839,461     839,680




                                            60
                           Table 9: Trigger Points: Election Years
All estimations use the brokerage data from June 2004 to December 2012. The coefficients are
average marginal effects from a logit regression in column (1), and OLS estimates in columns
(2) and (3). Stock-market participation (in column 1) is an indicator equal to one if an investor
holds stocks or equity funds in her portfolio in a given year. Fraction of stocks (in column 2) is
conditional on stock-market participation. East is an indicator equal to one if an investor lives in
East Germany. In addition to the full set of control variables from Table 2, we include interactions
of the East dummy with an indicator for federal election years (2005 and 2009 in our sample). All
variables are described in detail in Appendix-Table A1, Panel B. The z -statistics (in column 1) and
t -statistics (in columns 2 and 3) are based on standard errors clustered by municipality.

 Dependent Variable :        Stock-market            Fraction of stocks       Fraction of bonds
                             participation             if participant
                                  (1)                        (2)                     (3)
 East                          ­0.151                    ­0.073                    0.153
                               (­13.09)                   (­8.00)                   (9.47)
 East × Election year          ­0.019                      0.004                   0.025
                                (­8.16)                    (0.92)                   (4.96)
 Control variables                yes                       yes                       yes
 Year FE                          yes                       yes                       yes
 Pseudo/Adj. R2                  0.19                       0.09                     0.25
 West Mean                       0.873                     0.735                    0.107
 Observations                   839,680                   687,464                  839,272




                                                61
                                         Table 10: Are Anti-Capitalist Attitudes Costly?
     All estimations use the brokerage data from June 2004 to December 2012. In Panel A, we use equal- or value-weighted returns,
     respectively, of a difference portfolio that is long in East German investors' stock holdings and short in West German investors'
     stock holdings as dependent variables. Performance alphas are calculated using the Global CAPM market factor in columns (1)
     and (4), the Global Fama and French (1993) factors in columns (2) and (5), and the Global Carhart (1997) four-factor model
     in columns (3) and (6). Global risk factors are from Kenneth French's website. Panel B shows average marginal effects from
     a logit regression in column (1), and OLS estimates in columns (2) to (5). The dependent variables are: an indicator equal to
     one if an investor holds index funds or ETFs (in column 1), the number of assets in an investor's portfolio (in column 2), the
     average fund fees an investor pays her all-equity funds (in column 3), the Herfindahl index of an investor's stock holdings (in
     column 4), and the fraction of bank-owned products an investor holds in her portfolio (in column 5). We regress the dependent
     variables on the East German dummy variable and the same set of control variables as in Table 2. The t -stats are calculated
     from standard errors clustered by municipality.


        Panel A: Monthly performance alphas
                                                     Equal weighted                                 Value weighted
                                             -W                 -W             -W           -W                 -W             -W
                                       CAPME         3-FactorE      4-FactorE         CAPME         3-FactorE      4-FactorE
62




                                           t                  t              t            t                  t              t
                                            (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)
                              -W est
        Performance alphaEast
                         t               -0.080**        -0.073**        -0.076**       -0.109**       -0.107**        -0.101**
                                          (-2.04)         (-2.00)         (-2.08)        (-2.36)        (-2.32)         (-2.18)
        MKTRFGlobal                     -0.030***       -0.023***       -0.022***        0.018*         0.020*           0.017
                                          (-4.59)         (-4.03)         (-3.77)        (1.79)         (1.98)          (1.57)
        SMBGlobal                                       -0.086***       -0.087***                       -0.033          -0.031
                                                          (-3.41)         (-3.49)                       (-1.19)         (-1.10)
        HMLGlobal                                         -0.026          -0.022                        -0.004          -0.011
                                                          (-1.34)         (-1.08)                       (-0.10)         (-0.31)
        WMLGlobal                                                          0.008                                        -0.014
                                                                          (0.91)                                        (-1.04)
        Adj. R2                            0.133          0.216            0.212          0.032          0.023           0.025
        Observations                         92             92               92             92             92              92
                                      Table 10: cont'd


Panel B: Other costs
                          Passive        # of            Fund    Herfindahl   Bank owned
                        investments     assets            fees     index       products
                            (1)          (2)               (3)      (4)           (5)
East                     ­0.017        ­1.509       0.051        0.038           0.031
                          (­4.47)       (­4.74)       (4.71)       (2.72)        (1.73)
Gender (1=male)           0.014        1.023          ­0.002     ­0.036        ­0.060
                          (13.99)       (15.61)      (­0.38)     (­14.28)      (­12.93)
Investor age             ­0.044         ­0.196       0.059       0.043          0.045
                         (­23.50)       (­1.01)       (4.13)       (4.77)        (4.35)
Married (1=yes)           0.007        0.314          ­0.002      ­0.003       ­0.025
                           (6.08)        (5.41)      (­0.28)      (­1.33)       (­5.65)
Ln(Portfolio value)       0.010        1.137        ­0.011       ­0.075        ­0.090
                          (24.63)       (31.79)      (­6.44)     (­80.25)      (­72.80)
Ln(N. of local banks)     0.004          0.239      ­0.017        ­0.003          0.010
                           (2.18)        (1.44)      (­2.42)      (­0.50)        (1.10)
Ln(Total population)       ­0.000        0.059        0.000       ­0.002          0.003
                          (­0.27)        (1.06)       (0.15)      (­1.09)        (0.98)
Time account is open      0.008        1.798          ­0.000     ­0.050        ­0.122
                           (6.33)       (17.41)      (­0.03)     (­13.20)      (­16.91)
Real-estate wealth       ­0.001        ­0.073         0.003        0.002         ­0.002
                          (­3.72)       (­3.13)       (1.89)       (1.69)       (­1.36)
High-school degree        0.061          2.149      ­0.207        ­0.019         ­0.087
                           (2.81)        (1.16)      (­2.54)      (­0.31)       (­0.86)
Ln(GDP per capita)        0.012         0.524         ­0.011      ­0.010         ­0.012
                           (2.85)        (2.22)      (­0.68)      (­0.90)       (­0.53)
Ln(N. of local firms)    0.003           0.157      ­0.012        ­0.005          0.002
                           (3.01)        (1.85)      (­2.66)      (­1.53)        (0.43)
Year FE                      yes           yes          yes          yes           yes
Pseudo/Adj. R2              0.11          0.20         0.08         0.34           0.36
Observations              515,856       839,680       60,690      622,777        90,215




                                             63
