                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                CONVEX SUPPLY CURVES

                                      Christoph Boehm
                                     Nitya Pandalai-Nayar

                                      Working Paper 26829
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26829


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank our discussants Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Hikaru Saijo. The paper also benefited from
conversations with Mark Aguiar, Pol Antras, David Baqaee, Saroj Bhattarai, Oli Coibion, Javier
Cravino, Aaron Flaaen, Oleg Itskhoki, Andrei Levchenko, Chris Sims, and Jaume Ventura as
well as with seminar participants at UT Austin, Princeton, Wisconsin, the Federal Reserve Board,
the St Louis Fed, Tsinghua, Texas A\&M, SED Annual Meetings, ASSA Annual Meetings, the
West Coast International/Macro Workshop and Hong Kong University. Pandalai-Nayar thanks
the ECB for the Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy Fellowship, which supported this research. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christoph Boehm and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Convex Supply Curves
Christoph Boehm and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
NBER Working Paper No. 26829
March 2020
JEL No. E22,E32,E52,E62,F44

                                           ABSTRACT

We provide evidence that industries' supply curves are convex. To guide our empirical analysis,
we develop a putty-clay model in which capacity constraints at the plant level generate convex
supply curves at the industry level. The model's key insight is that an industry's capacity
utilization rate is a sufficient statistic for the slope of its supply curve. Using data on capacity
utilization and three different instruments, we estimate the supply curve and find robust evidence
for convexity. Supply curves are essentially flat at low levels of capacity utilization but increasing
at higher levels. Further, industries with low initial capacity utilization rates expand production
twice as much after demand shocks as industries that produce close to their capacity limit. The
nonlinearity we identify has a number of macroeconomic implications, including that responses
to shocks are state-dependent, that the Phillips curve is convex, and that the welfare costs of
business cycles are larger than in Lucas (1987).


Christoph Boehm
The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Economics
BRB 3.114
2225 Speedway
Austin, TX 78712
chrisboe@umich.edu

Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
3.142 BRB, 2225 Speedway
Austin, TX 78713
and NBER
npnayar@utexas.edu
1    Introduction

Up until a decade ago, most commonly used frameworks in macroeconomics were either
explicitly linearized, or almost linear when solved exactly (Parker, 2011). A limitation of
such frameworks is that they can lead to imprecise conclusions on aspects of the economy
that are fundamentally nonlinear. While recent research has emphasized the role of such
nonlinearities, there is limited direct empirical evidence on their importance.1 When the
evidence exists, it is frequently controversial. For instance, there is a lack of consensus as to
whether the fiscal multiplier varies with the state of the business cycle.2
    In this paper we document robust evidence for one particular nonlinearity--we show that
industries' supply curves are convex. At the industry level, our estimates suggest that the
curvature of supply curves is economically sizable. Industries that produce close to capacity
respond to a positive demand shock by raising their prices by six times as much as industries
that produce far below their capacity. At the same time, their production response is cut in
half. In the aggregate, convex supply curves have sizable and policy relevant implications,
including a countercyclical fiscal multiplier, a convex Phillips curve, and greater welfare costs
of business cycles than standard models.
    We argue that convex supply curves at the industry level arise from capacity constraints
at the plant level. Micro data from the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity (QSPC) suggests
that capacity constraints indeed limit plants' production. As Figure 1 illustrates, a significant
fraction of U.S. manufacturing establishments produces at "full capacity" as defined in the
QSPC or, equivalently, at a capacity utilization rate of one. These plants presumably have
limited room for increasing production in the short run and are likely to raise their price
when confronted with an increase in demand.
    We formalize this logic by developing a model in which capacity constraints at the plant
level generate supply curves that are convex at the industry level. In the model, firms invest
into a set of factors that are fixed in the short run and, once chosen, determine the firm's
maximum production capacity. When the demand for a firm's good materializes sufficiently
high, production becomes constrained by capacity. Constrained firms' production is locally
unresponsive to shocks because any changes in demand are absorbed in the markup. The
framework permits simple aggregation to the industry level, where it generates a supply curve
    1
      Baqaee and Farhi (2019) highlight that disregarding nonlinearities in models with input-output linkages can
have large quantitative implications.
    2
      While Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012; 2013a; 2013b) argue that the multiplier is likely large during down-
turns, Ramey and Zubairy (2018) find that such state dependence is small or nonexistent.




                                                        1
                             Figure 1: Densities of plant capacity utilization




        Notes: The data are from the QSPC of the U.S. Census Bureau. The figure shows kernel density
        estimates which are truncated below the 5th and above the 95th percentile due to Census disclosure
        requirements. We describe the data and discuss additional results in Appendix A.



that is convex in logarithms.3 Its key implication is that an industry's capacity utilization
rate is a sufficient statistic for its supply elasticity. The model builds on prior work by
Fagnart, Licandro, and Portier (1999), is qualitatively consistent with plant-level facts on
capacity utilization, and serves as a starting point for our empirical analysis.
    Our main contribution is to provide empirical evidence that industry's supply curves
are convex. The intuition of our empirical strategy is as follows. As Figure 1 shows, the
fraction of capacity constrained plants varies over time. In 2007 many plants produced at full
capacity. Subsequently, the Great Recession induced a leftward shift of the distribution of
utilization rates and fewer plants were constrained by capacity. By 2011, the distribution of
utilization rates had partially recovered. If constrained plants respond differently to demand
   3
     The model's supply curve is convex in logarithms, implying that the inverse supply elasticity is increasing in
output. This contrasts with commonly used production functions such as constant elasticity of substitution (CES).
When parameterized with decreasing returns to scale, these production functions generate cost functions that are
linearly increasing in logs and thus have a constant (inverse) supply elasticity. Throughout this paper, we refer to
supply curves as convex when they are convex in logs.


                                                         2
shocks than unconstrained plants, the fraction of constrained plants will affect an industry's
pricing and production responses to such shocks. Our estimation exploits this variation
across time and industries by allowing industries' price responses to depend on their initial
capacity utilization rate. We show formally that in a regression of prices on quantities an
interaction term with the utilization rate identifies the curvature of the supply curve.
   We estimate the supply curve using three alternative instruments to trace out its slope
and curvature. First, we use a version of the World Import Demand instrument (Hummels
et al., 2014). This instrument assumes that appropriately purified changes in foreign im-
ports are uncorrelated with the industry's unobserved supply shocks. Second, and building
on Shea (1993a,b), we construct an instrument from changes in downstream demand. The
idea of this instrument is to alleviate simultaneity concerns in production networks by iso-
lating variation from large downstream industries. Third, we consider changes in industries'
effective exchange rates. Conditional on holding industries' costs constant, depreciations in
the exchange rate stimulate demand from abroad.
   The estimates suggest that supply curves are highly elastic at low levels of capacity uti-
lization. At low capacity utilization rates, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that indus-
tries' supply curves are horizontal. This contrasts to an estimated inverse supply elasticity
of approximately 0.3 at the median and between 0.45 and 0.61 at high levels of capacity
utilization. We also directly estimate production responses to demand shifts (the reduced
form). We find that production responds twice as much to the same sized demand shock for
industries below the 15th percentile when compared to industries above the 85th percentile.
Our estimation uses the measures of capacity utilization from the Federal Reserve Board
(FRB), which are close empirical analogues to the corresponding object in the model. The
estimates are similar for all three instruments.
   To study the aggregate implications of convex supply curves, we develop a nonlinear
network model of 71 industries and calibrate it to match the estimated supply curves. In
our benchmark calibration the fiscal multiplier is countercyclical and varies between 0.55
and 0.68 over the business cycle. This degree of state-dependence is not trivial, but smaller
than the estimates in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2013a,b). The partial elasticity
of real marginal costs with respect to output--which plays a critical role for determining
the slope of the Phillips curve in models with price rigidities--is procyclical and drops by
approximately 20 percent during the Great Recession. This finding may partially explain
the "missing disinflation" observed at the time and is relevant for stabilization policy that
relies on generating inflation (e.g. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011). Finally, the


                                              3
welfare costs of business cycles are approximately twice as high as in Lucas (1987).

Related literature        Early work on capacity goes back to Chamberlin (1933) and Robinson
(1933). Cassels (1937) noted that definitions of capacity require an assumption on which
factors of production are held fixed. In line with this argument, today's measures of capacity
from the QSPC assume that a plant's capital stock is fixed, while all other factors can be
freely varied. In the 1950s and 1960s, Smithies (1957), Klein (1960), and others began
to introduce capacity and utilization into business cycle theories, and studied theoretical
questions on measurement of capacity. A recurring topic highlighted by this literature is that
engineering-based concepts of capacity are unsatisfactory from the point of view of economic
decision making, since they disregard firms' economic incentives. Current measures from the
QSPC and its predecessor, the Survey of Plant Capacity (SPC), explicitly address this issue
by defining capacity as the technically and economically sustainable level of production.4
    In part due to measurement difficulties, early series on capacity utilization were discontin-
ued or the underlying methodology changed. Shapiro (1989) provided a negative assessment
of the Federal Reserve Board's (FRB) measures of capacity and utilization at the time, since
the evidence appeared to be inconsistent with the intuition that "Capacity is best thought
of as the level of output where the marginal cost curve becomes steep" (Shapiro, 1989, p.
204). Our evidence is consistent with this intuition, although we note that it is neither the-
oretically nor empirically clear whether the steepness of the supply curve close to capacity
arises from increases in marginal costs or markups. Corrado and Mattey (1997) and Morin
and Stevens (2004) discuss the FRB's current measures of capacity utilization. We provide a
brief summary in Section 3. Of course, the FRB's primary objective is to use its measures of
capacity utilization to gauge inflationary pressures. Among many others, Stock and Watson
(1999) find capacity utilization to be a useful predictor of inflation.
    The concept of capacity utilization is distinct from--although related to--capital utiliza-
tion, which measures the fraction of time the capital stock operates. A large literature in
macroeconomics has studied models in which capital services vary at high frequencies due
to a utilization choice. These include Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman, 1988, Bils and
Cho, 1994, Cooley, Hansen, and Prescott, 1995, Burnside and Eichenbaum, 1996, Gilchrist
and Williams, 2000, Hansen and Prescott, 2005, among others. Our model builds on Fag-
nart, Licandro, and Portier (1999), who explicitly model capacity utilization. The nonlinear
    4
      For instance, the QSPC asks respondents about their "full production capability" under the assumption that
"the number of shifts, hours of operation and overtime pay that can be sustained under normal conditions and a
realistic work schedule in the long run."


                                                       4
implications of capacity utilization and related notions of slack have received relatively lit-
tle attention. Two important exceptions are Michaillat (2014), who develops the idea that
slack in the labor market (or a convex labor supply curve) leads to state-dependent fiscal
multipliers, and Kuhn and George (2017) who study the quantitative implications of convex
supply curves in a single sector general equilibrium model.
    Lastly, our paper is related to prior work that estimates production functions and the
degree of returns to scale. Standard estimation techniques of production functions typically
assume that the production function is Cobb-Douglas (Olley and Pakes, 1996; Levinsohn and
Petrin, 2003; Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer, 2015). This assumption rules out that production
functions are convex in logs. Many other papers estimate the degree of returns to scale. A
recent example is Almunia et al. (2018), who find that firms' production technologies have
decreasing returns to scale. Since they assume that the production function is CES, they also
rule out that production functions are convex in logs. Perhaps the most closely related paper
is Shea (1993a), who found that supply curves in many industries slope up. His benchmark
estimate of the inverse supply elasticity on a pooled sample is 0.18. When we disregard
second order terms and estimate a linear specification, we obtain a very similar value of
0.23.

Roadmap      We begin in Section 2 with presenting a simple model that features utilization
of capacity and motivates our empirical strategy. After discussing the data and identification
we present our empirical results in Section 3. We discuss the aggregate general equilibrium
implications of our findings in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.


2       Theoretical framework

This section lays out the theoretical framework for this paper. We begin with developing a
simple putty-clay model, which features a concept of capacity that aligns well with measured
capacity in the data. When aggregated to the industry level, the model generates a supply
curve that is typically increasing and convex in logs. We subsequently specify our estimating
equations. All proofs are in Appendix B.
    For maximum clarity, the model in this section assumes that prices are flexible. In
Appendix C we relax this assumption and derive our estimating equations in a version of
the model with sticky prices.



                                              5
2.1     A simple theory of capacity constraints and convex supply curves

Our framework features a competitive aggregating firm and monopolistically competitive
intermediate goods firms. In order to generate a notion of capacity and utilization, we
assume a putty-clay-type production function (as in Fagnart, Licandro, and Portier, 1999),
which requires firms to choose their maximum scale prior to making the production decision.
If demand materializes sufficiently high, production will be constrained by capacity.

2.1.1    Aggregating firm

A competitive aggregating firm uses a unit continuum of varieties, indexed j , as inputs into
a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregator to produce the industry's composite
good,
                                                                                     
                                              1                           -1         -1
                                                           1
                              Yt =                t (j ) yt (j )
                                                                               dj         .   (1)
                                          0

Parameter  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution and the weights  represent firm-specific and
time-varying demand shocks for intermediate goods producers. For simplicity, we assume
that these shocks are drawn independently and identically from distribution G with E [ ] = 1
and E [ 2 ] < .
   Taking prices as given, the final goods firm maximizes profits subject to the production
function (1). The resulting input demand curves are
                                                                                    -
                                                                    py
                                                                     t (j )
                                    yt (j ) = t (j ) Yt                                       (2)
                                                                     PtY

for all j , where the industry's price index is given by
                                                                                     1
                                                  1                                 1-
                                                                     1-
                              PtY   =                 t (j ) py
                                                              t   (j )         dj         .   (3)
                                              0


2.1.2    Intermediate goods producers

Consistent with Figure 1, we assume that a firm's capacity can limit production in the
short run. Following Fagnart, Licandro, and Portier (1999), the firm has to decide ex-ante
on the maximum of variable inputs, v
                                   ¯t , that it can employ (or process) in the short run.
Since short-run variable inputs vt include primarily production workers and intermediates,
v
¯t has a natural interpretation as the number of workstations or the capacity to process
intermediates. To preserve clarity we drop the index j throughout this section.

                                                           6
Production and capacity          Let qt denote the firm's idiosyncratic production capacity, which
is predetermined within the period. The firm's production function is

                                              vt
                                    yt = qt      ,    where vt  v
                                                                ¯t .                                (4)
                                              v
                                              ¯t

That is, production yt is linear in variable inputs vt , but subject to an upper bound in the
short run, because the variable inputs vt cannot exceed the predetermined value v
                                                                                ¯t .
   Letting zt denote productivity and kt capital, firm's production capacity takes the form

                                          qt = zt F (kt , v
                                                          ¯t ) .                                    (5)

The function F is increasing in kt and v
                                       ¯t , and exhibits constant returns to scale in its two
arguments. The latter assumption implies that firm's actual production can be written as
yt = zt F (t , 1) vt where t = kt /v
                                   ¯t . That is, the marginal product of vt is zt F (t , 1), which is
increasing in zt and t . Letting pv
                                  t denote the price of the variable input bundle vt , short-run
marginal costs are
                                                          pv
                                                           t
                                         mct =                    .                                 (6)
                                                     zt F (t , 1)

Dynamic problem        Firms own their capital stock k , discount future profits at rate r, and
maximize the present value of profits. We allow firm's investment to be subject to possibly
non-convex adjustment costs  (x, k ). The firm's Bellman equation is then

                                                                       1
        V (k, v
              ¯, z,  ) = max      py y - pv v - px x -  (x, k ) +         E [V (k , v
                                                                                    ¯ , z ,  )] ,
                         y
                        p ,x,v
                             ¯                                        1+r

where the maximization is subject to
                                                     y  q,                                          (7)

                                         k = (1 -  ) k + x,                                         (8)

as well as equations (2), (4), and (5). Equation (7) is the capacity constraint and (8)
is the standard capital accumulation equation. We assume that productivity z only has
an industry-specific and an aggregate (i.e. economy wide), but no firm-specific component.
This assumption limits the degree of heterogeneity in the model and allows us to analytically
aggregate output and prices to the industry level.
   Our estimation strategy does not require us to take a stance on the functional form of
adjustment costs . Nor are the precise features of the firm's investment decision or the


                                                       7
choice of v
          ¯ important for the estimation. What matters for our estimation is the evolution
of capacity, or more precisely the industry's capacity--which we directly observe in the data.
We discuss the role of changes in capacity for the estimation below.

Price setting    If the firm operates below its capacity limit, it sets prices at a constant
markup over marginal costs. Once production is constrained by capacity, however, the firm
raises its markup so as to equate the quantity demanded to its production capacity. Formally,

                             
                      py =      (mc + ) ,                     = 0 whenever y < q,
                             -1

where  is the multiplier on the capacity constraint (7). In this baseline version of the model
rising markups are the key mechanism generating a convex supply curve at the industry
level.
   Since the idiosyncratic demand shock  is the only source of heterogeneity, there exists a
threshold variety ¯ above which firms' production is constrained by their capacity. A lower
value of ¯ implies that more firms are capacity constrained. We next show that ¯ plays a
critical role for characterizing the degree to which the industry uses its productive capacity.

2.1.3    Industry capacity and utilization

Using equation (1) the industry's output can be written as
                                                                                             
                                                     ¯t                                      -1
                                          - -1                                    1
                Y (qt , ¯ t ) = qt (¯
                                    t )                   dG ( ) +             ( ) dG ( )
                                                                                                  .    (9)
                                                 0                        ¯t


In particular, the industry's output is only a function of the common idiosyncratic plant
capacity qt , and the threshold variety ¯t.
   An industry's capacity is defined as the level of output that would be attainable if every
intermediate firm produced at full capacity, that is

                                      Q (qt ) := lim Y (qt , ¯t) .
                                                          ¯ t 0
                                                          


Further, an industry's capacity utilization rate is defined as the ratio of actual production
to full capacity production,
                                                          Y (qt , ¯t)
                                             ut :=                    .                               (10)
                                                           Q (qt )
Note that this definition aligns well with its empirical counterpart. The Federal Reserve mea-

                                                            8
sures capacity utilization at the industry level by dividing an index of industrial production,
i.e. a measure of gross output, by an estimate of capacity.5

Lemma 1. The utilization rate as defined in (10) has the following properties:

   1. ut  [0, 1] is only a function of ¯ t : ut = u (¯
                                                     t )

   2. lim¯ 0 u (¯
                 ) = 1, lim¯  u (¯
                                 ) = 0

   3. u < 0

Proof. See Appendix B.

The lemma highlights that the industry's utilization rate is only a function of the threshold
value ¯ t above which firms produce at full capacity. The utilization rate approaches zero if
no firm produces at full capacity and it tends to one if all firms become capacity constrained.
Further, u is decreasing everywhere, and thus u is invertible and we can write ¯t = ¯ (ut ).
We will make extensive use of this property, both for the remainder of the theoretical analysis
and when taking the model to the data. For the empirical analysis, this property is crucial
because ut is observable, while the threshold variety ¯ is not.

2.1.4    The supply curve

One immediate application of the invertibility of u is that the industry's price index (3) can
be written as
                                        ln PtY = M (ln ut ) + ln (mct ) .                                         (11)

This (inverse) supply curve depends on the industry's marginal costs mct , and the industry's
log average markup M. This markup is only a function of the industry's utilization rate.
Since variation in ut is observable, this equation is the starting point for our empirical
analysis. Note that it is convenient to define the markup as a function of the logarithm of
the utilization rate.
   5
      There is a subtle difference between the model's definition of utilization and the FRB's definition, which we will
use for the estimation in Section 3. In the model, an industry's utilization rate captures the fraction of constrained
firms. In the data, the utilization rate is constructed by dividing the industry's total market value of production
by its total capacity and does not directly use information on the fraction of constrained plants. Statistically, this
difference is unimportant, because the fraction of constrained plants and the utilization rate as constructed by the
FRB are highly correlated (see Figure 1). In fact, we prefer to use the FRB's measure for two reasons. First, it is
plausible that firms begin raising their markup when approaching capacity and not only when hitting the constraint.
Second, and as discussed in Morin and Stevens (2004), the uncorrected survey data exhibit a "cyclical bias", which
the Federal Reserve removes when constructing their estimates.



                                                           9
Proposition 1. M has the following properties:

  1. M  0
                         
  2. limu0 M (ln u) = ln - 1
                             , limu1 M (ln u) = 

  3. limu0 M (ln u) = 0, limu1 M (ln u) = 

  4. Without further restrictions on G, the sign of M is generally ambiguous.

Proof. See Appendix B.

Because M is increasing in utilization everywhere, the industry's supply curve (11) is upward-
sloping. In contrast to standard models, the industry's markup rises when production Yt
increases relative to capacity Qt . As utilization rises, more suppliers become capacity con-
strained and those that are constrained respond by raising their markups. As the utilization
rate approaches one, all suppliers become constrained and M and its derivative tend to infin-
ity. Conversely, when the utilization rate tends to zero, fewer and fewer suppliers are capacity
                                       
constrained. As a result M tends to ln -1
                                          and its derivative to zero. While M (ln u) is
convex everywhere for many choices of G, it is possible to construct examples in which it is
locally concave. Thus, whether M is convex in the relevant range of utilization remains an
empirical question, which we will address below. Figure 2 shows parameterized examples of
supply curve (11). In these examples, a lower demand elasticity  and a lower variance of
the demand shock increase the curvature of the supply curve.

2.1.5   Estimating equation

Letting  denote the first difference operator and adding industry subscripts i, linearization
of the supply curve (11) around its t - 1 values yields

                       Y
                  ln Pi,t = M (ln ui,t-1 ) ( ln Yi,t -  ln Qi,t ) +  ln mci,t .            (12)

We then approximate M (ln ui,t-1 ) linearly around the industry-specific mean ln u
                                                                                 ¯i so that

                                                   M (ln u
                                                         ¯i )
                   M (ln ui,t-1 ) = M (ln u
                                          ¯i ) +              · (ui,t-1 - u
                                                                          ¯i ) .
                                                     u
                                                     ¯i




                                              10
                                          Figure 2: Supply curves




        Notes: The figure provides illustrative examples of supply curve (11). The parameterization is
        chosen as follows: G is log-normal with unit mean and variance V , marginal costs mc are set to 1.



Plugging this expression back into equation (12), and adding a constant and an error term,
gives our estimating equation for the structural form,

               Y
          ln Pi,t =  + Y  ln Yi,t + Y u  ln Yi,t · (ui,t-1 - ui ) + u (ui,t-1 - ui )                         (13)
                         +Q  ln Qi,t + Qu  ln Qi,t · (ui,t-1 - ui ) + mc  ln mci,t + i,t .

The primary object of interest is the coefficient on the interaction term  ln Yi,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                                                                                               ¯i ).
If this coefficient is positive, the supply curve is convex. To obtain the conventional interpre-
tation of the interaction terms, we always include a main effect of the demeaned utilization
rate ui,t-1 - u
              ¯i .
   Relative to the ad-hoc estimation of supply curves, our model provides two key insights.
First, in this framework, the initial utilization rate is a sufficient statistic for the supply
elasticity. This feature allows us to estimate the curvature of the supply curve with an
                                      ¯i ), rather than a squared term in output ( ln Yi,t )2 . As
interaction term  ln Yi,t · (ui,t-1 - u
we will demonstrate in below, using the interaction term has a critical econometric advantage.
While we can find strong instruments for the interaction term, our instruments are weak for

                                                       11
the squared term.
   Second, unlike conventional specifications of supply curves, equation (13) includes the
change in capacity as an endogenous supply shifter. All else equal, greater production
capacity implies that fewer firms in the industry are constrained. This reduces the industry's
price index and increases the industry's output (see Proposition 2 below). Further, it is likely
that firms occasionally adjust capacity in response to new information they receive, including
to expected changes in future demand. Since such changes in capacity shift the supply curve,
they generate downward-biased slope and curvature estimates when subsumed into the error
term. Instruments that shift the demand curve are unlikely to address this bias. If an
instrument identifies persistent changes in demand, the industry will adjust its capacity in
response, and the supply curve will shift. In the next section, we will therefore include the
change in capacity as a control variable. We will also verify that the slope and curvature
estimates fall when we drop the change in capacity from the set of controls.

2.1.6   Discussion

Why do plants produce below capacity?          In the model, plants produce below capacity in
equilibrium because they cannot sell more of their product at the desired price. This feature
is consistent with the data from the QSPC. For the time period from 2013q1 to 2018q2
for which public QSPC data is available, 78.4 percent of plant managers cite "Insufficient
orders" as the main reason for producing below capacity. The second most cited option
is chosen by 11.5 percent of respondents ("Insufficient supply of local labor force/skills").
In this sense, the model is qualitatively consistent with the micro data. Details on these
qualitative survey responses are available in Appendix A.

Markups versus marginal costs        In this simple model, the positive slope and curvature
of supply curve (11) is entirely driven by increasing markups, and the marginal cost term
mct is independent of the utilization rate (see equation (6)). In reality, this may not be the
case. As firms add additional shifts, for instance, overtime premia may raise the marginal
cost of production. When taking the model to the data, we therefore prefer to interpret
the dependence of M on the utilization rate as potentially reflecting both changes in firms'
markups as well as changes in their marginal costs. For the empirical analysis, the precise
mechanism generating the slope and curvature of the supply curve is immaterial. As long
as we correctly isolate changes in output that are due to demand shocks, our estimation
will correctly trace out the slope and curvature of the supply curve, regardless of whether

                                              12
the average markup, marginal costs, or both depend on the utilization rate.6 We note that
extensions of the model can accommodate increasing marginal costs. For instance, the model
with sticky prices in Appendix C features a notion of decreasing returns at the industry level.

Sticky prices        In the presence of sticky prices, an additional mechanism generates slope
and curvature in the supply curve. When prices are sticky, the capacity constraint can
prevent firms from producing enough output to satisfy their demand at a given price--thus
leading to a notion of rationing. As we show in Appendix C, this can pose a problem
for estimating the supply curve since measured prices are no longer allocative. Instead, the
analogue of equation (11) has an unmeasured shadow price on the left hand side, which--due
to rationing--is increasing and convex in the utilization rate. Since the model's prediction
for how quantities respond to demand shocks remains unchanged in the presence of sticky
prices, and is informative about the slope and curvature of this "shadow supply curve", we
will also estimate the reduced form of the model.7 To obtain the reduced form, we need to
specify the demand side of the model and market clearing. We will do so momentarily.

Inventories       Our model does not feature inventory accumulation. In practice, firms may
build up inventories when capacity utilization is low and draw down inventories when utiliza-
tion is high. By allowing firms to decouple production from sales, inventories could reduce the
role physical capacity limits play for constraining firms' activities. This production smooth-
ing model of inventory behavior has been extensively tested in the data--and is typically
rejected. One simple test of the model is to compare the standard deviations of production
and sales. As Blinder (1986) shows, the volatility of detrended production is actually higher
than that of detrended sales, which is starkly at odds with production smoothing. We have
verified that production continues to be more volatile than sales in our data.8 It is thus not
clear that inventory accumulation reduces the role of capacity constraints.
    Survey data also indicates that inventory accumulation does not eliminate the role of
capacity constraints. As noted above, the QSPC asks plant managers to report why their
plant produces below capacity. Only 5.5 percent of respondents reports "Sufficient inventory
of finished goods" as the primary reason. An additional 3.9 percent reports "Storage limi-
    6
       Hence, our empirical findings below should not necessarily be interpreted as evidence for procyclical markups.
    7
       We recognize the ambiguity of the term reduced form in the context of this paper. We will use the term
throughout to refer to the equilibrium quantity (and price) as a function of all demand and supply shifters.
     8
       The standard deviation of the growth rate of production in constant prices is 0.093 in our data and that of sales
is 0.085. The difference is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. These statistics are calculated on the sample
described in Section 3.



                                                            13
tations" (see Appendix A for details). This suggests that relatively few firms use episodes
of low capacity utilization to accumulate large inventories. Further, if inventories were accu-
mulated to smooth production, they should reduce the probability that capacity constraints
bind. However, as Figure 1 showed, capacity constraints bind for a large fraction of plants.
   Note lastly that our estimating equation of the reduced form below includes changes
in inventories as a control variable. This allows us to interpret the estimated production
response to a demand shock as if inventories were held constant.

2.2     Demand, market clearing, and the reduced form

Since the reduced form expresses the equilibrium quantity as a function of observed and
unobserved demand and supply shifters, the estimation benefits from a detailed specification
of the demand side. This part of the model therefore contains sufficient detail so that
industry's sales patterns match their analogues in the data.

2.2.1    Demand and market clearing

Each industry i sells its product both domestically and abroad. For domestic sales we dis-
tinguish sales to downstream industries in the form of intermediates, and final sales of con-
sumption and investment goods as well as government purchases. We assume for simplicity
that demand takes the constant elasticity form.

Domestic final demand          Depending on whether industry i produces a consumption or
investment good, private domestic final demand takes the form
                                             -                                           -
                                        Y                                           Y
                             C
                                      Pi,t                           I
                                                                                  Pi,t
                    Ci,t =   i,t Ct              ,        Ij,i,t =   j,i,t Ij,t              .
                                      PtC                                          I
                                                                                  Pj,t

Here, Ct are real personal consumption expenditures (PCE), and PtC is the PCE price index.
                                                                                              I
Similarly, Ij,t is real investment into goods of category j (e.g. equipment investment), and Pj,t
is the associated price index. The elasticity  parameterizes the substitutability of varieties
within each of these aggregates. Unlike quantities Ct , Ij,t and prices PtC , Pj,t
                                                                               I
                                                                                   , the weights
C       I
i,t and j,i,t are unobserved demand shifters.

Intermediate demand          Industry i further sells its output to other industries downstream.
                                                                                    M
Letting Mj,t denote the aggregate of industry j 's purchases of intermediates, and Pj,t the


                                                     14
price index, its demand for industry i's output is
                                                                           -
                                                                     Y
                                                  M
                                                                   Pi,t
                                      Mj,i,t =    j,i,t Mj,t        M
                                                                               .
                                                                   Pj,t

       M
Again, j,i,t is an unobserved demand shock.

Foreign demand        Exports abroad constitute an additional component of industry i's de-
mand. Demand of destination d is given by

                                                                     Y,        -
                                                 EX
                                                                    Pd,i,t
                                  EXd,i,t =      d,i,t EXd,t        EX,
                                                                                   .
                                                                   Pd,t

Here, EXd,i,t denotes industry i's exports to destination d, EXd,t is an observed demand
shifter, and prices with asterisks are measured in foreign currency units. The dollar-denominated
                            Y          Y,
price for sales abroad is Pi,t = Ed,t Pd,i,t , where Ed,t is the nominal exchange rate in U.S. dollars
per unit of foreign currency.

                                inv
Market clearing       Letting Yi,t  denote the stock of inventories at time t, IMi,t imports of
industry i's good, and Gi,t sales to the government, market clearing for industry i requires
that

           inv                                                                                         inv
         Yi,t -1 + Yi,t + IMi,t =           Mj,i,t + Ci,t +         Ij,i,t + Gi,t +        EXd,i,t + Yi,t  .    (14)
                                      j                        j                       d


2.2.2   The reduced form

We next define a number of variables that capture observable shifts in demand,

        i,t =         sM                   C
                       j,i,t-1  ln Mj,t + si,t-1  ln Ct +                 sI                   G
                                                                           j,i,t-1  ln Ij,t + si,t-1  ln Gi,t   (15)
                  j                                                  j

                  +        sEX
                            d,i,t-1  ln EXd,t ,
                       d

        i,t =         sM            M
                       j,i,t-1  ln Pj,t     + sC           C
                                               i,t-1  ln Pt +             sI            I
                                                                           j,i,t-1  ln Pj,t                     (16)
                  j                                                  j
                                         EX,
                  +        sEX
                            d,i,t-1  ln Pd,t ,
                       d

        ei,t =        sEX
                       d,i,t-1  ln Ed,t .                                                                       (17)
                  d


                                                       15
In these expressions, sM
                       j,i,t-1 denotes the sales share of industry i to downstream industry j ,
and other sales shares are defined similarly. i,t is an observable demand shifter, which
captures changes in the industry's customer size. For instance, if industry j increases its
demand for intermediates Mj,t by one percent, industry i's demand rises, ceteris paribus, by
sM
 j,i,t-1 percent. Similarly, a change in government expenditures  ln Gj,t affects industry i's
demand.
    i,t reflects changes in demand due to changes in industry i's customers' prices. Con-
tinuing with the earlier example, industry i would, all else equal, experience an increase in
                                                                               M
demand through substitution if downstream industry j 's materials price index Pj,t increased.
    ei,t is the change of industry i's effective nominal exchange rate. Notice that ei,t
varies by industry because existing trade linkages, as captured by sEX
                                                                    d,i,t-1 , differentially expose
industries to fluctuations of a common set of currencies. A positive value of ei,t reflects
a depreciation of the U.S. dollar relative to the relevant basket of foreign currencies. From
the viewpoint of industry i, which sets prices in U.S. dollars, such a depreciation leads to an
increase in demand through substitution towards the industry's product.9
    Having introduced the observable demand shifters i,t , i,t , and ei,t , we next solve
for the reduced form.

Proposition 2 (Reduced form). The industry's quantity, linearized around the equilibrium
in t - 1, is

          ln Yi,t =  (ln ui,t-1 ) i,t +  (ln ui,t-1 ) i,t + e (ln ui,t-1 ) ei,t
                          + Q (ln ui,t-1 )  ln Qi,t + mc (ln ui,t-1 )  ln mci,t                                (18)
                                                                         inv       inv
                                            IMi,t                      Yi,t  - Yi,t  -1   Y
                          + IM (ln ui,t-1 )         + inv (ln ui,t-1 )                  + i,t .
                                            Yi,t-1                          Yi,t-1

All coefficients are only functions of the log utilization rate ln ui,t-1 and  > 0,  > 0,
e > 0, mc < 0, Q > 0, IM < 0, and inv > 0. Supply curve (11) is convex if and only
if  < 0 and e < 0. The error term is a weighted average of changes in the unobserved
              C     I       M           EX
demand shocks i,t , j,i,t , j,i,t , and d,i,t .

Proof. See Appendix B.

    The equilibrium quantity is a function of all demand and supply shifters, which--in this
linearized version of the model--are i,t , i,t , ei,t ,  ln Qi,t ,  ln mci,t , IMi,t /Yi,t-1 ,
   9
    Note that definition (17) takes into account that some industries sell more of their goods abroad than others. If
industry k sells more of its output abroad than industry , then d sEXd,k,t-1 >
                                                                                     EX
                                                                                  d sd, ,t-1 .



                                                         16
                      Figure 3: The utilization rate as a sufficient statistic




   inv     inv                      Y
 Yi,t  - Yi,t -1 /Yi,t-1 as well as i,t . The critical fact for our empirical analysis is that
all coefficients  depend only on log utilization rates ln ui,t-1 . This implies, for instance,
that the supply curve is convex if and only if the elasticity  (ln ui,t-1 ) is decreasing in
the utilization rate, so that the quantity response to a demand shock is larger if the initial
utilization rate is low (see Figure 3). Detailed expressions for all coefficients in Proposition
2 are listed in Appendix B.
   As in Section 2.1.5 we proceed with approximating the coefficients  linearly in ln ui,t .
If supply curves are convex, the coefficients on the interaction terms i,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                                                                                       ¯i )
and ei,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                     ¯i ) will be negative, since a higher initial utilization rate leads more
firms to raise markups and fewer to increase production after positive demand shocks. This
intuition is illustrated in Figure (3). Before turning to the estimation, we briefly discuss a
measurement problem.

2.3   Measurement of marginal costs

In practice, estimation of the structural and the reduced form is complicated by the fact
that marginal costs are not observed. Further, subsuming marginal costs into the error term
has the two undesirable implications. First, it can lead to an omitted variable bias if the

                                                17
instrument is correlated with marginal costs. Second, doing so raises the variance of the
estimates. It is therefore common to proxy for marginal costs with unit variable costs, which
are observed. Unfortunately, this approach can also lead to biases.
     In our framework industry's marginal costs differ from the industry's unit variable cost.
This feature follows from the non-linear aggregation across varieties with aggregator (1).
Further, the wedge between unit variable cost and marginal cost is a function of the uti-
lization rate, that is, ln mci,t = ln UVCi,t +  (ln ui,t ), for some function , where UVCi,t =
     1
    0
         pv
          t vt (j ) dj /Yi,t are unit variable costs. Substituting for marginal costs in equation (11)
yields
                                   Y
                              ln Pi,t = M (ln ui,t ) +  (ln ui,t ) + ln UVCi,t .

This expression makes clear that if unit variable costs are held constant instead of marginal
costs, variation in ln ui,t does not identify M , but M + , thus leading to a biased estimate.
An analogous argument applies to M . The following proposition signs these biases.

Proposition 3.   0 and   0.

Proof. See Appendix B.

     Hence, when marginal costs are proxied for with unit variable costs, estimates of the
slope and curvature both exhibit a downward bias. Our estimates below should therefore
be interpreted as conservative. We have verified numerically that these biases are small for
reasonable calibrations, in the order of 5 to 10 percent.


3        Empirical analysis

In this section we test empirically whether the data support the hypothesis that supply
curves are convex at the industry level.

3.1       Data

3.1.1       Industrial production, capacity and utilization

Central to the empirical analysis are the FRB's measures of capacity and utilization. To
obtain series for utilization, the FRB first constructs indexes of industrial production and
capacity. The industrial production series are indexes of real gross output. Capacity is
defined as the sustainable maximum level of output or, "the greatest level of output a plant
[or industry] can maintain within the framework of a realistic work schedule after factoring

                                                     18
                         Figure 4: Industry-demeaned capacity utilization rates




  Notes: The figure plots the mean, minimum, maximum and interquartile range of the industry-demeaned
  capacity utilization series of all 21 3-digit NAICS manufacturing industries, constructed using the FRB capacity
  utilization data and industrial production. Shaded areas represent NBER recessions.



in normal downtime and assuming sufficient availability of inputs to operate the capital in
place".10 The FRB's measure of capacity is primarily based on the Survey of Plant Capacity
(prior to 2007) and the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity (from 2007 onwards), but also
uses information from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers.11 As in our model, utilization
is then calculated by dividing industrial production by capacity (see equation (10)).
    Figure 4 illustrates the industry-demeaned capacity utilization rates of the 21 3-digit
NAICS manufacturing industries in our sample, which enter our estimating equation (13)
on the right hand side. As is clear from the figure, these utilization rates display significant
variation both in the cross-section and over time. Capacity utilization is strongly procyclical
and experiences a mild downward trend towards the end of the sample.
  10
      See https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/Meth/MethCap.htm. A consequence of this definition is
that utilization can exceed unity for short periods of time. In practice, this rarely happens. In our 3-digt NAICS
sample from 1972 to 2011 only one industry (Primary Metal Manufacturing, NAICS 331) exceeded a utilization rate
of 100 and only for two months (December of 1973 and January of 1974).
   11
      For further details on the data sources and methodology underlying of the capacity indexes, see e.g. Gilbert,
Morin, and Raddock (2000) and https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/About.htm.



                                                        19
3.1.2    Additional data sources

We take data on prices, sales, input costs, and inventories from the NBER CES Manufactur-
ing Industry Database. These data are constructed mainly from sources of the U.S. Census
Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
and provide a detailed picture of the U.S. manufacturing sector. For a description of this
database, see Bartelsman and Gray (1996) and Becker, Gray, and Marvakov (2016). To ob-
tain our measure of unit variable costs, we sum production worker wages, costs of materials,
and expenditures on energy and then divide by real gross output.
   Our preferred measure of prices is a "deflator" constructed by dividing the nominal value
of production (from the NBER CES) by the industrial production index (from the FRB).
Relative to the price measure from the NBER CES database, this measure is consistent with
the quantity measure (industrial production). We also show results using the price index
from the NBER CES database. The results are very similar.
   We calculate the sales shares sj,i,t from the Use Tables of the BEA's Input-Output Ac-
counts. For the sales shares to foreign countries, we complement these data with data on
U.S. exports from the U.S. Census available from Peter Schott's website. The construction
of i,t and i,t , as given in equations (15) and (16), further requires data on quantity and
price indexes. We use data from the following sources. First, for domestic sales of final goods
we use data on personal consumption expenditures, equipment investment, and nonresiden-
tial fixed investment from the BEA's National Income and Product Accounts. Second, for
intermediate sales to downstream industries, we use quantity and price indexes of industries'
material use from the BEA's Industry Accounts. Third, for foreign quantity and price in-
dexes we use real GDP and the GDP deflator in local currency from the United Nation's
(UN) Statistics Division. The nominal exchange rate series for the calculation of ei,t (equa-
tion (17)) also come from the UN's Statistics Division. To guarantee high data quality, we
limit ourselves to countries that joined the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and De-
velopment (OECD) prior to year 2000 when constructing i,t , i,t , and ei,t . Our sample
is annual, includes all 21 3-digit NAICS manufacturing industries, and ranges from 1972 to
2011. Details on the data are available in Appendix D.

3.2     Instruments and identification

Estimation of the slope and curvature of the supply curve requires an instrumental variable,
which shifts the demand curve and is excluded from the supply curve. When estimating


                                              20
the structural form (13), the instrument addresses the endogeneity of  ln Yi,t . Since we also
estimate the reduced form, we use the same instrument for the supply shifter i,t as defined
in equation (15).
    We consider three different instruments in our empirical analysis. In all cases, the identi-
fication assumption for the structural form requires that conditional on the control variables,
the instrument is uncorrelated with the unobserved supply shifters. Whether this assump-
tion is broadly satisfied depends on the instrument, the controls, and the unobserved supply
shocks. The latter should be thought of as resulting either from model misspecification or
measurement error in the data, since our estimating equation (12) does not have a structural
error. We emphasize that all instruments deliver comparable results.12

3.2.1    World import demand

The first instrument uses variation in foreign demand to estimate the supply curve (see, e.g.
Hummels et al., 2014). We define the World Import Demand instrument as a weighted sum
of changes in foreign output,

                                     instWID
                                         i,t =          sEX
                                                         i,d,t-1  ln GDPd,t .                                 (19)
                                                    d


To better understand the identifying variation, we decompose the change in foreign GDP into
a common and a destination-specific component,  ln GDPd,t =  ln GDPcom
                                                                   t   + ln GDPspec
                                                                               d,t .
        ¯EX
Letting s d,t-1 denote the average export share of all manufacturing industries to destination
d, the variation of the World Import Demand instrument can be split into three components,

                                                                                            spec
                   instWID
                       i,t =  ln GDPcom
                                    t                       sEX
                                                             d,i,t-1 +       ¯EX
                                                                             s d,t-1  ln GDPd,t               (20)
                                                        d                d
                                                                         spec
                                      +        sEX        ¯EX
                                                d,i,t-1 - s d,t-1  ln GDPd,t .
                                           d


    The first term on the right hand side captures variation common to all foreign coun-
tries. Since this variation reflects the "global" business cycle (e.g. a global supply shock)
and could be correlated with unobserved supply shocks, we control for it by interacting a
time fixed effect with the foreign sales share of industry i,                      d   sEX
                                                                                        d,i,t-1 . The second term
on the right hand side weighs destination-specific changes in GDP with the average ex-
  12
     We have also considered a fourth instrument based on defense spending. Since the first stage of this instrument
is uniformly weak and the estimates noisy, we do not report these results.




                                                            21
port share. Since our specifications will include time fixed effects--in addition to the time
fixed effects interacted with the foreign sales share--this variation will be purged as well.
Hence, the identifying variation of this instrument comes entirely from the third term,
                                spec
  d   sEX        ¯EX
       d,i,t-1 - s d,t-1  ln GDPd,t , reflecting destination-specific changes in GDP, which are
weighted with the deviations of industry sales shares from the average. The identification
assumption holds that this term is uncorrelated with industries' unobserved supply shocks.

3.2.2   Shea's instrument

Shea (1993a; 1993b) argues that output of industry j is a good instrument for output of
industry i if (1) industry j demands a large share of i's output and (2) materials from i
constitute a small share of j 's costs. The first criterion aims at generating a high degree of
relevance, while the second implies that supply shocks in industry i are unlikely to have large
effects on j 's output. In a simple model with input-output linkages Shea (1993b) demon-
strates that the two criteria contain the degree of endogeneity, and that supply elasticities
can be estimated with relatively small biases.
   We extend Shea's idea by considering the possibility that shocks to industry j may affect
production in industry i not only through an effect on demand. If industry i uses j 's output
in production, a supply shock in industry j will generally affect production in industry i
also through a change in costs. To prevent this cost shock from confounding our results, we
require in addition to (1) and (2) that the relationship between i and j is unidirectional.
That is, we necessitate that (3) i's cost share from j is small.
   We construct an instrument for industry i's output based on its sales to a select group
of downstream industries, which satisfy criteria (1), (2), and (3). Recall that sM
                                                                                 j,i,t denotes
industry i's sales share to industry j . Our version of Shea's instrument is then

                      instShea
                          i,t  =       sM
                                        j,i,t-1 1{(1), (2), (3) hold}  ln Mj,t .          (21)
                                   j


The indicator function 1{(1), (2), (3) hold} selects downstream industries j which satisfy
our exogeneity criteria. We provide details on the instrument in Appendix E, but note here
that, as in Shea (1993a,b), we consider both direct and indirect linkages when measuring
sales and cost shares.




                                                  22
3.2.3    The effective exchange rate

We further use a purified change in an industry's effective exchange rate (equation (17))
to identify the slope and curvature of the supply curve. Holding costs constant, a dollar
depreciation relative to the relevant basket of foreign currencies makes U.S.-produced goods
cheaper for foreign customers. If firms in the U.S. set prices in U.S. dollars (as 97 percent
of U.S. exporters do, see Gopinath and Rigobon, 2008), such depreciations materialize as
outward shifts in demand. A one percent depreciation of the effective exchange rate raises
demand by the value of the demand elasticity ( in Section 2.2).
   Analogous to the World Import Demand instrument, we purge changes in the effec-
tive exchange rate ei,t by decomposing the nominal exchange rate into a common and
                                                           spec
destination-specific component  ln Ed,t =  ln Etcom +  ln Ed,t  . This decomposition can
be implemented by regressing the observed changes in exchange rates on a set of time fixed
effects. In our sample, the R2 of this regression is 28.3 percent, implying that 28.3 percent
of changes in the dollar value of foreign currencies are common to all foreign currencies.
   Similar to the World Import Demand instrument in equation (20), we decompose the
effective exchange rate into three parts,

                                                        spec                                spec
   ei,t =  ln Etcom       sEX
                           d,i,t-1 +       ¯EX
                                           s d,t-1  ln Ed,t +       sEX        ¯EX
                                                                     d,i,t-1 - s d,t-1  ln Ed,t .   (22)
                      d                d                        d


When the specification includes a time fixed effect and a time fixed effect interacted with
the foreign sales share, the identifying variation of the exchange rate instrument is limited to
destination-specific exchange rate changes, which are weighted with the deviations of sales
shares from the average (the third term on the right hand side).
   As Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2014) emphasize, most exporters also import and hence
dollar depreciations raise the cost of intermediate inputs. To prevent this channel from
confounding our interpretation of dollar depreciations as demand shocks, we will control for
unit variable costs as suggested by the model.

3.3     Results

We begin with presenting the estimates of the structural form and subsequently turn to the
estimates of the reduced form.




                                                   23
3.3.1     Estimates of the structural form

Linear model      Table 1 shows the estimates of the supply curve when we impose linearity.
Specification (1) begins with Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates of the inverse supply
elasticity without controls. As expected, the slope estimate is insignificantly different from
zero since unobserved supply shocks confound the estimation. For instance, a positive supply
shock lowers prices while raising quantities, thereby biasing the slope estimate downward.
   When we add the change in unit variable costs in specification (2), the R-squared rises
to 87 percent and the estimate of the slope coefficient becomes positive and significant.
Controlling for unit variable costs partially addresses the simultaneity problem by removing
a large fraction of the confounding variation from the error term. Specification (3) further
adds the change in capacity to the equation. As predicted by the model, the coefficient is
negative. All else equal, industries with greater capacity charge lower prices. That the slope
coefficient rises to 0.13 suggests that the capacity control successfully purges supply shifts
from the error term.
   In specification (4) we also add industry fixed effects, time fixed effects and time fixed
effects interacted with the industry's export share. The estimate of the inverse supply
elasticity rises to 0.17. When we simultaneously use the World Import Demand instrument,
Shea's instrument, and the effective exchange rate instrument in specification (5), we obtain
a slope estimate of 0.23. This estimate is greater than the OLS estimate, suggesting that
despite the controls, the error term in specifications (4) and (5) might still contain supply
disturbances. The first stage F-statistic is 20.03. Hansen's overidentification test fails to
reject the null of all instruments being valid (p = 0.441).

Baseline estimates     We next relax the assumption of linearity and allow the inverse supply
elasticity to depend on last period's utilization rate as predicted by the model. Table 2
specification (1) shows the OLS estimates. The main effect is 0.17 and the interaction term
is negative and insignificant. We next use the World Import Demand instrument, Shea's
instrument, and the effective exchange rate to instrument for the main effect (as in specifica-
tion (5) of Table 1), and additionally use the World Import Demand instrument interacted
with the demeaned utilization rate ui,t-1 - u
                                            ¯i for the interaction term. As specification (2)
shows, the interaction term becomes positive and significant. That is, the slope of the supply
curve is increasing in the initial capacity utilization rate, implying that supply curves are
convex.
   Little changes when we alternatively instrument for the interaction term with Shea's

                                              24
                                Table 1: Estimates of the linear model
                                                                Y
                                       Dependent variable:  ln Pi,t

           Estimator                OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS          2SLS
           Instruments               -            -            -            -         WID, Shea,
                                                                                        ei,t
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)

            ln Yi,t                  -0.09        0.08          0.13         0.17          0.23
                                    (0.08)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.10)
            ln Qi,t                                            -0.16        -0.12         -0.16
                                                              (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.08)
            ln UVCi,t                             0.91         0.90         0.89           0.90
                                                 (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.03)

           R-squared                0.010        0.873        0.880        0.910         0.908
           Fixed Effects             no           no           no           yes           yes

                                  First stage and instrument diagnostics
           F main effect                                                                 20.03
           Hansen J (p-value)                                                            0.441

       Notes: The estimates are based on equation (13). Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in
       parentheses.



instrument interacted with ui,t-1 - u
                                    ¯i as shown in specification (3). The estimate of the
inverse supply elasticity also changes little when we use the effective exchange rate instead
in specification (4), although this instrument is potentially weak. When we use all three
instruments interacted with the demeaned utilization rate, the coefficient on the interaction
term is 1.13 and precisely estimated. These estimates are reported in specification (5).
   We report the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) conditional (SW) F-statistic in addition
to the standard F-statistics and the Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic in the bottom panel of
Table 2. These diagnostics suggest that the effective exchange rate instrument is potentially
weak. When we drop it from our set of instruments for both the main effect and the interac-
tion term, the estimated coefficients both remain positive and highly significant (specification
(6)). Under the identification assumption that conditional on controls, the WID and Shea's
instrument are orthogonal to unobserved supply shocks, supply curves at the industry level
are increasing and convex. Further, all diagnostics suggest that this set of instruments is




                                                     25
                                 Table 2: Estimates of the non-linear model
                                                                    Y
                                           Dependent variable:  ln Pi,t

   Estimator                           OLS          2SLS         2SLS         2SLS         2SLS          2SLS
   Instrument(s):
    Main effect                                                  WID, Shea, ei,t                      WID, Shea
    Interaction (· (ui,t-1 - u
                             ¯i ))                  WID          Shea         ei,t          all       WID, Shea
                                        (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)

    ln Yi,t                             0.17         0.27         0.28         0.26        0.27            0.26
                                      (0.02)       (0.09)       (0.09)       (0.10)       (0.08)         (0.09)
    ln Yi,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                        ¯i )           -0.33         0.97         1.36        0.92          1.13           1.13
                                      (0.24)       (0.31)       (0.72)       (0.66)       (0.33)         (0.33)
   ui,t-1 - u
            ¯i                          0.01         0.03         0.03         0.03        0.03            0.03
                                      (0.02)       (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)         (0.05)
    ln Qi,t                            -0.11        -0.23        -0.24        -0.21        -0.22          -0.21
                                      (0.04)       (0.11)       (0.11)       (0.12)       (0.10)         (0.11)
    ln Qi,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                        ¯i )           -0.32        -1.13        -1.35        -1.09        -1.21          -1.20
                                      (0.43)       (0.42)       (0.50)       (0.43)       (0.42)         (0.42)
    ln UVCi,t                           0.89         0.89         0.89         0.89        0.89            0.89
                                      (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.03)

   R-squared                           0.910        0.902        0.897        0.903        0.901         0.901
   Fixed Effects                        yes          yes          yes          yes          yes           yes

                                     First stage and instrument diagnostics
   F Main effect                                    10.84        19.23        12.05        18.00         17.27
   F Interaction                                    16.84         6.43         3.82        65.87         28.25
   Cragg-Donald Wald F                               9.08         7.76        6.67          6.22          9.02
   SW F Main effect                                 31.30        20.21        25.65        17.97         31.42
   SW F Interaction                                 33.76        16.86         6.01        25.10         33.52
   Hansen J (p-value)                               0.409        0.380        0.407        0.719         0.531

    Notes: The estimates are based on equation (13). Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses.
    
     : F is the standard F-statistic. For details on the Cragg-Donald statistic, see Cragg and Donald (1993) and
    Stock and Yogo (2002). SW F is the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) conditional F-statistic.



strong.13
    In Appendix F.1 we report results from an ad-hoc estimation of the supply curve. In
                             Y
particular, we regress  ln Pi,t on a linear and a squared term in  ln Yi,t , using the WID and
   13
      Stock and Yogo (2002) tabulate critical values for weak IV tests based on the Cragg-Donald statistic. In
specification (6) of Table 2, a value of 9.02 implies that the maximum bias of the 2SLS is less than 10 percent of the
bias of the OLS estimator.


                                                         26
Shea's instrument as well as their squares to address simultaneity. As Appendix Table F1
shows, the first stage for ( ln Yi,t )2 is always weak (F < 3). This contrasts to the first stage
of the interaction term as reported in Table 2, and highlights the empirical usefulness of the
model: With our instruments, it is not possible to estimate the curvature of the supply curve
with a squared term. We can only estimate the curvature, when imposing the structure of
the model.

Robustness        As discussed in Section 2.3, proxying marginal costs with unit variable costs
may lead to downward-biased estimates of the slope and curvature in our model. Consistent
with this prediction and as shown in Table 3 specification (1), the estimates of both increase,
when we instead subsume marginal cost changes into the error term. While these estimates
likely exhibit less bias, the error bands also increase substantially. We therefore prefer to
include unit variable costs as a control and to interpret our estimates as conservative.
    In specifications (2) and (3) of Table 3 we examine the implications of dropping the change
in capacity and its interaction with the utilization rate from the regression. Consistent with
the model prediction that changes in capacity shift the supply curve, the estimates of the
slope and curvature fall (relative to specification (6) of Table 2). Hence, the change in capac-
ity is a useful control variable--even when the supply curve is estimated with instrumental
variables. Note also that estimating equation (12) suggests that the slope coefficient is the
negative of the coefficient on capacity (and similarly for the interaction term). Inspection of
the estimates in specification (6) of Table 2 suggests that these cross-coefficient restrictions
broadly hold.
    We next add a number of additional controls to the equation. Specification (4) of Table
3 adds the percent change of the industry's price from t to t + 1. Extensions of the model to
include sticky prices (see Appendix C) suggest that this variable should capture the firm's
expectations about changes in future marginal costs. Adding this control has virtually no
effect on the estimates of slope and curvature. Further, the coefficient on future price changes
is close to zero and tightly estimated, suggesting that producer prices are flexible over a year-
long horizon.14 In specification (5) we include an interaction term of changes in unit variable
costs with the utilization rate. This variable is positive and highly significant, suggesting
that pass-through of cost shocks into prices is stronger when capacity utilization is high.
The slope and curvature of the supply curve change little. To better control for industries'
  14
     A second diagnostic that suggests that producer prices are quite flexible when differenced over one year is the
high pass-through of unit variable costs changes into price changes. In models with sticky prices, this pass-through
is substantially less than one. Our estimates suggest that it is close to 0.9.


                                                        27
"initial position" on their supply curve, specification (6) includes the square of the lagged
utilization rate as a control. Doing so raises both the slope and the curvature estimates
somewhat. In specification (7), we include i,t as defined in equation (16) to capture
unobserved inflationary pressure downstream--with very little effect on the estimates of
interest. Specification (8) includes all controls simultaneously. In this preferred specification
the inverse supply elasticity is 0.33 and the interaction term with the utilization rate is 1.51.
    One potential concern with the estimates is that there is a purely mechanical correlation
between the price change on the left hand side and the change in unit variable costs on
the right hand side. In all specifications this far, the price index has been constructed as
an implicit deflator by dividing the market value of production by the index of industrial
production, and the unit variable cost measure on the right hand side was constructed
by dividing variable costs by the index of industrial production. The common division by
industrial production could therefore induce a purely mechanical correlation. As specification
(1) in Table 3 showed, the slope and curvature estimates are not driven by this correlation
and increase when unit variable costs are dropped from the regression. As an additional
check, we use the price index from the NBER-CES manufacturing industry database instead
of our preferred implicit price measure on the left hand side. The estimates, reported in
specification (9) of Table 3, are very similar.15




  15
     Also note that not even the large coefficient and high R-squared reported in Table 1 specification (2) is driven
by this mechanical correlation. When we use instead the price index from the NBER-CES manufacturing industry
database, a regression of the percent change in prices on the percent change in quantities and the percent change in
unit variable costs gives a coefficient of 0.80 on unit variable costs and the R-squared is 0.86.


                                                         28
                                                     Table 3: Robustness of the non-linear model
                                                                                        Y
                                                               Dependent variable:  ln Pi,t

                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)      (8)      (9)
         ln Yi,t                       0.69        0.24         0.22         0.26         0.26        0.35           0.26     0.33     0.28
                                      (0.28)      (0.09)       (0.07)       (0.09)       (0.08)      (0.10)         (0.10)   (0.11)   (0.06)
         ln Yi,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                             ¯i )      1.85        0.95         0.82         1.13         0.99        1.70           1.21     1.51     1.15
                                      (0.91)      (0.32)       (0.27)       (0.34)       (0.31)      (0.44)         (0.34)   (0.46)   (0.23)
        ui,t-1 - u
                 ¯i                    0.44        0.02         -0.02        0.03         0.00        0.09           0.03     0.06     0.00
                                      (0.14)      (0.04)       (0.02)       (0.05)       (0.04)      (0.05)         (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.02)
         ln Qi,t                       -0.80       -0.19                     -0.21        -0.20       -0.31          -0.22    -0.28    -0.17
                                      (0.32)      (0.11)                    (0.11)       (0.10)      (0.11)         (0.12)   (0.12)   (0.06)
         ln Qi,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                             ¯i )      -2.29                                 -1.21        -1.03       -2.90          -1.38    -2.44    -1.75
                                      (1.13)                                (0.43)       (0.41)      (0.68)         (0.41)   (0.85)   (0.54)
         ln UVCi,t                                 0.89         0.89         0.89         0.90        0.90           0.85     0.87     0.92
                                                  (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.02)      (0.03)         (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.08)
             Y
         ln Pi,t +1                                                          0.00                                             0.01     -0.11
29




                                                                            (0.02)                                           (0.02)   (0.06)
         ln UVCi,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                               ¯i )                                                       1.13                                0.74      1.72
                                                                                         (0.29)                              (0.35)   (0.47)
                  ¯ i )2
        (ui,t-1 - u                                                                                   1.25                    0.90     0.55
                                                                                                     (0.30)                  (0.33)   (0.23)
        i,t                                                                                                          0.27     0.25     -0.09
                                                                                                                    (0.09)   (0.10)   (0.14)

        R-squared                     0.469        0.902        0.901       0.901        0.907       0.896          0.902    0.903    0.855
        Fixed Effects                  yes          yes          yes         yes          yes         yes            yes      yes      yes

                                                           First stage and instrument diagnostics
        F Main effect                 16.42        17.14        18.10       16.12        17.51       16.20          17.51    15.76    11.14
        F Interaction                 27.80        28.97        31.58       27.58        23.72       10.73          23.55    8.70     15.96
        Cragg-Donald Wald F            8.68        9.29         9.97         8.66         9.09        7.33          9.03     7.23     5.06
        SW F Main effect              29.08        33.25        21.80       28.03        26.93       15.79          31.90    14.01    15.81
        SW F Interaction              31.64        38.72        35.35       30.66        29.72       20.03          30.73    16.30    34.85
        Hansen J (p-value)            0.297        0.484        0.484       0.529        0.748       0.731          0.524    0.629    0.348
     Notes: The estimates are based on equation (13). Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                   Figure 5: Non-parametric estimates




  Notes: The bins of the utilization rate ui,t-1 - u ¯i are 1) below -0.06 (approximately the 15th percentile),
  2) between -0.06 and 0, 3) between 0 and 0.06, and 4) above 0.06 (approximately the 85th percentile). The
  parametric estimates are based on specification (8) of Table (3).




Nonparametric estimates            Figure 5 Panel A shows non-parametric estimates of the inverse
supply elasticity. We allow the slope coefficient to differ depending on whether the utilization
rate of the previous period (ui,t-1 - u
                                      ¯i ) was below -0.06 (approximately the 15th percentile),
between -0.06 and 0, between 0 and 0.06, and above 0.06 (approximately the 85th percentile).
The non-parametric estimates align well with those based on the interaction term.
   The figure also demonstrates that at low levels of the utilization rate, the estimated
inverse supply elasticity is statistically indistinguishable from zero. This contrasts to a value
of 0.48 at the 95th percentile (ui,t-1 - u
                                         ¯i = 0.10), which is highly statistically significant.
The non-parametric estimate for the highest utilization rates suggests an even larger value
of 0.61. Comparing industries with utilization rates below the 15th and above the 85th
percentile, the non-parametric estimates imply that a one percent outward shift in demand
raises prices by approximately 0.1 percent in the former and by 0.6 percent in the latter
case (a sixfold difference). Panel B of Figure 5 plots the quadratic and the partially-linear
approximation of the supply curve.

3.3.2   Estimates of the reduced form

We next turn to the estimates of the reduced form (equation 18). To conserve on space we
discuss the linear estimates of the reduced form in Appendix F.2.

                                                       30
      Specification (1) in Table 4 presents OLS estimates of the non-linear reduced form. This
specification is based on equation (18) and all coefficients are allowed to depend linearly on
the utilization rate. The coefficient on the interaction term i,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                                                                              ¯i ) is negative
and significant. Similarly, the interaction term associated with the exchange rate ei,t ·
(ui,t-1 - u
          ¯i ) is negative and significant. That demand shocks stimulate production more
when the utilization rate is initially low implies that supply curves are convex (Proposition
2).
      The interaction term i,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                                           ¯i ) becomes more negative when we estimate the
specification by 2SLS. With the WID instrument (specification (2)), the coefficient becomes
-4.29, and with Shea's instrument it becomes -2.74 (specification (3)). When we combine
both instrument in specification (4), the coefficient is -3.38. Hence, the initial utilization rate
robustly determines how much production responds to demand shocks. The instruments are
uniformly strong. In Appendix F.2 we discuss robustness of the reduced form estimates and
in Appendix F.3 we show that the estimates of the structural and reduced forms are broadly
consistent with one another.

Nonparametric estimates         Figure 6 plots non-parametric estimates that allow for differ-
ent production responses depending on whether the initial utilization rate is below -0.06 ,
between -0.06 and 0, between 0 and 0.06, and above 0.06. These estimates align well with
those based on the interaction term. As Panel A demonstrates, production responds by
approximately twice as much when the initial utilization rate is below the fifth percentile
(-0.13) than when it is above the 95th percentile (0.10). The exchange rate response drops to
zero at high utilization rates (Panel B), although we note that the main effect is imprecisely
estimated (Table 4).

Summary of results        In summary, our estimates indicate a sizable degree of curvature of
the supply curve. Price responses to increases in demand are much larger at high levels
of capacity utilization, and production responses smaller. The evidence for convex supply
curves is robust across specifications and independent of whether we estimate the structural
or the reduced form.




                                                31
                            Table 4: Estimates of the non-linear reduced form
                                              Dependent variable:  ln Yi,t

           Estimator                               OLS           2SLS           2SLS            2SLS
           Instrument(s):
             Main effect                                                     WID, Shea
             Interaction (· (ui,t-1 - u
                                      ¯i ))                      WID            Shea        WID, Shea
                                                    (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)

           i,t                                       0.80          0.82          0.82           0.82
                                                   (0.10)        (0.13)        (0.12)          (0.12)
           i,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                           ¯i )                     -1.79         -4.29         -2.74           -3.38
                                                   (0.65)        (0.96)        (1.55)          (0.92)
           ei,t                                      1.19          1.01          1.10           1.06
                                                   (0.95)        (0.88)        (0.85)          (0.86)
           ei,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                            ¯i )                   -21.29        -21.00        -21.25          -21.14
                                                   (4.72)        (5.00)        (4.56)          (4.70)
           (ui,t-1 - u
                     ¯i )                           -0.28         -0.24         -0.26           -0.25
                                                   (0.06)        (0.04)        (0.05)          (0.04)

           R-squared                               0.832         0.827          0.831           0.830
           Other controls                           yes           yes            yes             yes
           Fixed Effects                            yes           yes            yes             yes

                                      First stage and instrument diagnostics
           F Main effect                                         185.62        193.54          150.03
           F Interaction                                         13.42          14.31           17.26
           Cragg-Donald Wald F                                   29.46          42.15           38.19
           SW F Main effect                                      269.92        304.22          208.90
           SW F Interaction                                       20.00        22.07            23.80
           Hansen J (p-value)                                    0.842          0.821           0.748

    Notes: The estimates are based on equation (13). Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses.




4     General equilibrium applications

The objective of this section is to study the aggregate implications of supply curves that
are convex at the industry level. To do so, we embed a variant of the partial equilibrium
framework from Section 2 in a general equilibrium environment with input-output linkages.
Although convex supply curves have implications in a variety of other contexts, we focus for
concreteness on the following three applications. First, we study the state-dependence of the


                                                            32
                       Figure 6: Non-parametric estimates of the reduced form




  Notes: The bins of the utilization rate ui,t-1 - u ¯i are 1) below -0.06 (approximately the 15th percentile),
  2) between -0.06 and 0, 3) between 0 and 0.06, and 4) above 0.06 (approximately the 85th percentile). The
  parametric estimates are based on specification (6) of Table F3.




aggregate government expenditure multiplier. Second, we study the mapping from output
(Y ) to real marginal costs (mc/P Y ), an integral component of the slope of the Phillips curve.
This mapping becomes convex in our framework. Third, we calculate the welfare costs of
business cycles in our model. These are larger than in standard frameworks such as Lucas
(1987).

4.1   Model setup and calibration

At the heart of the model is a set of industries, which jointly form a nonlinear production
network. Since our estimates in Section 3 are based on a sample of manufacturing industries,
it is not clear to what extent they are valid for non-manufacturing industries. We therefore
model two different types of industries. In some industries firms produce subject to a capacity
constraint. We will refer to these industries as capacity industries. The remaining non-
capacity industries have a representative firm operating a standard neoclassical production
technology with constant returns to scale. To focus our attention on the implications of
convex supply curves, the remainder of the model is standard. In contrast to Section 2.2,
the economy is closed.




                                                       33
Model setup        A representative household consumes and supplies labor to maximize utility
subject to her budget constraint. Labor is specific to each industry. The household purchases
a consumption bundle composed of the goods and services produced by 71 industries. Some
of these industries exhibit a notion of capacity while others do not. Capacity industries are
modelled similar to those in Section 2, but with constant productivity and a fixed capital
stock. Non-capacity industries use a technology that is linear in variable inputs. The variable
input bundle includes labor and a bundle of materials, where the relative weights on labor
and materials from other industries are calibrated to the data. The business cycle is driven
by a shock that scales the marginal utility of consumption, which we interpret as a demand
shock. We provide a detailed description of the model in Appendix G.

Calibration      We briefly highlight key elements of the calibration. Of the 71 industries in
the model, our benchmark calibration assumes that 45 exhibit a concept of capacity and the
remaining 26 do not. This classification is based on whether an industry's output is likely
to be constrained by capacity when demand increases while the capital stock is held fixed.
For instance, we classify construction as a capacity industry, but not retail or wholesale
industries. We document our choices in Appendix G.3. Elasticity  and the distribution
of idiosyncratic demand shocks (see Section 2) are calibrated so that the supply curve of
capacity industries matches our preferred estimate in the data. As Appendix Figure G1
shows, the fit is almost exact. We further choose the weights in industries' production
functions so that their cost shares match those in the BEA's Use Tables. Two additional
parameters are important for our results. First, we choose a Frisch labor supply elasticity of
2. This value is greater than most micro estimates, but a common choice in DSGE models
and in line with the argument in Hall (2009). Second, based on a number of recent estimates,
we assume that the substitutability of inputs is very limited in the short run and set the
elasticities of substitution to 0.05 in the benchmark calibration. We discuss this choice
momentarily. Details on the calibration are available in Appendix G.3.

Related literature        Our framework is related to prior work studying the transmission of
shocks in non-linear production networks. Baqaee and Farhi (2019) emphasize the aggregate
implications of nonlinearities in production networks for applications such as the asymmetric
distribution of GDP growth rates and the welfare costs of business cycles.16 Several other
papers study the role of sectoral shocks for the aggregate business cycle, including Bigio and
  16
    Note that Hulten's (1978) theorem in its original form does not hold in our framework, because labor supply is
endogenous and firms set time-varying markups.


                                                       34
La'O (2016) and Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019). Our approach differs from this
literature, because we explicitly model capacity industries and carefully estimate them in the
data. Further, we are interested in aggregate demand shocks rather than industry-specific
productivity distortions.

4.2   Mechanisms that affect aggregate curvature

Three mechanisms determine the overall curvature of the aggregate supply curve and hence
aggregate outcomes. First, it is known that markups accumulate in production networks.
If one industry sells its output to another industry before the good is sold to the final
consumer, the price that the consumer pays includes the markups from both industries. Put
differently, net markups are additive in production networks. In the context of our model,
this additivity of markups constitutes a powerful mechanism that leads the aggregate supply
curve to exhibit greater slope and curvature than industries' supply curves.
   On the other hand, substitution attenuates the aggregate slope and curvature relative to
the industry level. If the relative price of an industry rises, firms and households substitute
away from its product. While substitution is likely important for similar goods and over long
time horizons, our benchmark calibration follows a recent empirical literature that documents
that substitutability is low for broad industry categories and at business cycle frequencies
(e.g. Atalay, 2017, Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar, 2019). We also consider a case with
a higher elasticity of substitution below.
   Third, if aggregate shocks affect industries differentially, this heterogeneity affects the
slope and curvature of the aggregate supply curve. In the presence of nonlinearities--and
holding all else equal--a shock that lowers two otherwise identical industries' output by 5
percent, has a different aggregate effect than a shock which reduces one industry's output
by, say, 2 percent and the other's by 8 percent. In the latter case, the effect of industries'
convex supply curves on aggregate curvature is larger. It turns out that this heterogeneity
channel is quantitatively unimportant in our model, because there is no mechanism (other
than substitution) that generates differential responsiveness to aggregate shocks. We discuss
details in Appendix G.5.

4.3   Applications

We next turn to three applications.




                                              35
4.3.1   The government expenditure multiplier

Convex supply curves imply that the government expenditure multiplier is countercyclical.
Estimates of the multiplier for different states of the business cycle vary and the literature
has not yet converged to a consensus (see Section 1). This is, in part, because aggregate
time series variation is too limited to deliver precise estimates. Our contribution here is to
quantify the role of convex supply curves that are precisely estimated at the industry level.
This quantification proceeds as follows. We first choose the demand shock to generate an
output gap relative to the steady state. For each value of the output gap, we then compute
the fiscal multiplier for an instantaneous and small government expenditure shock as dY /dG.
   As Table 5 shows, the multiplier for the baseline calibration ranges from 0.55 to 0.68 for
output gaps between negative and positive 10 percent. Hence, the multiplier is approximately
12 cents on the dollar greater when output is 10 percent below potential, than when output is
10 percent above potential. As the table shows, this difference depends on the calibration. It
falls for greater elasticities of substitution, and rises if more industries are capacity industries
or when the Frisch labor supply elasticity is greater. While these differences in multipliers
are modest relative to the estimates in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2013a), we note
that our model contains no mechanisms other than convex supply curves that affect the
state-dependence of the multiplier. A similar mechanism in the labor market would amplify
this degree of state-dependence (Michaillat, 2014).

4.3.2   The mapping from output to real marginal costs

We next turn to the mapping from output to real marginal costs. We focus on this mapping
because it is well defined even in static models and plays a key role for the slope and curvature
of the Phillips curve. To be precise, we define the partial elasticity of real marginal costs
with respect to output as
                                         ln mc
                                            PY
                                              t
                                              t
                                                               .
                                          ln Yt
                                                  M U =const

Calculation of this elasticity requires the entire model as described in Appendix G.1, except
that 1) we do not impose output market clearing so that output can be varied independently,
2) we do not impose that intermediaries sell their output to the final goods sector at constant
markups (as in New Keynesian models), and 3) we hold the marginal utility of consumption
constant. We define this elasticity more rigorously in Appendix G.4.
   As Figure 7 shows, a convex aggregate supply curve implies that the partial elasticity of


                                                  36
                                    Table 5: State-dependent multipliers

                                                  Initial output relative to steady state              Difference
                                                                            (in percent)
                                                  -10         -5        0         5         10          -10/+10
  Calibration                                                 Government expenditure multiplier
  Baseline                                        0.68      0.65      0.63      0.59       0.55            0.12
  Elasticity of substitution 0.5                  0.68      0.66      0.64      0.63       0.61            0.07
  22 capacity industries                          0.72      0.71      0.69      0.67       0.64            0.08
  66 capacity industries                          0.62      0.59      0.56      0.51       0.46            0.16
  Frisch labor supply elasticity 1                0.56      0.54      0.52      0.50       0.47            0.09
  Frisch labor supply elasticity 5                0.77      0.74      0.71      0.67       0.62            0.15

  Notes: The baseline calibration has 45 capacity industries, an elasticity of substitution of 0.05, and a Frisch
  labor supply elasticity of 2. See Appendix G.3 for details. In the BEA's industry classification 22 industries are
  in the manufacturing sector, and 66 industries are private.



real marginal costs with respect to output is procyclical. In standard sticky price models,
this leads to a flattening of the Phillips curve during downturns. If a positive demand shock
hits the economy during a downturn, this shock generates less inflationary pressure than if
the same-sized shock hits during an expansion. For instance, during the Great Recession, the
slope of the Phillips curve falls by approximately 12 to 20 percent. This finding can partially
explain the Missing Disinflation observed at the time, and has implications for stabilization
policy that relies on generating inflation. If episodes at the zero lower bound coincide with
low output, government expenditures will generate less inflation than predicted by models
in which the Phillips curve is log-linear (e.g. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011).
   Note also that when we compute the partial elasticity of real marginal costs with respect
to output using the demeaned utilization rate from the FRB--the red line in Figure 7--it
trends downwards. The reason is that the utilization rate itself trends downwards. When
taken at face value, this implies that the Phillips curve has significantly flattened since the
1970's, although the downward trend in the utilization rate raises a number of questions
(Pierce and Wisniewski, 2018). The flattening of the Phillips curve has recently attracted
attention by policymakers (e.g. Brainard, 2019).




                                                         37
                Figure 7: Partial elasticity of real marginal cost with respect to output




  Notes: For this figure, we choose the demand shock to generate an output gap as measured by either the
  Congressional Budget Office (CBO) or the FRB's (demeaned) utilization rate. Shaded areas represent NBER
  recessions.



4.3.3    The welfare cost of business cycles

Building on Lucas' (1987) seminal contribution, we next discuss the implications for the
welfare costs of business cycles. As Lucas famously demonstrated, the welfare benefits of
eliminating business cycle fluctuations in standard models are shockingly small--and smaller
than compatible with many researchers' intuition. This discrepancy has prompted work
exploring the origins and the robustness of this finding. We build here on one branch of
this research agenda that generates larger welfare costs of business cycles by introducing
non-linearities on the supply side.17 With such non-linearities, Jensen's inequality implies
that the mean of consumption in the presence of business cycle fluctuations differs from the
level of consumption that would prevail in the absence of business cycle fluctuations. In
our model the mean of consumption falls permanently, thereby raising the welfare costs of
   17
      The welfare costs of business cycles in Lucas (1987) arise from the curvature of the utility function. Baqaee and
Farhi (2019) illustrate that the welfare costs can be very large in economies with network linkages and nonlinearities
on the production side. In Barlevy (2004) decreasing returns to investment generate a permanent increase in the
growth rate when business cycle fluctuations are eliminated, implying large welfare costs of business cycles. Lucas
(2003) and Barlevy (2005) summarize the literature.



                                                          38
                               Table 6: Welfare costs of business cycles

                                                       E[C ]-Css    E[n]-nss
                                                          Css          nss     Welfare costs

              Model/calibration                                     (in percent)
              Baseline                                    -0.097    -0.076          0.119
              Elasticity of substitution 0.5              -0.077    -0.059          0.115
              22 capacity industries                      -0.071    -0.055          0.107
              66 capacity industries                      -0.129    -0.101          0.135
              Frisch labor supply elasticity 1            -0.114    -0.090          0.139
              Frisch labor supply elasticity 5            -0.088    -0.068          0.107
              Lucas (1987)                                  -          -            0.068

         Notes: As in Lucas (1987), the welfare costs are measured in consumption equivalents.




business cycles.
    Table 6 shows the welfare costs of business cycles in our model. We calibrate the demand
shock such that the standard deviation of the log of consumption is 0.032 (as in Lucas,
1987). Relative to a calibration without business cycle fluctuations, consumption falls by
0.097 percent in the baseline calibration. At the same time, however, hours worked fall by
0.076 percent, partially offsetting the utility loss from lower consumption. The representative
household would permanently give up 0.119 percent of her steady state consumption in order
to eliminate business cycles.
    Alternative calibrations affect the loss in consumption and hours relative to the economy
without business cycles as well as the welfare costs. In comparison to Lucas (1987) with
the same coefficient of relative risk aversion, the welfare losses are typically a little less than
twice as large. We note that our model does not feature endogenous capital accumulation,
idiosyncratic income risk, and a number of other mechanisms, which the literature has shown
to affect the welfare costs of business cycles.


5    Conclusion

In this paper we have shown that capacity constraints at the plant-level generate convex
supply curves at the industry level. This convexity implies that price and production re-


                                                     39
sponses to demand shocks are state-dependent. Comparing industries with utilization rates
below the 15th and above the 85th percentile, our non-parametric estimates indicate that,
a one percent outward shift in demand raises prices by approximately 0.1 percent in the
former and by 0.6 percent in the latter case. When comparing the production responses
of industries below the 15th percentile to those above the 85th percentile, it approximately
doubles in size. In this sense, our estimates imply that the degree of convexity is large.
   Convex supply curves at the industry level matter for business cycles because the ag-
gregate supply curve becomes convex. The aggregation necessitates additional assumption,
which affect the curvature of the aggregate supply curve. In our model, the aggregate im-
plications of convex supply curves are of intermediate size. Depending on the calibration,
the fiscal multiplier increases by 7 to 16 cents on the dollar during times of slack relative to
boom times. The Phillips curve flattens during recessions and over time. For instance, the
elasticity of real marginal costs with respect to output falls by 18 to 30 percent during the
Volcker disinflation and by 12 to 20 percent during the Great Recession. The welfare costs
of business cycles approximately double.
   We add three remarks. First, our estimates imply that changes in the utilization rate due
to demand shocks cause inflation. Without conditioning on this demand shock, however, this
relationship is delicate due to simultaneity bias. One would therefore not generally expect the
utilization rate to be useful for forecasting inflation, although a number of studies find that
it is (Corrado and Mattey, 1997; Stock and Watson, 1999). Further, a weak unconditional
relationship between capacity utilization and inflation is not an indication that the FRB's
measures of capacity utilization are flawed.
   Second, the controversy as to whether the fiscal multiplier varies with the business cycle
stems in part from disagreement on which variable should be used to measure the state of
the business cycle. Our findings suggest that capacity utilization is a good candidate--as
does prior work by Fazzari, Morley, and Panovska (2015). At the same time, it is unlikely
that capacity utilization captures all relevant notions of slack, and hence other measures
should be considered as well.
   Third, a limitation of this and many other papers which use data on capacity utilization is
that these data are only collected for the manufacturing sector, mining, and utilities. Further,
and unlike earlier work by Shapiro (1989) three decades ago, we find the FRB's current
measures of capacity and utilization to be highly informative. In our assessment, it would
therefore be fruitful to expand efforts to measure capacity utilization to non-manufacturing
industries.


                                               40
   In this paper, we have shown that capacity constraints lead to economically significant
nonlinearities on the supply side of the economy, and we have discussed three instances
in which they matter for policy. However, convex supply curves give rise to many more
policy relevant implications. They imply, for instance, that responses to all shocks are state
dependent, and not only for government expenditures. They also lead to an interdependence
between domestic and foreign sales. As Almunia et al. (2018) show, firms aim to increase
exports when the domestic demand for their product falls. We expect that exploring the
role of capacity constraints and convex supply curves for the business cycle will likely yield
many more interesting insights.




                                             41
References
Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. 2015. "Identification Properties of
 Recent Production Function Estimators." Econometrica 83:2411­2451.
Almunia, Miguel, Pol Antr`
                         as, David Lopez-Rodriguez, and Eduardo Morales. 2018. "Venting
  Out: Exports During a Domestic Slump." Nber working papers, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.
Alvarez-Lois, Pedro P. 2004. "Capacity constraints, idiosyncratic demand uncertainty and
  the dynamics of inflation." Economics Letters 83 (1):15 ­ 21.
------. 2006. "Endogenous capacity utilization and macroeconomic persistence." Journal
  of Monetary Economics 53 (8):2213 ­ 2237.
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2014. "Importers, Exporters, and Exchange
 Rate Disconnect." American Economic Review 104 (7):1942­1978.
Atalay, Enghin. 2017. "How Important Are Sectoral Shocks?" American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 9 (4):254­280.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. "Measuring the Output Responses to
 Fiscal Policy." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2):1­27.
------. 2013a. "Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion." In Fiscal Policy after the
  Financial Crisis, NBER Chapters. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 63­98.
------. 2013b. "Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy."       American Economic Review
  103 (3):141­146.
Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi. 2019. "The Macroeconomic Impact of Microe-
 conomic Shocks: Beyond Hulten's Theorem." Econometrica 87 (4):1155­1203.
Barlevy, Gadi. 2004. "The Cost of Business Cycles Under Endogenous Growth." The Amer-
 ican Economic Review 94 (4):964­990.
------. 2005. "The cost of business cycles and the benefits of stabilization." Economic
  Perspectives 29 (1):32,49.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Wayne Gray. 1996. "The NBER Manufacturing Productivity
 Database." Working Paper 205, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Becker, Randy, Wayne Gray, and Jordan Marvakov. 2016. "NBER-CES Manufacturing
  Industry Database: Technical Notes." Tech. rep.
Bigio, Saki and Jennifer La'O. 2016. "Distortions in Production Networks." Nber working
  papers, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bils, Mark and Jang-Ok Cho. 1994. "Cyclical factor utilization." Journal of Monetary
  Economics 33 (2):319­354.

                                           42
Blinder, Alan S. 1986. "Can the Production Smoothing Model of Inventory Behavior be
  Saved?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (3):431­453.
Boehm, Christoph E., Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2019. "Input Linkages and
 the Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 T¯  ohoku Earthquake."
 The Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1):60­75.
Brainard, Lael. 2019. "The Disconnect between Inflation and Employment in the New
  Normal." Remarks at the national tax association 49th annual spring symposium, Board
  of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Burnside, Craig and Martin Eichenbaum. 1996. "Factor-Hoarding and the Propagation of
 Business-Cycle Shocks." American Economic Review 86 (5):1154­1174.
Cassels, J. M. 1937. "Excess Capacity and Monopolistic Competition." The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 51 (3):426,443.
Chamberlin, Edward. 1933. The theory of monopolistic competition. Harvard economic
 studies ... vol. XXXVIII. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. "When Is the Govern-
 ment Spending Multiplier Large?" Journal of Political Economy 119 (1):78­121.
Cooley, Thomas F, Gary D Hansen, and Edward C Prescott. 1995. "Equilibrium Business
 Cycles with Idle Resources and Variable Capacity Utilization." Economic Theory 6 (1):35­
 49.
Corrado, Carol and Joe Mattey. 1997. "Capacity Utilization." Journal of Economic Per-
 spectives 11 (1):151­167.
Cragg, John G. and Stephen G. Donald. 1993. "Testing Identifiability and Specification in
  Instrumental Variable Models." Econometric Theory 9 (2):222­240.
Fagnart, Jean-Fran¸cois, Omar Licandro, and Franck Portier. 1999. "Firm Heterogeneity,
  Capacity Utilization and the Business Cycle." Review of Economic Dynamics 2 (2):433­
  455.
Fazzari, Steven M., James Morley, and Irina Panovska. 2015. "State-dependent effects of
  fiscal policy." Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics 19 (3):285­315.
Gilbert, Charles, Norman J. Morin, and Richard D. Raddock. 2000. "Industrial production
  and capacity utilization: recent developments and the 1999 annual revision." Federal
  Reserve Bulletin (Mar):20­33.
Gilchrist, Simon and John C. Williams. 2000. "Putty-Clay and Investment: A Business
  Cycle Analysis." Journal of Political Economy 108 (5):928­960.
Gopinath, Gita and Roberto Rigobon. 2008. "Sticky Borders." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics 123 (2):531­575.


                                           43
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W Huffman. 1988. "Investment, Capacity
 Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle." American Economic Review 78 (3):402­417.
Hall, Robert E. 2009. "By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More
 Output?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 40 (2 (Fall)):183­249.
Hansen, Gary D. and Edward C. Prescott. 2005. "Capacity constraints, asymmetries, and
 the business cycle." Review of Economic Dynamics 8 (4):850­865.
Hulten, Charles R. 1978. "Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs." Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies 45 (3):511­518.
Hummels, David, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2014. "The Wage
 Effects of Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data." American
 Economic Review 104 (6):1597­1629.
Huo, Zhen, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2019. "The Global Business
 Cycle: Measurement and Transmission." Nber working papers, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research, Inc.
Klein, L. 1960. "Some theoretical issues in the measurement of capacity." Econometrica
  28 (2):272,286.
Kuhn, Florian and Chacko George. 2017. "Business Cycle Implications of Capacity Con-
 straints under Demand Shocks." Working Paper, .
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin. 2003. "Estimating production functions using inputs to
  control for unobservables." Review of Economic Studies 70 (243):317­341.
Lucas, Robert E. 1987. Models of business cycles. OX, UK: B. Blackwell.
------. 2003. "Macroeconomic Priorities." American Economic Review 93 (1):1­14.
Michaillat, Pascal. 2014. "A Theory of Countercyclical Government Multiplier." American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (1):190­217.
Morin, Norman J. and John J. Stevens. 2004. "Estimating capacity utilization from survey
 data." Tech. rep.
Olley, G Steven and Ariel Pakes. 1996. "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommu-
  nications Equipment Industry." Econometrica 64 (6):1263­1297.
Parker, Jonathan A. 2011. "On Measuring the Effects of Fiscal Policy in Recessions." Journal
  of Economic Literature 49 (3):703­718.
Pierce, Justin R. and Emily Wisniewski. 2018. "Some Characteristics of the Decline in Man-
  ufacturing Capacity Utilization." Feds notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
  System (U.S.).



                                            44
Ramey, Valerie A. and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. "Government Spending Multipliers in Good
 Times and in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data." Journal of Political Economy
 126 (2):850­901.
Robinson, Joan. 1933. The economics of imperfect competition, by Joan Robinson. London:
 Macmillan and Co., ltd.
Rotemberg, Julio J. 1982. "Sticky Prices in the United States." Journal of Political Economy
 90 (6):1187­1211.
Sanderson, Eleanor and Frank Windmeijer. 2016. "A weak instrument F-test in linear IV
  models with multiple endogenous variables." Journal of Econometrics 190 (2):212­221.
Shapiro, Matthew D. 1989. "Assessing the Federal Reserve's Measures of Capacity Utiliza-
  tion." Brookings Paper on Economic Activity (1):181­241.
Shea, John. 1993a. "Do Supply Curves Slope Up?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  108 (1):1­32.
------. 1993b. "The Input-Output Approach to Instrument Selection." Journal of Business
  & Economic Statistics 11 (2):145­155.
Smithies, Arthur. 1957. "Economic Fluctuations and Growth." Econometrica 25.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 1999. "Forecasting inflation." Journal of Monetary
  Economics 44 (2):293­335.
Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
  Regression." Nber technical working papers, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.




                                            45
For online publication




          46
A     Appendix: Capacity utilization at the plant level
This Appendix discusses background information on the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Uti-
lization (QSPC) and basic facts on plants' capacity utilization using public use microdata.

Background The survey is conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau and funded jointly by the
Federal Reserve Board and the Department of Defense. The sample is drawn from all U.S. man-
ufacturing and publishing plants with 5 or more production employees. Among other things,
establishments are asked about the market value of their actual production and the estimated
market value of their full production capacity. Respondents are asked to construct this estimate
under the following assumptions: 1) only the current functional machinery and equipment is avail-
able, 2) normal downtime, 3) labor, materials, and other non-capital inputs are fully available,
4) a realistic and sustainable shift and work schedule, and 5) that the establishment produces
the same product mix as its current production. Figure A1 shows the question on the survey
form. The full survey form of the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization is available
at https://bhs.econ.census.gov/bhs/pcu/watermark_form.pdf. Capacity utilization rates are
then obtained by dividing the market value of actual production by the estimate of full capacity
production.

Why do plants produce below capacity? The survey also contains questions on why estab-
lishments produce at levels below their capacity. As Figure A1 shows, respondents of the QSPC
are asked: "If this plant's actual production in the current quarter was less than full production ca-
pacity, mark (X) the primary reasons." Possible answers include "Insufficient supply of materials",
"Insufficient orders", "Insufficient supply of local labor force/skills", and others. Multiple answers
are permitted. It turns out that the vast majority of plants produce below capacity because they
are not able to sell their products. For the time period from 2013q1 to 2018q2, 79.7 percent of plant
managers cite insufficient orders as the main reason for producing below capacity. The second most
cited option is chosen by 10.0 percent of respondents (insufficient supply of local labor force/skills).
These responses are summarized in Figure A2.




                                                  47
                Figure A1: Page 2 of survey form of the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity
                                                                                                                                                                Page 2

         Item 2      VALUE OF PRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                 $Bil.     Mil.         Thou.
         A. Report market value of actual production for the quarter.

            ACTUAL PRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


         B. Estimate the market value of production of this plant as if it had
            been operating at full production capability for the quarter.
            Assume:
              · only machinery and equipment in place and ready to
                operate.
              · normal downtime.
              · labor, materials, utilities, etc. ARE FULLY AVAILABLE.
              · the number of shifts, hours of operation and overtime pay
                that can be sustained under normal conditions and a
                realistic work schedule in the long run.                                                                         $Bil.     Mil.         Thou.
              · the same product mix as the actual production.
              FULL PRODUCTION CAPABILITY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




                                                                                                                        IT
                                                                                                                                     Capacity Utilization
            C. Divide your actual production estimate by your full
               production estimate. Multiply this ratio by 100 to get                                                                             %
               a percentage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




                                                                                                           B M
                                                                                               U
            Is this a reasonable estimate of your utilization rate for this quarter?                             Yes            No -- Review item 2A and 2B




                                                                                             S
         Item 3      ACTUAL AND FULL PRODUCTION COMPARISONS




                                                                          t
         A. FULL PRODUCTION CAPABILITY: CURRENT QUARTER VS PREVIOUS QUARTER




                                                                        o
            If your estimate of current quarter full production capability has changed compared to the previous
            quarter, mark (X) the primary reasons.

                  Building capital expenditures

                                                                       n                                   Change in method of operation




                                                     o
                  Machinery capital expenditures ­ Include new,                                            Change in product mix or product specifications




                                                   D
                  replaced, or enhanced machinery
                                                                                                           Change in material input
                  Building retirements
                                                                                                           Other ­ Specify
                  Machinery retirements
                                                                                                                             




                  Price changed but product mix is the same

                  Revised estimation assumption with no change in
                  plant or operations
§@"]:¤




         B. ACTUAL OPERATIONS VS FULL PRODUCTION CAPABILITY
            If this plant's actual production in the current quarter was less than full production capability, mark (X)
                                                                                                                                                                         31016025



            the primary reasons.

                  Not most profitable to operate                            Lack of sufficient fuel or electric energy             Strike or work stoppage
                  at full production capability
                                                                            Equipment limitations                                  Seasonal operations
                  Insufficient supply of materials
                                                                            Storage limitations                                    Environmental restrictions
                  Insufficient orders
                                                                            Logistics/transportation constraints                   Other ­ Specify
                  Insufficient supply of local labor
                                                                                                                                                     




                  force/skills                                              Sufficient inventory of finished goods
                                                                            on hand

                                                                CONTINUE WITH Item 4 ON PAGE 3.




                                                                                          48
                            Figure A2: Qualitative responses




Notes: The data are from public use data of the QSPC of the U.S. Census Bureau and are averaged
from 2013q1 to 2018q2.




                                              49
B      Appendix: Proofs
Recall that we assumed in Section 2 that  > 1, that E [ ] = 1 and that E  2 < . We will
make use of these conditions below. Further, for the proofs in this Appendix, the following limits
are useful. Using L'H^
                     ospital's rule, we have
                               ¯t
                              0     dG ( )                        ¯ t g (¯
                                                                         t )                        1+ 1
                     lim                 -1     = lim                            1    =      lim  ¯ t  g (¯
                                                                                                          t ) = 0,             (B1)
                    ¯ t 0
                               (¯
                                t )                   ¯ t 0 -1         (¯
                                                                        t )     -         -1¯ t 0
                                                            
                                                                                1
                           
                    -1              1                             - (¯
                                                                     t )  g (¯
                                                                             t )                   
        lim (¯
             t )               dG ( ) = lim
                                                                                              =             t )2 g (¯
                                                                                                       lim (¯       t ) = 0,   (B2)
      ¯ t 
                                                  ¯ t                               - -1
                                                                                         -1        -1 t
                                                                                                     ¯  
                         ¯t                               - -
                                                            
                                                              1
                                                                            t )
                                                                           (¯         


where g is the pdf of G.

Proof of Lemma 1
Lemma 1. The utilization rate as defined in (10) has the following properties:

    1. ut  [0, 1] is only a function of ¯ t : ut = u (¯
                                                      t )

    2. lim¯ 0 u (¯
                  ) = 1, lim¯  u (¯
                                  ) = 0

    3. u < 0

Proof. Using the definition of capacity and limit (B1), we can write

                     Q (qt ) =           lim Y (qt , ¯t)
                                        ¯ t 0
                                        
                                                                                                                         
                                                                               ¯t                                        -1
                                                          1                                                  1
                                    = qt        lim            -1                   dG ( ) +                 dG ( )
                                                                                                             
                                              ¯ t 0
                                              
                                                       (¯
                                                        t )                0                        0
                                    = qt ,

where                                                                                          
                                                                                1              -1
                                                =                     (t ) dG ( )
                                                                                                    .
                                                              0

Then equation (10) implies that
                                                                                                                   
                                                         -1                                                        -1
                                                                      ¯t                       
                                  1              1                                                      1
                         u (¯
                            t ) =                                          dG ( ) +                  dG ( )
                                                                                                                        .      (B3)
                                                 ¯t               0                           ¯t

Hence, ut is only a function of  ¯ t and ut  0.
   Regarding part 2, lim  ¯ t 0 u (¯
                                   t ) = 1 follows directly from the definition of capacity and utiliza-




                                                                           50
tion. Further,
                                                                                                                         
                                                              -1                                                         -1
                                                                        ¯t                       
                               1                  1                                                    1
             lim u (¯
                    t ) = lim                                                g ( ) d +                g ( ) d
                                                                                                       
           ¯ t 
                          ¯ t  
                                                  ¯t                0                           ¯t
                                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                   ¯t                          -1
                              1                   0     g ( ) d
                         =          lim                        -1                   =0
                                   ¯ t 
                                   
                                                    (¯
                                                     t )       



   For part 3, take the derivative of equation (B3) to obtain
                                                                                                      1
                   1-2             -1                                                                 -1
                                             ¯t                                                                ¯t
      ut    (¯
             t )             1                                                      1
         =-                                       g ( ) d +                        g ( ) d
                                                                                                                    g ( ) d,   (B4)
      ¯t
                             ¯t
                                         0                                   ¯t                            0

which is negative for 0 < ¯ t < . It then follows that ut  1, completing the proof of part 1 of
the lemma.


Proof of Proposition 1
Proposition 1. M has the following properties:

  1. M  0
                         
  2. limu0 M (ln u) = ln -1 , limu1 M (ln u) = 

  3. limu0 M (ln u) = 0, limu1 M (ln u) = 

  4. Without further restrictions on G, the sign of M is generally ambiguous.

Proof. The dynamic problem in Section 2.1.2 requires that the firms pricing decision solves

                                          max
                                           y
                                              (py
                                                t (j ) - mct ) yt (j )
                                          pt (j )

subject to the constraints
                                                             yt  qt ,
                                                                                        -
                                                                         py
                                                                          t (j )
                                        yt (j ) = t (j ) Yt                                 .
                                                                          PtY
    Letting t (j ) be the multiplier on the capacity constraint, the solution requires that firms set
prices according to the rule
                                               
                                     py
                                      t (j ) =     (mct +  (j )) ,                              (B5)
                                               -1
with  (j ) = 0 if and only if yt = qt .
   The threshold value   ¯ t of the demand shock is
                                                                                        
                                                        qt       mct
                                             ¯t =                                                                              (B6)
                                                        Yt      - 1 PtY

                                                               51
and production of firms with t (j )      ¯ t is constrained by capacity while production of firms with
t (j ) < ¯ t is not. For constrained firms, the Lagrange multiplier is
                                                                                   1
                                          -1 Y                    t (j ) Yt        
                                   (j ) =   Pt                                         - mct .                            (B7)
                                                                     qt

    Now combining the price index (3) with the price setting rule (B5) and equations (B6) and (B7)
gives
                                                                                               1
                                  1                                            1-             1-
                                             
                 PtY   =              t (j )    (mct +  (j ))                           dj
                              0              -1
                                                                                                                  1
                                                ¯t                                       
                                                                               -1                  1
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                 1-
                       =       mct                   t dG ( ) + (¯
                                                                 t )                          t dG ( )                .
                            -1              0                                           ¯t

Taking logs gives the supply curve (11) with the log average markup given by
                                                             ¯t                                         
             ~ (¯               1                                                             -1             1
             M  t ) := ln     -   ln                              t dG ( ) + (¯
                                                                              t )                           t dG ( ) .
                            -1 -1                        0                                             ¯t

                                                                    ~ (¯
The log average markup as a function of ln ut is then M (ln ut ) := M   (ln ut )).
   For part 1, note that
                                                                    1          1
                                                                           
                                   1                      t )- 
                                                         (¯               ¯ t t dG ( )
                                                                          
                        ~ (¯
                        M  t ) = -                                                            1              .            (B8)
                                             ¯t
                                                     t dG ( ) + (¯
                                                                 t )
                                                                               -1       
                                                                                       ¯ t t dG ( )
                                                                               
                                            0                                          

Further note that

                                           ~ (¯     ¯ (ut )
                              M (ln ut ) = M  t ) ·         · ut
                                                    ut
                                           ~ (¯     ut -1
                                         = M  t ) ·            · ut
                                                      ¯t

Now plugging in equations (B8), (B4), and (B3) gives, after some algebra,
                                                                   -1          1
                                                                           
                                               1 (¯
                                                  t )              
                                                                          ¯ t t dG ( )
                                                                          
                                  M (ln ut ) =                       ¯t                        ,                          (B9)
                                                                    0     dG ( )

which is greater than or equal to zero.




                                                              52
   For part 2 note that

          lim M (ln ut ) =                       ~ (¯
                                             lim M  t )
          u0                             ¯ 
                                         
                                                                                 1
                                              1                             -1
                                    = ln    -   ln      dG ( ) + lim (¯ t )         dG ( )
                                         -1 -1      0            ¯ t 
                                                                               ¯t
                                                                       1
                                              1                 -1
                                    = ln    -   ln 1 + lim (¯
                                                            t )           dG ( )
                                         -1 -1         ¯ t           ¯t
                                         
                                    = ln
                                         -1
where we used the limit (B2). Further
                                                                                                                          
                               ~ (¯                               1                                               -1              1
          lim M (ln ut ) = lim M  t ) = ln                      -   ln                             lim (¯
                                                                                                        t )                        dG ( )             =
          u1                        ¯ 0                       -1 -1                             ¯ t 0
                                                                                                                       ¯t

   For part 3, and using the limits (B1) and (B2), we obtain
                                                         -1               1
                                                                                                                             
                                1 (¯
                                   t )                   
                                                                  ¯ t t dG ( )                      1      -1                           1
           lim M (ln ut ) = lim                             ¯t                                = lim   (¯
                                                                                                       t )                         t dG ( ) = 0
          ut 0             ¯ t  
                                                                 dG ( )                        ¯ t                          ¯t
                                                           0

and
                                                   -1               1
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             -1
                              1 (¯
                                 t )               
                                                          ¯ t t dG ( )                       1                   1                 (¯
                                                                                                                                    t )      
       lim M (ln ut ) = lim                          ¯t                              = lim                       
                                                                                                                t dG ( )           ¯t                 = .
      ut 1              ¯ t 0                             dG ( )                       ¯ t 0             0                              dG ( )
                                                    0                                                                             0

   For part 4, take the derivative of equation (B9) to obtain
                                                                           -1             1
                                                                                    
                                                                 1 (¯
                                                                    t )    
                                                                                    ¯t   t dG( )
                                                                               ¯t
                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                    dG( )
                                                                              0                              ut
                                     M (ln ut ) =                                                                         ut .
                                                                              ¯t                             ¯t
                  ut
Since ut > 0 and   ¯ t < 0, the sign of M (ln ut ) is the negative of the sign of the first derivative
                   
on the right hand side. Now
                           -1            1
                                   
                 1 (¯
                    t )    
                                   ¯t   t dG( )
                            ¯t
                           0       dG( )

                               ¯t
                               1             1                                                                               -1              1
                                                                                ¯t                                                     
               -1
                     t )- 
                    (¯              ¯ t t dG ( )    -¯ t g (¯
                                                            t )                0     dG ( ) - ¯ t g (¯
                                                                                                     t ) (¯
                                                                                                          t )                
                                                                                                                                      ¯ t t dG ( )
                                                                                                                                      
      =                                                                                        2
                                                                         ¯t
                                                                        0      dG ( )
                           1             1                                                                                         -1             1
                                                 ¯t                                                 ¯t                                       
            -1
                  t )- 
                 (¯                ¯ t t dG ( ) 0
                                                          dG ( ) - ¯ t g (¯
                                                                          t )                      0     dG ( ) + (¯
                                                                                                                   t )             
                                                                                                                                            ¯ t t dG ( )
                                                                                                                                            
      =                                                                                            2                                                        .
                                                                               ¯t
                                                                              0      dG ( )


                                                                               53
It is clear that this expression can be positive or negative, depending on the value of g (¯    t ). If
   t ) is sufficiently small, the derivative on the left hand side is positive and M negative. For
g (¯
                      t ), the opposite is the case. Most conventional distributions result in M > 0.
sufficiently large g (¯
This completes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 2
Proposition 2 (Reduced form). The industry's quantity, linearized around the equilibrium in t - 1,
is

            ln Yi,t =  (ln ui,t-1 ) i,t +  (ln ui,t-1 ) i,t + e (ln ui,t-1 ) ei,t
                          + Q (ln ui,t-1 )  ln Qi,t + mc (ln ui,t-1 )  ln mci,t
                                                                              inv - Y inv
                                                                            Yi,t
                                                  IMi,t                                 i,t-1   Y
                          + IM (ln ui,t-1 )              + inv (ln ui,t-1 )                   + i,t .
                                                  Yi,t-1                         Yi,t-1

All coefficients are only functions of the log utilization rate ln ui,t-1 and  > 0,  > 0, e > 0,
mc < 0, Q > 0, IM < 0, and inv > 0. Supply curve (11) is convex if and only if  < 0 and
e < 0. The error term is a weighted average of changes in the unobserved demand shocks i,t   C,
 I ,  M , and  EX .
j,i,t  j,i,t       d,i,t

Proof. We prove a slightly more general version in which the demand elasticity is allowed to depend
on the type of customer. Setting  M =  C =  I =  F =  gives the version in the text. In this
more general version i,t is defined as

                       M                                           C           I
           i,t =                      sM            M      C
                                       j,i,t-1  ln Pj,t + si,t-1      ln PtC +         sI            I
                                                                                        j,i,t-1  ln Pj,t
                       ¯                                           ¯           ¯
                              j                                                    j

                          F                          EX,
                      +                sEX
                                        d,i,t-1  ln Pd,t .
                          ¯
                                  d

                                    EXd,i,t-1                Mj,i,t-1            Ij,i,t-1        Ci,t-1
    Define the shares sEX
                       d,i,t-1 =
                                                  M                   I                   C               G
                                      Yi,t-1 , sj,i,t-1 = Yi,t-1 , sj,i,t-1 = Yi,t-1 , si,t-1 = Yi,t-1 , si,t-1 =
Gi,t-1
       sEX
Yi,t-1 ,i,t-1 =
                     EX         M
                  d sd,i,t-1 , si,t-1 =
                                               M              I
                                            j sj,i,t-1 , and si,t-1 =
                                                                           I
                                                                        j sj,i,t-1 . We begin with summarizing
the linearized system of equations:
Supply
                                Y
                           ln Pi,t = M (ln ui,t-1 )  ln ui,t +  ln (mci,t )
Domestic final demand
                                     C
                       ln Ci,t =  ln i,t +  ln Ct -  C  ln Pi,t
                                                             Y
                                                                +  C  ln PtC
                                      I
                      ln Ij,i,t =  ln j,i,t +  ln Ij,t -  I  ln Pi,t
                                                                  Y
                                                                     +  I  ln Pj,t
                                                                               I


Intermediate demand
                                    M
                    ln Mj,i,t =  ln j,i,t +  ln Mj,t -  M  ln Pi,t
                                                                Y
                                                                   +  M  ln Pj,t
                                                                             M




                                                           54
Foreign demand
                                  EX                          Y,              EX,
                 ln EXd,i,t =  ln d,i,t +  ln EXd,t -  F  ln Pd,i,t +  F  ln Pd,t

Utilization
                                            ln ui,t =  ln Yi,t -  ln Qi,t
Price in domestic and foreign currency
                                                Y                    Y,
                                           ln Pi,t =  ln Ed,t +  ln Pd,i,t

Market Clearing

        ln Yi,t =               sM                     C
                                 j,i,t-1  ln Mj,i,t + si,t-1  ln Ci,t +        sI
                                                                                j,i,t-1  ln Ij,i,t
                           j                                              j
                                                                                 inv - Y inv
                                                                               Yi,t        i,t-1   IMi,t
                      +sG
                        i,t-1  ln Gi,t +              sEX
                                                       d,i,t-1  ln EXd,i,t +                     -
                                                                                    Yi,t-1         Yi,t-1
                                                  d

   After some algebra, this system can be solved for  ln Yi,t where

           ln Yi,t =  (ln ui,t-1 ) i,t +  (ln ui,t-1 ) i,t + e (ln ui,t-1 ) ei,t
                               +Q (ln ui,t-1 )  ln Qi,t + mc (ln ui,t-1 )  ln (mci,t )
                                                                              inv - Y inv
                                                                            Yi,t
                                                  IMi,t                                 i,t-1   Y
                               +IM (ln ui,t-1 )          + inv (ln ui,t-1 )                   + i,t .
                                                  Yi,t-1                         Yi,t-1

Letting
                                 ¯ = sM
                                      i,t-1 
                                             M
                                               + sC     C   I     I   EX    F
                                                  i,t-1  + si,t-1  + si,t-1  ,

the coefficients satisfy
                                                                 1
                                     (ln ui,t-1 ) =                           > 0,
                                                           1+¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                                 ¯
                                     (ln ui,t-1 ) =                           > 0,
                                                           1+¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                                 F
                                    e (ln ui,t-1 ) =                               > 0,
                                                           1+ ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                            ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                            
                                    Q (ln ui,t-1 ) =                               > 0,
                                                           1+ ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                                 - ¯
                                   mc (ln ui,t-1 ) =                               < 0,
                                                           1+ ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                                 -1
                                  IM (ln ui,t-1 ) =                                < 0,
                                                           1+ ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                                  1
                                  inv (ln ui,t-1 ) =                               > 0.
                                                           1+ ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )




                                                           55
Further, the error term is

  Y               1
  i,t =                        ·
            1+¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                                                                                                         
                   sM           M        C         C
                    j,i,t-1  ln j,i,t + si,t-1  ln i,t +                             sI           I
                                                                                      j,i,t-1  ln j,i,t +                sEX          EX 
                                                                                                                          d,i,t-1  ln d,i,t .
               j                                                                j                                    d

Since
                                                                               ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                                                               
                                     (ln ui,t-1 ) = -                                                         ,
                                                                       (1 + ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 ))2
                                                                          F ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 )
                                    e (ln ui,t-1 ) = -                                                        ,
                                                                       (1 + ¯ M (ln ui,t-1 ))2

the supply curve is convex (M (ln ui,t-1 ) > 0) if and only if  (ln ui,t-1 ) < 0 and e (ln ui,t-1 ) < 0.


Proof of Proposition 3
Proposition 3.   0 and   0.

Proof. Since marginal costs are not directly observable, we are interested in using average unit
costs as a proxy. Unit variable costs are
                               1 v                                         1                            1
                              0 pt vt (j ) dj            pv
                                                          t               0 yt (j ) dj                 0 yt (j ) dj
                                                =                                          = mct                         ,
                                   Yt               zt F (t , 1)                Yt                            Yt

where we used relationship yt (j ) = zt F (t , 1) vt (j ) and equation (6). Now, using equation (B6),
we obtain
                                                                                    -
                          1                         ¯t
                                                                   py
                                                                    t ( )
                                                                                                         
                              yt (j ) dj =               t Yt                            dG ( ) +             qt dG ( )
                      0                         0                   PtY                                ¯t
                                                                         -
                                                                                    ¯t                      
                                                         -1 mct
                                         = Yt                                            dG ( ) +                 qt dG ( )
                                                          PtY                   0                        ¯t
                                                              ¯t                             
                                                         1
                                         = qt                          t dG ( ) +                 dG ( ) .
                                                         ¯t   0                             ¯t

Next, using equation (9), we can write

                    1 v                                           1       ¯t                       
                                                                               t dG ( ) +          ¯ t dG ( )
                   0 pt vt (j ) dj                                ¯t     0                         
                                        = mct                                                                                      .
                          Yt                                                                              1                   -1
                                                          1         ¯t                           
                                                            -1     0     t dG ( ) +              ¯ t (t )
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              dG ( )
                                                    (¯
                                                     t )    




                                                                        56
Defining  (ln ut ) = ~ (¯
                         (ut )), where
                                                                                                               
                                                           1        ¯t                
                                   
                                                           ¯t      0     t dG ( ) +   ¯ t dG ( )
                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
                  ~
                                                                                                              
                     (ut )) = - ln 
                   (¯                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                (B10)
                                                                                             1             -1 
                                                 1            ¯t                    
                                                      -1     0     t dG ( ) +       ¯ t (t )
                                                                                    
                                                                                                 dG ( )
                                              (¯
                                               t )    


it follows that
                                                                 1 v
                                                                0 pt vt (j ) dj    ~ (¯
                                        ln mct = ln                               +   t )
                                                                         Yt
and hence
                                 ln PtY = M (ln ut ) +  (ln ut ) + ln U V Ci,t ,
                      1 v
where U V Ci,t =     0 pt vt (j ) dj    /Yt .
   We are interested in estimating M (ln ut ) and M (ln ut ), but ln ut traces out the composite
term  (ln ut ) = M (ln ut ) +  (ln ut ). We will next show that  (ln ut ) < 0 and  (ln ut ) < 0 in
the model. This implies that we estimate a lower bound for both the slope and the curvature

                               M (ln ui ) =  (ln ui ) -  (ln ui )   (ln ui ) ,

                             M (ln ui )    (ln ui )  (ln ui )   (ln ui )
                                        =          -                     .
                               ui           ui        ui         ui
   Start with  (ln ut ) = ~ (¯
                              (ut )) and differentiate both sides with respect to ln ut . This gives

                                                   ~ (¯           ¯t
                                        (ln ut ) =     (ut )) ·      · ut
                                                                ut
                                                   ~ (¯      ut -1
                                                 =    t ) ·             · ut                                                    (B11)
                                                                ¯t

Now taking the derivative of equation (B10) gives
                                          1                      1            1                ¯t
                                  t )- 
                                 (¯             ¯t
                                                       (t )  - (¯
                                                                t )  dG ( )                   0     t dG ( )
       ~ (¯
          t ) =                                                                                                             ,
                      ¯t                         -1                 1                  ¯t                      
                     0                 t )
                           t dG ( ) + (¯         
                                                           ¯ t (t )
                                                                          dG ( )      0     t dG ( ) + ¯t      ¯ t dG ( )

which is positive.




                                                                     57
   Plugging this derivative together with equation (B4) and (B3) into equation (B11) gives
                                                       1                        1              1                    ¯t
                                             t )- 
                                            (¯                   ¯t
                                                                       (t )  - (¯
                                                                                t )  dG ( )                        0     t dG ( )
    (ln ut ) = -                                                 -1              1
                          ¯t                                                                                ¯t                      
                         0                 t )
                               t dG ( ) + (¯                     
                                                                        ¯ t (t )
                                                                                     dG ( )                0     t dG ( ) + ¯t      ¯ t dG ( )
                                -1
                         1                 ¯t                             1
                         ¯t               0     g ( ) d +                ¯ t  g ( ) d
                                                                         
                                                                             

                   ·                            1-2         ¯t
                                      (¯
                                       t )        
                                                           0     g ( ) d
                               1                            1               1
                              -  -1
                       (¯
                        t )                ¯t        (t ) - (¯
                                                             t )  dG ( )
               = -               ¯t                                                                < 0.
                                0     t dG ( ) + ¯t                   ¯ t dG ( )
                                                                      

This completes the first part of the proof.
   Next define the auxiliary function
                                                            1                        1                 1
                                                     t )-  -1
                                                    (¯                  ¯t       (t )  - (¯
                                                                                          t )  dG ( )
                              t ) = -
                             (¯                                  ¯t                                                                           (B12)
                                                                0     t dG ( ) + ¯t                ¯ t dG ( )
                                                                                                   

and note that  (ln ut ) =  (¯
                            t (ut )). Then

                                                                           ¯t
                                                        t ) ·
                                           (ln ut ) =  (¯                     · ut
                                                                           ut
                                                                           ut -1
                                                                     t ) ·
                                                                 =  (¯             · ut
                                                                             ¯t

Since u (¯
         t ) < 0 and ut > 0, the sign of  (ln ut ) is fully determined by the sign of  (¯
                                                                                        t ). Taking
the derivative of equation (B12) gives
                                      1                  1                            ¯t                                   
                        
                        1
                             t )-  -1
                            (¯                  ¯ t (t )
                                                                  dG ( ) ¯t          0                 t )2
                                                                                           t dG ( ) + (¯                   ¯ t dG ( )
                                                                                                                           
          (¯
           t ) =                                                                                                2
                                                             ¯t                                      
                                                     ¯t     0                 t )2
                                                                  t dG ( ) + (¯                      ¯ t dG ( )
                                                                                                     
                                                1                1                        ¯t                                  
                               ¯t     (t )  - (¯
                                               t )  dG ( )                               0     t dG ( ) + 2 (¯
                                                                                                             t )             ¯ t dG ( )
                        +                              1                                                                    2             ,
                                                                       ¯t                                  
                                                (¯
                                                 t )  ¯t              0                 t )2
                                                                            t dG ( ) + (¯                  ¯ t dG ( )
                                                                                                           

which is greater than zero. Hence,  (ln ut ) < 0. This completes the proof.




                                                                            58
C     Appendix: Model with sticky prices
In this appendix, we extend the baseline model in Section 2 by introducing sticky prices as in
Rotemberg (1982). Alvarez-Lois (2004, 2006) also studies extensions of Fagnart, Licandro, and
Portier (1999) to include sticky prices.

C.1    Aggregating firm
As before, a competitive aggregating firm uses a unit continuum of varieties, indexed j , as inputs
into CES aggregator (1) to produce the industry's composite good. We continue to assume that
these shocks are drawn independently and identically from distribution G with E [ ] = 1 and
E  2 < .
    Since the production of individual varieties is constrained by capacity, the aggregating firm
cannot purchase unlimited amounts of a particular variety at a predetermined (or sticky) price.
Taking prices as given, the final goods firm therefore maximizes profits subject to the production
function (1) and the constraints
                                     yt (j )  qt (j ) for all j,                               (C1)
where qt (j ) denotes the production capacity of variety j .
   The resulting input demand curves are
                                                                         -
                                                     py
                                                      t (j ) + t (j )
                           yt (j ) = t (j ) Yt                                 for all j,       (C2)
                                                             PtY,a

where t (j ) is the multiplier on the capacity constraint, and the industry's price index is given by
                                                                                     1
                                            1                                       1-
                                                                          1-
                           PtY,a   =            t (j ) (py
                                                         t   (j ) + t (j ))    dj        .      (C3)
                                        0

We refer to this price index as the allocative price index to distinguish it from the measured price
index, which we will introduce below. The allocative price index is relevant for agents' decisions,
but it cannot easily be constructed from the data, since the Lagrange multipliers t (j ) are not
observed. The aggregating firm's demand is rationed whenever t (j ) > 0.

C.2    Intermediate goods producers
The production function (4), firms' idiosyncratic production capacity (5), and marginal costs (6)
are as in Section 2.1.2.

Dynamic problem As before, firms own their capital stock k , discount future profits at rate r,
and maximize the present value of profits. In contrast to Section 2.1.2, however, we assume now
that firms compete monopolistically and prices are sticky as in Rotemberg (1982). To keep the
problem analytically tractable, we additionally assume that the demand shocks  materialize after
prices have been set. We allow investment to be subject to possibly non-convex adjustment costs




                                                             59
k (x, k ). The firm's Bellman equation is then

             ¯, z, py
        V k, v      -1
                                                                               1
        = max       E py y - pv v - px x - p py , py
                                                   -1 - k (x, k ) +                      ¯ , z , py
                                                                                  E V k ,v            ,
          y
          p ,k ,v
                ¯                                                             1+r

where the maximization is subject to equations (4), (5), (7), (8), and (C2) as well as the price
adjustment cost function
                                                            2
                                   y y       p py
                              p p , p-1 =             - 1 .                                (C4)
                                             2 py  -1

The term  is a generic scaling factor that determines the units of adjustment costs (typically
nominal GDP). In the problem above, we treat  as fixed.
   Again, we assume that productivity z only has an industry-specific and an aggregate, but
no firm-specific component. Since demand shocks  materialize after prices have been set, this
assumption still contains the degree of heterogeneity in the model and allows us to analytically
aggregate output and prices to the industry level.

Price setting When firms set prices, they take into account that their production can be con-
strained by capacity. Whether a firm becomes constrained depends on how the demand shock
 materializes relative to a threshold level  ¯ . If  exceeds   ¯ , firms produce at capacity, y = q .
Otherwise they produce below capacity, y < q , and the demand curve (C2) holds with  = 0.
A key implication of capacity constraints is that in the former case the quantity sold is locally
unresponsive to price changes: Conditional on being constrained by capacity, the quantity sold is
no longer decreasing in prices. This implies that the elasticity of the firms' expected output with
respect to its price,
                                                                 ¯
                         ~ (¯        ln E [y ]                  0    dG ( )
                             ) := -            =     ¯
                                                                                  ,                   (C5)
                                      ln py         0    dG ( ) + ¯      ¯ dG ( )
                                                                         

is lower than parameter  in absolute terms. We call ~ (¯
                                                        ) the effective demand elasticity.
     The threshold value ¯ takes the form
                                                             
                                                q     py
                                           ¯=                   .                                     (C6)
                                                Y    P Y,a

It is therefore inversely related to the industry's output Y . Holding all else equal, greater in-
dustry output Y reduces the threshold variety    ¯ . This increases firms' probability of becoming
constrained by capacity, and reduces the effective demand elasticity  ~ (¯
                                                                          ). We shall see below that
this mechanism is key for generating convex supply curves in this model with sticky prices.
    Firms' optimal price setting requires that
                                         ~ (¯
                                            )
                                py =           mc + p ~ (¯
                                                          , ln a) ,                                   (C7)
                                       ~ ) - 1
                                        (¯

where mc denote marginal costs as defined in equation (6). The term ~ is a function of current



                                                    60
and future price changes,

        ~ (¯                    1     1                      (py )       (py )                  py       py
            , ln a) =                    E                         -1                  -           -1        ,
                        ¯
                        q    ¯
                             
                            0 dG ( )
                                     1+r                      py          py                   py
                                                                                                -1      py
                                                                                                         -1


where ln a = ln q, ln (1 + r) , ln (py ) , ln py , ln py
                                                       -1 , ln , ln  is a column vector. Note that price
 y                                       ~
p is common for all firms and that  drops out when prices are flexible, p = 0.
   Again, the firm's choices of k and v    ¯ are unimportant for the estimating equation as long as we
observe changes in the industry's capacity.

C.3     Industry capacity and utilization
The definition of industry capacity Qt and the utilization rate ut are as in Section 2.1.3. It is easy
to see that Lemma 1 continues to hold, since the proof only depends on the definitions of Qt and
ut .

Lemma C1. The utilization rate as defined in (10) has the following properties:

  1. ut  [0, 1] is only a function of ¯ t : ut = u (¯
                                                    t )

  2. lim¯ 0 u (¯
                ) = 1, lim¯  u (¯
                                ) = 0

  3. u < 0

Proof. See Appendix B.

    Hence, in this model with sticky prices, we can still invert the utilization rate in the threshold
variety ¯ t and express industry-level aggregates in terms of the utilization rate.

C.4     The supply curve
After plugging in equations (C2) and (C6), the allocative price (C3) can be written as
                                                                                                1
                                               ¯t                   1
                                                                              1                1-
                                                                 1- 
                        PtY,a   =   py
                                     t                        t )
                                                    dG ( ) + (¯               dG ( )
                                                                                                    .            (C8)
                                           0                            ¯t

Next, use equation (C7), take logs, and invoke Lemma (C1), to obtain

                   ln PtY,a = MS (ln ut ) + (ln ut ) + ln (mct + p  (ln ut , ln at )) ,                          (C9)

where
                                            ~ (¯
                                               t )
                 ~ S (¯
                 M    t ) = ln                       ,
                                          ~ t ) - 1
                                           (¯
                                                     ¯t                            
                                          1                             1                  1
                     ~ (¯
                        t ) =                 ln                  t )1- 
                                                        dG ( ) + (¯                      dG ( ) ,
                                         1-        0                              ¯t




                                                            61
and MS (ln ut ) = M   ~ S (¯
                            (ut )), (ln ut ) = ~ (¯
                                                   (ut )), and  (ln ut , ln at ) = ~ (¯
                                                                                       (ut ) , ln at ). In the
sticky price model equation (C9) is the relevant supply curve. Relative to the flexible price model
in Section 2, there are three differences that we discuss next.
     First, the log markup MS (ln ut ) is different from the baseline model. In this version of the
model with sticky prices, the markup still depends on the utilization rate and only the utilization
rate, but it arises because firms anticipate to be capacity constrained ex-post. Since the quantity
demanded is inelastic conditionally on being capacity constrained, the relevant demand elasticity
is  ~ (¯
        ), which depends on the utilization rate or, equivalently    ¯ t , see equation (C5). Note that
we require that    ~ (¯
                      t ) > 1 at all times. It can be verified numerically that MS is increasing and
convex for conventional parameterizations, such as those used in Figure 2.
     Second, the term (ln ut ) appears on the right hand side of equation (C9), which also depends
on the utilization rate (and only the utilization rate). This term is absent in the flexible price
version of the model. For fixed nominal prices, (ln ut ) captures rationing of the aggregating firm
as mediated by the equilibrium shadow prices, see equation (C8). (ln ut ) can be interpreted as
reflecting decreasing returns at the industry level. Up to a constant, (ln ut ) is identical to M (ln ut )
as defined in Section 2, and hence a modified version of Proposition 1 applies.
Proposition C1.          has the following properties:
   1.    0

   2. limu0 (ln u) = 0, limu1 (ln u) = 

   3. limu0       (ln u) = 0, limu1     (ln u) = 

   4. Without further restrictions on G, the sign of         is generally ambiguous.
Proof. See proof of Proposition 1 in Appendix B.

Importantly, is typically convex.
    Third, the term  (ln ut , ln at ), capturing sluggish price adjustment, appears on the right hand
side of equation (C9). It depends on the general equilibrium environment and its slope and curvature
are difficult to characterize without additional assumptions.
    When linearizing equation (C9) around t - 1 values, we obtain

                                                     p    
                                                         ln u (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )
  ln PtY,a   =     MS (ln ut-1 ) +    (ln ut-1 ) +                                   ( ln Yt -  ln Qt )
                                                   mct-1 + p  (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )

                           mct-1                            p ln 
                                                                   a (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )
             +                                    ln mct +                                  ln at . (C10)
                 mct-1 + p  (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )           mct-1 + p  (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )

Mirroring the previous discussion, this expression makes clear that, the slope and curvature have
three distinct components, the markup MS , the rationing term , and the term related to sticky
prices    
         ln u (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 ). There are also indirect effects that arise from changes in  ln at in the
last term on the right hand side, which depend on the utilization rate. Since we will argue below
that the degree of price stickiness is small in our data, we will not provide a detailed discussion of
these effects.
    Although equation (C10) is insightful to understand the forces affecting the slope and curvature
of the supply curve, it is infeasible for estimation, since the price PtY,a is not observable. It is

                                                     62
however, the relevant object to understand the model's prediction for the evolution of quantities.
In Section 3, we therefore estimate the reduced form, which does not require us to measure  ln PtY,a .
The industry's production response to demand shocks is then indirectly informative about the slope
and curvature of this supply curve. We continue with a discussion of how to interpret estimates of
the structural form.

C.5     Estimating equation
The allocative price index PtY,a is the relevant price for goods that are purchased from this industry.
                                                                                    1  y
It is constructed, taking into account all economic costs,                         0 (pt      (j ) + t (j )) yt (j ) dj /Yt , including
the shadow prices. However, PtY,a cannot be constructed from the data, because the Lagrange
multipliers t (j ) are not observed by the statistical authorities. In the presence of rationing, it
is unlikely that one can recover the relevant slope and curvature of the supply curve from the
data. The details of this mis-measurement problem depend, of course, on how the price index is
constructed from the underlying microdata.
    We next discuss the implications of this measurement problem in the model. To do so, we
construct the price index without the shadow prices and only sum the total dollar cost per unit of
            1
output, 0 py  t (j ) yt (j ) dj /Yt . This price index can be written as

                                                                        ¯t                         
                                    1-
                     PtY,m = (py
                               t)             PtY,a                          dG ( ) + ¯t                dG ( ) .
                                                                    0                            ¯t

Note that it differs from PtY,a , see equation (C8).
   As discussed in Section 2.3 of the paper, a second issue is that marginal costs are not observed,
and that the unit variable cost proxy differs from marginal costs,
                                                      1        ¯t                     
                                                      ¯t      0     t dG ( ) +        ¯ t dG ( )
                                                                                      
                    U V Ct = mct                                                                                   .
                                                                                            1                 -1
                                              1         ¯t                         
                                                -1     0      t dG ( ) +           ¯ t (t )
                                                                                   
                                                                                                   dG ( )
                                     (¯
                                      t )       


Note that the wedge between U V Ct and mct is identical in this model with sticky prices and the
model without sticky prices, see proof of Proposition 3 in Appendix B. After some algebra, it is
then possible to write

                      ln PtY,m = MS (ln ut ) + ln (U V Ct + p m (ln ut , ln at )) ,

where
                                                                                                                        
                                        ¯ (ut )                                       1
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                       1-
                                                                                   1- 
         m (ln ut , ln at ) =                     dG ( ) + (¯
                                                             (ut ))                                      dG ( )
                                                                                                         
                                    0                                                         ¯ (ut )
                                            ¯ (ut )                                  
                                ·                     dG ( ) + ¯ (ut )                        dG ( ) ~ (¯
                                                                                                         (ut ) , ln at ) .
                                        0                                           ¯ (ut )




                                                                    63
Now linearizing around t - 1 values gives
                                            m
                                      p   ln u (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )
  ln PtY,m   =   MS (ln ut-1 ) +                                           ( ln Yt -  ln Qt )    (C11)
                                 U V Ct-1 + p m (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )
                                                                       m
                   U V Ct-1                                  p    ln a (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )
      +               m
                                            ln U V C t +                                      ln at .
        U V Ct-1 + p  (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )               U V Ct-1 + p m (ln ut-1 , ln at-1 )

Conclusions for the empirical analysis We next discuss the implications of estimating this
specification under the assumptions that 1) this sticky price model as specified above is the true
data generating process and the econometrician uses 2) measured prices and 3) the unit variable
cost proxy instead of true marginal costs.
    First, since passthrough of unit variable costs into prices is close to 1 in all our specifications,
the data indicate that prices are not particularly sticky at the industry level in yearly differences.
We therefore view the approximation p  0 as reasonable. This finding is corroborated by the
fact that future prices are not significant in Specification (4) of Table 3. With p = 0, equation
(C11) becomes
                      ln PtY,m = MS (ln ut-1 ) ( ln Yt -  ln Qt ) +  ln U V Ct .
Note that even if prices are flexible, p = 0, this model does not nest the baseline model in Section
2, because we assumed that prices are set prior to the materialization of demand shocks.
    Second, relative to equation (C10), the term (ln ut-1 ) is absent. This implies that in this
model, in which prices are set prior to the materialization of demand shocks, an econometrician
using 1) measured prices and 2) the unit variable cost proxy underestimates both the slope and
the curvature of the model. This suggests that even if prices are flexible across periods, but are set
before the materialization of demand shocks, we should still estimate the reduced form to check
whether the implications are consistent with our estimates of the structural form.

Implications for the general equilibrium model Note also that in Section 4, we base the
general equilibrium model on this version of the model, in which prices are set prior to the mate-
rialization of demand shocks. The advantage of doing so is that our estimates directly inform the
markup MS , which we match in the calibration, see Figure G1.




                                                  64
D     Data Appendix
Sample Our baseline sample is annual and includes all 21 3-digit NAICS manufacturing indus-
tries. It ranges from 1972 to 2011.

Industrial production, capacity, and capacity utilization The series for industrial produc-
tion, capacity, and capacity utilization are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board and available at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/ipdisk/alltables.txt. Table D1 provides
summary statistics of the utilization rate by NAICS 3-digit industry.

NBER-CES manufacturing industry database Data on prices, sales, production worker
wages, material costs, energy costs, and inventories are from the NBER CES Manufacturing Indus-
try Database. For a description of these data, see Bartelsman and Gray (1996) and Becker, Gray,
and Marvakov (2016). The database is available at http://www.nber.org/nberces/.

BEA Input-Output Accounts Cost shares, sales shares, changes in government purchases,
and changes in imports are constructed from the BEA's Input-Output accounts. Data from
1997 to today is available at https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=52&step=102&
isuri=1&table_list=4&aggregation=sum. Historical data is available at https://www.bea.gov/
industry/input-output-accounts-data.

BEA National Income and Product Accounts We use quantity and price indexes on personal
consumption expenditures, equipment investment, and nonresidential fixed investment from the
BEA's National Income and Product Accounts. These data are available at https://www.bea.
gov/national/nipaweb/DownSS2.asp

BEA Industry Accounts Data on quantity and price indexes of downstream industries' mate-
rial use from the BEA's Industry Accounts. Data from 1997 to today is available at https://apps.
bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=56&step=2&isuri=1#reqid=56&step=2&isuri=1. Histori-
cal data is available at https://www.bea.gov/industry/historical-industry-accounts-data.
Note that since these downstream industries are not necessarily in the manufacturing sector, they
are not necessarily covered by the NBER-CES manufacturing industry database.

UN Statistics Division Real GDP, the GDP deflator, both in local currency, and the nominal
exchange rate are from the United Nation's Statistics Division. These data are available at https:
//unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/Downloads.

U.S. export data The data on exports are from the U.S. Census and are available from Peter
Schott's website http://faculty.som.yale.edu/peterschott/sub_international.htm. The data
are available with SIC industry codes between 1972 and 1997, and with NAICS industry codes there-
after. We use the NBER CES SIC4 to NAICS6 concordance based on sales weights to convert the
SIC codes into NAICS equivalents and then aggregate to the 3-digit NAICS level. The sales shares
to foreign countries sEX
                      d,i,t are constructed based on sales to all countries that joined the OECD prior
to year 2000. These are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland,



                                                 65
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Luxem-
bourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States.




                                              66
                 Table D1: Summary Statistics of Utilization Rates by 3-digit NAICS Manufacturing Industries

      Industry                                           NAICS   p10    Median   p90    Mean   S.D.   Skewness   Kurtosis   Durable

      Food                                                311    79.6    82.3    85.2   82.4   2.4       0.3       2.5        no
      Beverage and Tobacco Products                       312    68.3    79.2    83.0   77.3   5.3      -0.5       2.1        no
      Textile Mills                                       313    68.3    82.0    89.5   79.8   8.6      -0.8       3.2        no
      Textile Product Mills                               314    69.8    82.3    90.4   80.9   8.3      -0.8       3.2        no
      Apparel                                             315    71.0    80.2    84.2   79.0   4.9      -0.9       3.4        no
      Leather and Allied Products                         316    59.3    74.9    82.1   72.8   8.8      -1.2       3.7        no
      Wood Products                                       321    63.8    79.2    85.2   77.1   8.4      -1.2       4.6        yes
      Paper                                               322    81.4    87.6    91.4   86.9   4.2      -0.2       2.4        no
      Printing and Related Support Activities             323    72.2    82.7    89.3   81.3   7.6      -1.0       3.8        no
      Petroleum and Coal Products                         324    77.3    87.1    92.6   85.7   5.8      -0.7       2.8        no
67




      Chemicals                                           325    72.1    77.8    83.1   77.7   4.3      -0.4       2.3        no
      Plastics and Rubber Products                        326    71.4    83.7    89.6   82.4   7.2      -0.9       3.3        no
      Nonmetallic Mineral Products                        327    62.3    77.2    84.0   75.3   9.2      -1.6       5.3        yes
      Primary Metals                                      331    68.2    79.6    89.5   79.3   9.3      -0.7       3.4        yes
      Fabricated Metal Products                           332    71.7    77.7    84.4   77.4   5.7      -0.2       3.1        yes
      Machinery                                           333    67.6    78.9    87.0   77.8   7.8      -0.2       2.5        yes
      Computer and Electronic Product                     334    70.1    79.0    84.2   78.2   5.7      -1.0       4.0        yes
      Electrical Equipment, Appliances, and Components    335    73.2    82.8    90.6   82.6   6.7      -0.2       2.6        yes
      Transportation Equipment                            336    66.4    75.6    81.5   74.4   6.1      -1.0       4.1        yes
      Furniture and Related Products                      337    68.0    77.8    84.1   76.8   7.4      -0.2       3.9        yes
      Miscellaneous                                       339    72.8    76.9    79.7   76.3   3.1      -0.5       3.1        yes

      All                                                        70.0    79.8    88.6   79.1   7.6      -0.8       4.4


     Source: Federal Reserve Board
E     Appendix: Notes on Shea's instrument
In this Appendix we provide additional notes on our version of John Shea's instrument as described
in Section 3.2. In particular, we next specify a condition that guarantees that criteria (1), (2), and
(3) as described in the text hold. Our starting point is equation (21).
     As noted in Shea (1993b), measuring direct linkages between two industries is generally not
sufficient for satisfy criteria (1), (2), and (3). Nor are ultimate cost or sales shares sufficient.
Following Shea, we therefore use information from both direct and ultimate cost and sales shares.
We next describe our definitions of these shares.

E.1     Demand shares
Let pi denote the price and yi the quantity produced by industry i. Let further xj,i denote industry
j s usage of i's output. Lastly, let di denote the value of final demand for the good produced by
industry i.

E.1.1    Direct demand share
We define the direct demand share of industry j for industry i as
                                                               pi xj,i
                                               ddsj,i =                  .
                                                               j pi xj,i

While alternative definitions are sensible, we choose the denominator such that                    j   ddsj,i = 1.

E.1.2    Ultimate demand share
Market clearing implies that

                               p i yi =        pi xji + di =           µc
                                                                        j,i pj yj + di ,
                                          j                        j

               px
where µc     i j,i
       j,i = pj yj is the cost share of i in j 's output. We can then stack the system in matrix form.
Using the notation
                                                              c
                                                                µ1,1 · · · µc
                                                                                
                              p1 y1               d1                        1,I
                     py =  .
                            .                 .  c  .                 ..     .
                                . , d =  .         . ,  =  .                 .
                                                                             . ,
                                                                                
                                                                  .      .
                             p I yI                 dI                           µc          c
                                                                                  I,1 · · · µI,I

we can write
                                               py = d + (c ) py,
or
                                                                       -1
                                              py = I - (c )                 d.
Based on this relationship, we define the ultimate demand share of industry j for the output of
industry i as
                                            1            -1
                                 udsj,i =        · I - c i,j · dj ,
                                          p i yi


                                                          68
where (I - c )- 1                                         c -1
              i,j is the (i, j )th element of matrix (I -  ) . By construction,                        j   udsj,i = 1.

E.2     Cost shares
E.2.1    Direct cost share
We define industry j 's direct cost share for industry i as
                                                                      pj xi,j
                                                   dcsi,j =                     .
                                                                      j pj xi,j

Notice that     j   dcsi,j = 1.

E.2.2    Indirect cost share
Let vai denote industry i's value added, then

                                      pi yi = vai +          pj xi,j = vai +            µs
                                                                                         i,j pj yj ,
                                                       j                            j

               pj xi,j
where µs
       i,j =    p j yj   is industry j 's sales share to industry i. Using the notation
                                                    s
                                                   µ1,1 · · · µs
                                                                   
                              p1 y1        va1                 I,i
                         py =  .
                               .           .  s  .      ..     .
                                .  , va =  .. ,  =  .          .
                                                               . ,
                                                                   
                                                    .       .
                              pI yI        vaI     µs          s
                                                    I,1 · · · µI,I

we can then stack the system in matrix form and write

                                                      py = va + s py,

or
                                                   py = (I - s )-1 va.
The ultimate cost share of industry j for industry i is then defined as
                                                             1
                                            ucsi,j =              · (I - s )- 1
                                                                            i,j · vaj ,
                                                           p i yi

where (I - s )- 1                                              s -1
              i,j denotes the (i, j )th element of matrix (I -  ) . Notice that                        j   ucsi,j = 1.

E.3     Our version of Shea's instrument
We define our version of Shea's instrument as


                                                min {ddsj,i,t-1 , udsj,i,t-1 }
      instShea
          i,t  =         sM
                          j,i,t-1 1                                                             > 3  ln Mj,t .       (E1)
                                       max {dcsj,i,t-1 , ucsj,i,t-1 , dcsi,j,t-1 , ucsi,j,t-1 }
                    j

   Conditions (1), (2), and (3) as defined in Section 3.2 are satisfied because (1) j 's the demand
share from i is large relative to j 's cost share from i (2) and i's cost share from j (3).

                                                                 69
F     Appendix: Additional Results
F.1    Ad-hoc estimation of the supply curve
In this Appendix, we show the results from an ad-hoc estimation of the supply curve, which does
not use the guidance of the model in Section 2. To do so, we estimate the specification
                           Y
                      ln Pi,t = 0 + 1  ln Yi,t + 2 ( ln Yi,t )2 + controls + i,t ,

using the WID and Shea's instrument as well as their squares to address simultaneity.
    The results are shown in Table F1. The key problem with using this ad-hoc specification is
that the first stage for the squared term is uniformly weak across all three specifications (F < 3).
Based on our instruments, it is therefore not possible to estimate the curvature of the supply curve
without the structure of the model.

F.2    Estimates of the reduced form
Linear model Specifications (1) and (2) of Table F2 show estimates of the linear reduced form
without and with controlling for changes imports and inventory accumulation. All coefficients have
the expected sign, and those on i,t and ei,t are highly significant. Since imports and inventory
accumulation are potentially correlated with the error, it is not clear as to whether to include them
in the regression. Since doing so has little effect on the other coefficients, we proceed with including
them.
    In specification (3) we add industry fixed effects, time fixed effects, and time fixed effects
interacted with the foreign sales share. While the coefficients on i,t and ei,t change little, the
standard error on the coefficient of ei,t more than doubles. The reason is that, taken together,
these fixed effects explain approximately 94 percent of the variation in the exchange rate variable
(the time fixed effects interacted with the foreign sales share alone explain 92.6 percent). An
implication of this is that the main effect of the effective exchange rate will be imprecisely estimated
in all specifications. When we instrument for i,t with the WID instrument, Shea's instrument,
or both (specifications 4 to 6), the estimates remain very stable around 0.9.

Robustness We next consider a number of robustness checks. In specifications (1) of Table F3,
we drop unit variable costs and its interaction with the utilization rate from the regression. The
estimates change very little. The estimates are also robust to alternatively dropping the change
in capacity and its interaction from the regression (specification (2)). In specifications (3) and (4)
we add the change in future prices and a lagged dependent variable. Both of these variables are
significant, but including them in the regression barely affects the estimates. We further estimate
a specification with all second order terms. Specification (5) includes squares and interactions of
all control variables. The interaction term i,t · (ui,t-1 - u  ¯i ) falls slightly in absolute magnitude
(to -2.55), but it remains significant at the one percent level. Finally, specification (6) presents
estimates when we include all second order terms in addition to the change in future prices and a
lagged dependent variable. In this preferred specification coefficient on i,t · (ui,t-1 - u    ¯i ) is -2.56
and that on ei,t · (ui,t-1 - u  ¯i ) is -17.53. Hence, that the production response depends on the
initial utilization rate is robust to including or dropping a large number controls.




                                                    70
                                        Table F1: Ad-hoc estimation
                                                                  Y
                                         Dependent variable:  ln Pi,t

                   Estimator                       2SLS             2SLS             2SLS
                   Instrument(s):
                     Main effect                                 WID, Shea
                     Squared term                                WID, Shea
                                                    (1)            (2)                (3)

                    ln Yi,t                        0.50             0.18              0.20
                                                  (0.37)           (0.12)            (0.12)
                              2
                   ( ln Yi,t )                     -2.90            -0.88             -0.92
                                                  (1.41)           (0.60)            (0.67)
                    ln Qi,t                                                           -0.14
                                                                                     (0.11)
                    ln UVCi,t                                       0.89               0.90
                                                                   (0.03)            (0.04)

                   R-squared                       0.343            0.900            0.901
                   Fixed Effects                    yes              yes              yes

                                    First stage and instrument diagnostics
                   F Main effect                    9.81            12.57            17.44
                   F Squared term                   2.47             2.44            2.45
                   Cragg-Donald Wald F              5.61            5.87             3.94
                   SW F Main effect                13.27            19.80            23.77
                   SW F Squared term                3.30             3.32             3.29
                   Hansen J (p-value)              0.918            0.960            0.948

   Notes: Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses.
   
    : F is the standard F-statistic. For details on the Cragg-Donald statistic, see Cragg and Donald (1993) and
   Stock and Yogo (2002). SW F is the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) conditional F-statistic.




F.3    Consistency of estimates of structural and reduced form
We finally ask the question whether the estimates of the structural form and the reduced form
are consistent with one another. How much production responds to an outward shift in demand
depends both on the supply elasticity and the elasticity of demand. In Figure F1 we plot this
elasticity of production with respect to the demand shock i,t . The figure shows both the direct
estimate based on the reduced form and the response implied by the estimated supply elasticity. We
plot this latter response for three alternative demand elasticities,  = 1, 2, and 3. As is clear from
the figure, both estimates are broadly consistent with one another if one believes that the demand
elasticity is in this range. On the other hand, and as discussed in Appendix C, measurement
problems can imply that the estimates of structural and reduced form deliver different conclusions


                                                          71
                            Table F2: Estimates of the linear reduced form
                                          Dependent variable:  ln Xi,t

  Estimator                       OLS           OLS           OLS         2SLS         2SLS         2SLS
  Instrument(s)                                                           WID          Shea       WID, Shea
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)

  i,t                              0.89          0.91          0.83       0.93          0.89          0.90
                                 (0.08)         (0.09)        (0.12)     (0.43)        (0.14)        (0.13)
  i,t                             -0.03          -0.03         -0.05      -0.07         -0.06         -0.06
                                 (0.11)         (0.11)        (0.12)     (0.12)        (0.12)        (0.11)
  ei,t                             1.94          2.07          1.69       1.53          1.59          1.58
                                 (0.60)         (0.45)        (1.02)     (1.31)        (0.97)        (0.98)
   ln Qi,t                         0.69          0.79          0.65       0.63          0.64          0.64
                                 (0.07)         (0.07)        (0.08)     (0.11)        (0.08)        (0.09)
   ln UVCi,t                      -0.08          -0.05         -0.12      -0.12         -0.12         -0.12
                                 (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.04)     (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)
     inv     inv
   Yi,t  - Yi,t -1 /Yi,t-1                        0.10         0.03       0.03           0.03         0.03
                                                (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)
  IMi,t /Yi,t-1                                  -0.07          0.15      0.11           0.12          0.12
                                                (0.08)        (0.08)     (0.18)        (0.09)        (0.08)

  R-squared                       0.691         0.705         0.808       0.807        0.807         0.807
  Fixed Effects                    no            no            yes         yes          yes           yes

                                   First stage and instrument diagnostics
  F Main effect                                                           8.20        398.33         216.07
  Hansen J (p-value)                                                                                  0.937

 Notes: The estimates are based on equation (18). Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses.




even if the true data generating process is as specified by the model. Our preferred interpretation
is therefore that the estimates of structural and reduced form are qualitatively consistent with one
another, without taking a stand on whether they are quantitatively consistent.




                                                         72
                              Table F3: Robustness of the reduced form
                                       Dependent variable:  ln Xi,t

Estimator                                                               2SLS
Instruments
 Main effect                                                       WID, Shea

 Interaction (· (ui,t-1 - u
                          ¯i ))                                    WID, Shea
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)             (5)          (6)

i,t                                     0.79         0.88       0.80             0.81     0.85          0.82
                                      (0.12)       (0.13)      (0.13)          (0.13)    (0.13)       (0.14)
i,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                ¯i )                   -3.29        -3.35       -3.38           -3.34     -2.55        -2.56
                                      (0.89)       (0.82)      (0.96)          (0.96)    (1.03)       (1.08)
ei,t                                    1.04         1.43       0.96             1.31     1.73          1.73
                                      (0.81)       (1.21)      (0.86)          (0.84)    (0.98)       (1.01)
ei,t · (ui,t-1 - u
                 ¯i )                 -20.82       -22.58      -20.65          -19.60    -19.47       -17.53
                                      (4.77)       (5.69)      (4.55)          (4.35)    (5.26)       (4.88)
(ui,t-1 - u
          ¯i )                         -0.27        -0.06       -0.26           -0.26     -0.21        -0.22
                                      (0.04)       (0.06)      (0.04)          (0.05)    (0.06)       (0.07)
     Y
 ln Pi,t+1                                                       0.07                                   0.07
                                                               (0.02)                                 (0.02)
 ln Yi,t-1                                                                      0.12                    0.14
                                                                               (0.04)                 (0.05)

R-squared                             0.829        0.785        0.831          0.833      0.844        0.848
Fixed Effects                          yes          yes          yes            yes        yes          yes
Drop UVCi,t and interaction            yes          no           no             no         no           no
Drop Qi,t and interaction              no           yes          no             no         no           no
All second order terms                 no           no           no             no         yes          yes
Other controls                         yes          yes          yes            yes        yes          yes

                                  First stage and instrument diagnostics
F Main effect                        161.68       162.23       151.81          127.33     92.20       82.60
F Interaction                        22.97        17.48         17.21          17.28      16.73       16.32
Cragg-Donald Wald F                   38.43       36.92         38.26          36.62      35.11        34.00
SW F Main effect                     227.11       231.78       210.66          176.37    131.46       116.12
SW F Interaction                      30.94        24.63       23.67            23.99    23.27        23.19
Hansen J (p-value)                   0.866        0.664         0.720          0.792      0.923       0.817

 Notes: The estimates are based on equation (18). Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses.
 
  : F is the standard F-statistic. For details on the Cragg-Donald statistic, see Cragg and Donald (1993) and
 Stock and Yogo (2002). SW F is the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) conditional F-statistic.




                                                      73
Figure F1: The production response to demand shocks




                        74
G     General equilibrium model
G.1     Model setup
G.1.1    Households
Letting  denote the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, and  the Frisch labor supply elasticity,
households maximize                             1                      1
                                             1-          I          1+ 
                                     t ( Ct )            i=1 (ni,t )
                            E0                1 -               1
                               t=0
                                         1 -               1+ 
subject to the budget constraint

                                   PtY Ct = bt            wi,t ni,t + t - tl .
                                                      i

    In our model the aggregate shock bt is the source of business cycle fluctuations. Since this shock
scales the marginal utility of consumption, it can be interpreted as a demand shock. Relative to a
shock that enters the utility function, bt does not impact welfare calculations through a direct effect.
Of course, it is related to the labor wedge (see e.g. Karabarbounis, 2014). In the budget constraint,
PtY is the price of output, t are profits and tl lump-sum taxes. Sector i's wage is denoted by wi,t
and labor by ni,t . Households could trade an uncontingent bond to price the interest rate, but we
omit this part for simplicity. Optimal behavior implies that
                                                  1                 1   wi,t
                                          (ni,t )  = bt (Ct )-               .                     (G1)
                                                                        PtY

G.1.2    Final aggregating firm
The final aggregating firm produces output Yt , which is sold to the final consumer and to the
government.It uses a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregator with elasticity  to as-
semble the final good from intermediates,
                                                                            
                                                               -1           -1
                                     Yt =             Xt ( )        d               .

Demand for output from intermediary          is
                                                                            -
                                                            PtX ( )
                                         Xt ( ) = Yt                            ,
                                                              PtY

and the price index
                                                                              1
                                                                  1-         1-
                                   PtY   =            PtX   ( )         d               .

    We next introduce a unit mass of intermediaries, indexed , which buy goods from all industries,
differentiate them, and sell them to the final aggregating firm. In our model, their only role is to
add a markup over marginal costs. In a more general model, these intermediaries could have sticky
prices. We will need these intermediaries to discuss the mapping from output to real marginal costs


                                                          75
(see Section 4.3.2), in which we will not impose that these intermediates set a constant markup.
    Each intermediary uses the a CES aggregator
                                                                                                
                                                                     1                          -1
                                                                                     -1
                                                                     
                                 Xt ( ) =                    i (Xi,t ( ))            

                                                     i

where the sum is over all the different industries. Cost minimization implies that
                                                                                 Y,a        -
                                                                               Pi,t
                                   Xi,t ( ) = i Xt ( )
                                                                              mct ( )

where mct ( ) denotes the marginal cost of intermediary ,
                                                                                             1
                                                                                            1-
                                                                                     1-
                                                                              Y,a
                                 mct ( ) =                       i,t        Pi,t                     .
                                                         i

In the baseline model prices are flexible, and each intermediary                                     charges a constant markup over
marginal costs,
                                                  
                                      PtX ( ) =       mct ( ) .
                                                -1
Note next that all intermediaries have the same technology. It follows that mct ( ) = mct and hence
PtX ( ) = PtX = PtY . Then
                                                              1
                                                     Y,a 1- 1-
                                         
                                  mct              Pi,t
                                    Y
                                      =        i      Y
                                                                                               (G2)
                                  Pt         i
                                                    P t

and
                                                                           Y,a         -
                                                                         Pi,t  PtY
                                       Xi,t = i Yt                                         .                                  (G3)
                                                                         PtY mct
                                 mct       - 1
Further, in the baseline model    Y
                                 Pt
                                       =    .


G.1.3   Capacity industries
The capacity industries in this general equilibrium extension are a simplified version of those mod-
elled in Appendix C. The main difference, is that capacity qi,t and i,t are treated as fixed here,
while they are endogenously chosen Appendix C. Each capacity industry is populated by a unit
continuum of monopolistic competitors. An aggregating firm maximizes
                                                                 1
                                         Y
                                       Pi,t Yi,t -                   py
                                                                      i,t (j ) yi,t (j ) dj
                                                             0

subject to the production function
                                                                                                  
                                               1                     1                -1          -1
                              Yi,t =               i,t (j ) (yi,t (j ))
                                                                                           dj
                                           0


                                                                     76
and the capacity constraint
                                                                yi,t (j )  qi,t (j ) .
Optimal behavior implies that
                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                  py
                                                                                   i,t (j ) + i,t (j )
                                     yi,t (j ) = i,t (j ) Yt                                  Y,a
                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                            Pi,t

and                                                                                                                               1
                                                   1                                                        1-                   1-
                               Y,a
                             Pi,t    =                 i,t (j )          py
                                                                          i,t (j )       + i,t (j )                     dj            ,
                                               0

where i,t (j ) is the multiplier on the capacity constraint.
   Once monopolistic competitors are aggregated to the industry level (see Section 2), we obtain
the following set of equations at the industry level. First, price setting implies that
                                              Y,a
                                            Pi,t                    ~i,t
                                                                                   1           1     pv
                                                                                                      i,t
                                                        =                         py
                                                                                                                                                    (G4)
                                             PtY                ~i,t - 1           i,t    zi,t       P
                                                                                                i,t-1 t
                                                                                                       Y
                                                                               Y,a
                                                                              Pi,t

where the effective demand elasticity is
                                                                          ¯ i,t
                                ~i,t =                                   0        i,t dG (i,t )
                                                    ¯ i,t                                                                                           (G5)
                                                   0        i,t dG (i,t ) + ¯ i,t                   ¯ i,t   dG (i,t )

and the relative price is
                                                                                                                                           1
                      py
                       i,t
                                           ¯ i,t
                                                                                     1- 1
                                                                                                            1                              -1

                       Y,a
                              =                    i,t dG (i,t ) +                 ¯ i,t                    
                                                                                                        i,t dG (i,t )                           .   (G6)
                     Pi,t              0                                                        ¯ i,t


Second, the threshold variety ¯ i,t is determined by the condition
                                                                                                 
                                                                      qi,t               py
                                                                                          i,t
                                                            Yi,t    =                    Y,a
                                                                                                                                                    (G7)
                                                                      ¯ i,t            Pi,t

Third, demand for the variable input bundle vi,t is

                                                       zi,t (i ) vi,t = E [yi,t ]                                                                   (G8)

where
                                                                ¯ s,t                                            
                                              qi,t
                         E [yi,t ] =                                    i,t dG (i,t ) + qi,t                            dG (i,t )                   (G9)
                                              ¯ i,t         0                                                   ¯ i,t




                                                                             77
G.1.4   Neoclassical (non-capacity) industries
Monopolistic competitors have the linear production function

                                              yi,t = zi,t vi,t ,                                            (G10)

where vi,t is a bundle of variable inputs as discussed above. Non-capacity industries charge the
          nc
markup nc   -1 so that
                                       pY
                                        i,t    nc     1 pv i,t
                                            =                  .                          (G11)
                                      PtY     nc - 1 zi,t PtY

G.1.5   The variable input bundle
Both capacity and non-capacity industries produce output from a variable input bundle that is
composed of labor and materials
                                                                                               
                                                   -1                             -1           -1
                                   v                       v
                            vi,t = n,i (ni,t )           + M,i (Mi,t )                                  .

The materials bundle Mi,t is itself a CES aggregate of the form
                                                                                           µ
                                                                                          µ-1
                                                          1               µ-1
                                                   M      µ
                              Mi,t =               i,j        (mi,j,t )    µ                    .
                                          j

We use the notation that mi,j,t denotes material shipments from industry j to industry i. The
parameters  and µ are elasticities of substitution and nv ,  v , and  M weights. The demand
                                                            M        i,j
curves for inputs are
                                                                          -
                                                  v            wi,t
                                     ni,t =       n,i vi,t                    ,                             (G12)
                                                               pv
                                                                i,t

                                                                  M       -
                                              v
                                                                Pi,t
                                    Mi,t =    M,i vi,t                            ,                         (G13)
                                                                pv
                                                                 i,t

                                                                  Y,a       -µ
                                              M
                                                                 Pj,t
                                   mj,i,t =   j,i Mi,t             M
                                                                                      ,                     (G14)
                                                                 Pi,t
and the price indexes are
                                                                                            1
                                            1-                                1-           1-
                            pv     v
                             i,t = n (wi,t )
                                                 v
                                               + M   M
                                                   Pi,t                                             ,       (G15)

                                                                                   1
                                                                                  1-µ
                                                                      1-µ
                                  M                 M    Y,a
                                Pi,t =              j,i Pj,t                               .                (G16)
                                              j




                                                         78
G.1.6      Market clearing and government
The market for aggregate output clears,

                                                         Yt = Ct + Gt ,                                                   (G17)

where Gt is government expenditures on output. These expenditures are financed with a contem-
poraneous lump-sum tax, Gt = tl . Further, industries' output is sold for final use (Xi,t ) and as
intermediates downstream,
                                    Yi,t = Xi,t +   mj,i,t .                                 (G18)
                                                                         j


G.2      Equilibrium
Let I c and I nc denote the number of capacity and non-capacity industries, respectively. The total
number of industries is I = I c + I nc .
   An equilibrium in this economy is a set of prices
                            Y,a   I                                                     I                   Ic
                          Pi,t              pv
                                             i,t
                                                   I
                                                             wi,t    I             M
                                                                                 Pi,t               py
                                                                                                     i,t
                                        ,                ,                   ,                ,                   ,
                           PtY              PtY    i=1       PtY     i=1         PtY                  Y,a
                                                                                                    Pi,t
                                  i=1                                                   i=1                 i=1

quantities
                                                                                        c
        Yt , ct , {Yi,t }I            I            I            I                I            I              I,J
                         i=1 , {vi,t }i=1 , {ni,t }i=1 , {Mi,t }i=1 , {E [yi,t ]}i=1 , {Xi,t }i=1 , {mj,i,t }i=1,j =1 ,

                              c                                                         Ic
threshold varieties {¯ i,t }I                                   ~
                            i=1 , effective demand elasticities i,t                               such that households and firms
                                                                                        i=1
optimize and markets clear. This requires that equations (G1), (G2), (G3), (G4), (G5), (G6), (G7),
(G8), (G9), (G10), (G11), (G12), (G13), (G14), (G15), (G16), (G17), and (G18) hold and that
mct
PY
    = - .
         1
 t



G.3      Calibration
We calibrate our model in two steps. First, we set a number of parameters to (external) conventional
values in the literature. Second, we choose a other parameters to match the estimated industry-
level supply curve in the data. We also discuss below which of the 71 industries in the data we
calibrate as capacity and which we calibrate as non-capacity industries.
    Table G1 summarizes the benchmark calibration. We highlight the role of two parameters. First,
we choose a Frisch labor supply elasticity of 2. This value is greater than most micro estimates,
but in line with the argument in Hall (2009). Second, we assume that the substitutability of inputs
is very limited in the short run and set the elasticities of substitution to 0.05. This choice is based
on recent estimates by Atalay (2017), Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019), and others who
document very limited substitutability between inputs at business cycle frequencies.
    Weights in various CES aggregators are calibrated to expenditure and cost shares, which we
take from the 2007 Use Tables of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. In particular, we use (1) the
final expenditure shares in output to calibrate {i }. We use (2) the share of labor in total variable



                                                                79
                                       Table G1: Baseline calibration


 Parameter   Description                                      Value   Notes
             Intertemporal elasticity of substitution         0.75    standard
             Frisch labor supply elasticity                    2      Hall (2009)
 nc          Parameterizes markup in nc-industries             10     standard
             Parameterizes markup in c-industries             14.84   internally calibrated, see text
             Parameterizes markup in final goods sector        10     standard
 sG
  Y          Share of government expenditure in GDP            0.2    National Accounts
 , µ,        Elasticities of substitution                     0.05    see text
 {zi , i }   Productivity parameters                           1      normalization
 V           Variance of distribution G                       1.75    internally calibrated, see text
   c
 {ki }       Capital stock in c-industries                            internally calibrated, see text
 {i }        Weight in final output bundle                            match expenditure share in industry i
  v
 {n,i }      Labor weight in variable input aggregator                match industry i's labor cost share
  M
 {j,i }      Weights in materials aggregator                          match industry j 's material cost share from i




costs to calibrate {n,i  v }, and then set  v          v                               M
                                            M,i = 1 - n,i . Lastly, we (3) calibrate {j,i } such that j 's
material cost share from i equals the measured share in the data.
    In a second step, we choose the elasticity  and the variance of the log-normal distribution
G of idiosyncratic demand shocks  for monopolistic competitors in capacity industries such that
the supply curve matches the estimate in the data. The mean of distribution G is normalized
to 1. When doing so, we also choose industries' capital stocks ki      c to center their utilization rate

(equivalently  ¯ i,t ) at the portion of the supply curve that has the curvature as estimated in the
data. As Figure G1 shows, the fit between model and data is almost exact.
    We next discuss which industries we calibrate as capacity industries. Since the Survey of Plant
Capacity is limited to manufacturing industries, we have to decide whether our estimates apply to
industries not covered by the survey. The Survey of Plant Capacity aims at measuring a capital-
based notion of capacity utilization (see Section 3.1.1 and Appendix A). We then classify an industry
as a capacity industries if this notion of capital-based capacity utilization appears to exist in the
industry. Table G2 shows our classification.




                                                         80
Figure G1: Calibration of the industry level supply curve




                           81
                                                                       Table G2:   Calibration of industry types

     IO code   Industry name                                                                    Calibration               Analogy to capital-based capacity utilization
                                                                                      Sample    Baseline    All private
     111CA     Farms                                                                     0         1            1         Major land use, U.S. Department of Agriculture, World Bank
     113FF     Forestry, fishing, and related activities                                 0         1            1         Major land use, U.S. Department of Agriculture, World Bank
     211       Oil and gas extraction                                                    1         1            1         in sample
     212       Mining, except oil and gas                                                1         1            1         in sample
     213       Support activities for mining                                             1         1            1         in sample
     22        Utilities                                                                 0         1            1         Capacity Utilization: Electric and gas utilities, FRB
     23        Construction                                                              0         1            1         Capital-based capacity utilization
     321       Wood products                                                             1         1            1         in sample
     327       Nonmetallic mineral products                                              1         1            1         in sample
     331       Primary metals                                                            1         1            1         in sample
     332       Fabricated metal products                                                 1         1            1         in sample
     333       Machinery                                                                 1         1            1         in sample
     334       Computer and electronic products                                          1         1            1         in sample
     335       Electrical equipment, appliances, and components                          1         1            1         in sample
     3361MV    Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts                            1         1            1         in sample
     3364OT    Other transportation equipment                                            1         1            1         in sample
     337       Furniture and related products                                            1         1            1         in sample
     339       Miscellaneous manufacturing                                               1         1            1         in sample
     311FT     Food and beverage and tobacco products                                    1         1            1         in sample
     313TT     Textile mills and textile product mills                                   1         1            1         in sample
     315AL     Apparel and leather and allied products                                   1         1            1         in sample
     322       Paper products                                                            1         1            1         in sample
     323       Printing and related support activities                                   1         1            1         in sample
82




     324       Petroleum and coal products                                               1         1            1         in sample
     325       Chemical products                                                         1         1            1         in sample
     326       Plastics and rubber products                                              1         1            1         in sample
     42        Wholesale trade                                                           0         0            1
     441       Motor vehicle and parts dealers                                           0         0            1
     445       Food and beverage stores                                                  0         0            1
     452       General merchandise stores                                                0         0            1
     4A0       Other retail                                                              0         0            1
     481       Air transportation                                                        0         1            1         Transportation capacity
     482       Rail transportation                                                       0         1            1         Transportation capacity
     483       Water transportation                                                      0         1            1         Transportation capacity
     484       Truck transportation                                                      0         1            1         Freight capacity, JOC Truckload capacity index, JOC.com
     485       Transit and ground passenger transportation                               0         1            1         Transportation capacity
     486       Pipeline transportation                                                   0         1            1         Transportation capacity
     487OS     Other transportation and support activities                               0         1            1         Transportation capacity
     493       Warehousing and storage                                                   0         1            1         Transportation capacity
     511       Publishing industries, except internet (includes software)                0         0            1
     512       Motion picture and sound recording industries                             0         0            1
     513       Broadcasting and telecommunications                                       0         0            1
     514       Data processing, internet publishing, and other information services      0         0            1
     521CI     Federal Reserve banks, credit intermediation, and related activities      0         0            1
     523       Securities, commodity contracts, and investments                          0         0            1
     524       Insurance carriers and related activities                                 0         0            1
     525       Funds, trusts, and other financial vehicles                               0         0            1
     HS        Housing                                                                   0         1            1         Capital-based capacity utilization
     ORE       Other real estate                                                         0         1            1         Capital-based capacity utilization
     532RL     Rental and leasing services and lessors of intangible assets              0         1            1         Capital-based capacity utilization
                                                                                                                                                               Continued on next page
                                                                         Table G2 ­ continued from previous page
     IO code   Industry name                                                                   Calibration               Analogy to capital-based capacity utilization
                                                                                     Sample    Baseline    All private

     5411      Legal services                                                           0          0           1
     5415      Computer systems design and related services                             0          0           1
     5412OP    Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and technical services           0          0           1
     55        Management of companies and enterprises                                  0          0           1
     561       Administrative and support services                                      0          0           1
     562       Waste management and remediation services                                0          1           1         Capital-based capacity utilization
     61        Educational services                                                     0          0           1
     621       Ambulatory health care services                                          0          1           1         Capital-based capacity utilization
     622       Hospitals                                                                0          1           1         Occupancy rates
     623       Nursing and residential care facilities                                  0          1           1         Occupancy rates
     624       Social assistance                                                        0          0           1
     711AS     Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and related activities       0          1           1         Occupancy   rates
     713       Amusements, gambling, and recreation industries                          0          1           1         Occupancy   rates
     721       Accommodation                                                            0          1           1         Occupancy   rates
     722       Food services and drinking places                                        0          1           1         Occupancy   rates
     81        Other services, except government                                        0          0           1
     GFGD      Federal general government (defense)                                     0          0           0
     GFGN      Federal general government (nondefense)                                  0          0           0
     GFE       Federal government enterprises                                           0          0           0
     GSLG      State and local general government                                       0          0           0
     GSLE      State and local government enterprises                                   0          0           0
83
G.4    Mapping from output to real marginal costs
Real marginal cost as a function of aggregate output mc  PtY (Yt ) is defined by equations (G1), (G2),
                                                            t


(G3), (G4), (G5), (G6), (G7), (G8), (G9), (G10), (G11), (G12), (G13), (G14), (G15), (G16), and
(G18), while holding the marginal utility of consumption (or consumption Ct ) constant.
    The partial elasticity is then defined as in Section 4.3.2. In special cases, this mapping can be
calculated analytically. For the full model, we compute it numerically.

G.5    Additional results
Heterogeneity in industries' responses to aggregate shocks As discussed in Section 4.2,
industries' differential responses to aggregate shocks affect the curvature of the aggregate supply
curve in the presence of non-linearities. The reason is that curvature has more bite when an
industry's response to a shock is large. We demonstrate here that this channel is quantitatively
unimportant in our model and calibration.
    Figure G2 shows a histogram of industries' responses to a shock, which reduces aggregate output
by 5 percent. As the figure shows, all industries' output falls by slightly more than 5 percent, thereby
limiting this heterogeneity channel in shaping the aggregate supply curve. Capacity industries'
output falls by slightly less. The reason is as follows. Since the supply curves of capacity industries
are upward-sloping, a drop in demand reduces their price. Further, non-capacity industries operate
constant returns to scale technologies, so their prices are not directly impacted by the fall in output.
Substitution towards capacity industries explains why their output falls slightly less.




                                                  84
                              Figure G2: Heterogeneity




Notes: This figure is based on the benchmark calibration as described in Appendix G.3




                                           85
