                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                RISKS TO HUMAN CAPITAL

                                      Mehran Ebrahimian
                                       Jessica Wachter

                                      Working Paper 26823
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26823


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We are grateful to Will Diamond, Joao Gomes, Urban Jermann, Patrick Kehoe, Tim Landvoigt,
Daniel Neuhann, Nick Roussanov, and seminar participants at the RAPS Winter Finance
Conference, at Temple University and at Wharton for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mehran Ebrahimian and Jessica Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risks to Human Capital
Mehran Ebrahimian and Jessica Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 26823
March 2020
JEL No. G12,G32

                                           ABSTRACT

What is the connection between financing constraints and the equity premium? To answer this
question, we build a model with inalienable human capital, in which investors finance individuals
who can potentially become skilled. Though investment in skill is always optimal, it does not take
place in some states of the world, due to moral hazard. In other states of the world, individuals
acquire skill; however outside investors and individuals inefficiently share risk. We show that this
simple moral hazard problem and the resultant financing friction leads to a realistic equity
premium, a low riskfree rate, and severe negative consequences for distribution of wealth and for
welfare. When investment fails to take place, the economy enters an endogenous disaster state.
We show that the possibility of these disaster states distorts risk prices, even under calibrations in
which they never occur in equilibrium.


Mehran Ebrahimian
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia,PA 19104
ebrm@wharton.upenn.edu

Jessica Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction

The 2008­2009 financial crisis directed the attention of economists and policymakers
to links between intermediary balance sheets, asset pricing fluctuations and economic
variability (He and Krishnamurthy, 2012; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2014). One
hypothesis is that deterioration in intermediary balance sheets was the cause of these
fluctuations. However, for intermediary balance sheets to matter quantitatively, there
must be some underlying friction that prevents capital from flowing, either directly
or through intermediaries, in times of financial distress. Given the innovations and
technological advances over the last century, the question remains: what is the friction
that can survive the powerful incentives to move capital to where it is most productive?
The answer seems likely to be independent of specific institutional arrangements.
    A second hypothesis is that institutional factors are of minor significance, and the
fluctuations in balance sheets are a symptom and not a cause. According to this view,
underlying fluctuations in productivity drive asset prices in a nearly frictionless way
and an economic crisis is simply a large productivity decline. A line of literature fo-
cuses on the quantitative implications of such rare disasters for asset prices (Barro,
2006; Gabaix, 2012; Gourio, 2012; Wachter, 2013) assuming complete markets. How-
ever, other than world-wide conflicts, the source of these large, rare macroeconomic
fluctuations is unknown.
    In this paper, we build a model in which financial frictions arise from risk to human
capital. In so doing, we provide a foundation for rare output-related disasters. We
consider an individual's decision to finance a non-convex human capital investment. A
substantial empirical literature shows, for example, that the decision to go to college is
non-convex. A little bit of college does not produce a little bit of the benefits of going
to college; rather it produces nothing.1 We assume markets are incomplete: we take as
    1
    See e.g. Hungerford and Solon (1987); Altonji (1993); Jaeger and Page (1996); Card (1999);
Heckman et al. (2006)


                                              2
given individuals cannot sell claims to their human capital. However, individuals can
pledge some of the resultant cash flows. Because pledgeability is limited, individuals
cannot receive outside funding in every state of the world. This friction amplifies
negative shocks to equityholders, reducing the riskfree rate to zero and generating an
equity premium that is close to the historical average, even under log utility.
   To summarize, the model explains the following empirical results:

  1. A high equity premium under low risk aversion

  2. A low riskfree rate (in fact, a riskfree rate that is at the zero lower bound).

  3. Non-participation in the stock market.

  4. Procyclical dividends (and wages that are relatively unresponsive to the business
     cycle).

We explain these facts through a methodological advance: we extend the basic moral
hazard framework of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and Aghion and Bolton (1997) to
the case of aggregate risk. The solution has quantitatively realistic implications, but
does not rely on complicated dynamics and has an analytical characterization.
   Our paper relates to a literature using nonconvexities to explain variations in em-
ployment over the business cycle. For example, Hansen (1985), Rogerson (1988), and
Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) argue that a nonconvex employed/unemployed dis-
tinction lies behind the volatility of unemployment relative to output, whereas Prescott
(1992) argues that nonconvexities explain differential rates of unemployment among de-
veloped countries. The debate on the significance and form of non-convexity continues:
Chetty et al. (2011) argue that indivisibilities are insufficient to reconcile the macro
and micro evidence, while Kehoe et al. (2019) derive non-convexities from on-the-job
learning, and show that the resultant model explains unemployment volatility given



                                           3
variation in discount rates. This literature assumes that unemployment risk is per-
fectly shared and thus that markets are complete. We depart from this literature in
that markets are realistically incomplete in our model, and imperfect risk sharing plays
an important role in our results.
   While the above literature focuses on explaining unemployment assuming complete
markets, a second literature uses market incompleteness generated by unemployment
to explain asset prices. Early work focused on how countercyclical labor income risk
together with incomplete markets offered a solution to the equity premium puzzle
(Constantinides and Duffie, 1996; Storesletten et al., 2007). More recent work has
focused on the role of negative skewness (Schmidt, 2016; Constantinides and Ghosh,
2017; Catherine, 2019). Guvenen et al. (2014) show that labor income of those on the
low end of the income scale displays greater countercyclicality relative to the labor
income of those at the top. Our model endogenously generates this outcome through
financial contracting frictions, while also generating an increased equity premium as in
Constantinides and Duffie (1996).
   Our paper also relates to a literature on the consequences of imperfect financial
markets for economic development. In this literature, financing frictions hinder some
individuals from making positive net present value investments in human capital. In-
dividuals remain poor, and continue to face the same financing problem; thus the
economy stagnates into a "poverty trap" (Banerjee and Newman, 1993; Ljungqvist,
1993; Levine, 2005). To this framework, we add aggregate risk. We show how aggre-
gate risk makes these frictions more severe, and can lead, endogenously, to economic
disasters.
   Finally, our paper relates to a substantial and growing literature on financing fric-
tions and the macroeconomy. Classic references include Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and
Bernanke et al. (1999). These papers assume a class of risk neutral individuals ("ex-
perts") who have special access to investment technologies. More recent work (Gertler


                                           4
and Kiyotaki, 2010) allows for risk aversion, but assumes, in effect, complete mar-
kets. Given cash flows, asset prices are the same as in a standard endowment economy
without experts and financing frictions. Our model departs from these along several
dimensions. At the core of our model is an investment decision in human capital--after
which individuals become analogous to experts. Also, in our model, in which markets
are endogenously incomplete, financing frictions deepen negative shocks as they occur
(as opposed to responding to a sequence of negative shocks; an effect not observed in
the data).2 Non-convexities further amplify the effects of incomplete contracts, leading
to risky aggregate cash flows, volatile state prices, and a greater equity premium.
   Our work is closer to the more recent papers of He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013)
and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) in that we focus on non-participation and mar-
ket incompleteness. However, our moral hazard problem is of a quite different nature,
leading to very different results. As discussed above, in our model financing frictions
deepen negative shocks as they occur. The reason is that our agent can (realistically)
divert cash flows subsequent to the aggregate shock. This gives rise to three regions,
determined by the outcome of an aggregate productivity shock. When productivity is
sufficiently high, risk is perfectly shared, and outcomes are as in the frictionless case.
There are two inefficient regions. In the lowest region, financing constraints are locally
non-binding. However, investment is inefficient. For intermediate values of productiv-
ity, investment is efficient, but risk sharing is not. The existence of the lowest region
distorts savings (because agents attempt to stay out of it), leading to low interest rates,
whereas the second region is the main driver of the equity premium. The lowest region
corresponds to disaster states. Intriguingly even when this region (endogenously) dis-
appears, the potential occurrence of this region off-equilibrium drives results. In our
model, unlike others, disasters can exert a substantial influence over asset prices, even
when they never occur in equilibrium.
   2
       In this sense, the model is similar to the fire-sales model of Shleifer and Vishny (2011).


                                                     5
2       Model

We present a three-period model in which individuals and investors face a financial
contracting friction due to moral hazard and limited liability, similar to Holmstrom
and Tirole (1997) and Aghion and Bolton (1997). As in Hart and Moore (1994), the
individual cannot sell claims to his or her human capital. To this standard framework,
we add aggregate risk and risk averse agents.


2.1     Setup

Environment. There is one non-perishable investment/consumption good and there
are three types of agents: i) a unit mass of outside investors with aggregate initial en-
dowment eI ; ii) a mass mh of high-cash-on-hand individuals, henceforth h-individuals,
with initial endowment eh ; iii) a mass m of low-cash-on-hand individuals, henceforth -
individuals, with initial endowment e  eh .3 There are three periods in the model. In
period 0 agents write financial contracts and trade Arrow-Debreu securities. The state
of the world--aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) --is realized in period 1. Let
   denote TFP; it is drawn from cumulative distribution function F :   [0, 1].
Afterwards an individual chooses her occupation and (potentially) calls for funds from
outside investors based on securities traded in period 0 to pay for the investment costs.
Production takes place in period 2. An individual either shirks or puts forth effort.
Output depends on the choice of effort, occupational choice, and aggregate TFP. Fi-
nally, all payments are settled, everyone consumes her endowment.


Technology. The occupational choice set is nonconvex. An individual may either
work in the traditional sector to generate H0  0 units of the consumption good,
where H0 is independent of the state of the world; or invest in her human capital,
    3
     We use the terminology individual rather than the more common entrepreneur to emphasize the
fact that the model is one of human rather than physical capital.


                                               6
which returns H units of goods in the production period (period 2) if the individual
puts forth effort, where H is a constant parameter governing the return to investment in
human capital. If the individual shirks, the return to investment is zero. Let f denote
the investment cost. We assume investment in human capital is first-best optimal in
any state of the world:
                                   : H - f > H0  0.                                  (1)

Finally, we assume everyone is endowed with an inventory technology which delivers a
zero net return across periods.


Preferences. All agents have log utility with time discount factor  :


                          u(c0 , c2 ) = (1 -  ) log c0 +  log c2


Here, c0 and c2 denote consumption in period 0 and period 2, respectively. For sim-
plicity, we abstract from consumption in the intermediate period. Given the weights
 and 1 -  , we can interpret utility at time 2 as representing continuation value into
the infinite future. Note that, in our model, all agents have the same risk aversion.
This distinguishes our setting from those such as Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979), and,
more recently Berk et al. (2010) in which outside investors have lower risk aversion, or
are risk neutral. In our model, both agents have the same patience, differentiating it
from settings such as those of DeMarzo et al. (2012) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)
in which a patient investor funds an impatient entrepreneur.


Financing Friction. If an individual shirks, she receives a nonpecuniary private
benefit equal to f in units of the consumption good. Namely,  is the fraction of
investment funds than an individual can divert. The action of an individual is not
observable, and we assume all agents are protected by limited liability. A contract that


                                            7
prevents shirking will take the form that, should production be zero, the individual re-
ceives zero (the individual cannot receive less than zero because of limited liability), and
should production be positive, the individual receives something at least as large as f .
That is, the payoff to an individual should meet the following incentive-compatibility
constraint:
                                          c2  f.                                       (IC)

This lack of commitment on the part of the individual limits the payoff that can be
pledged to the outside investor. The outside investor receives the payoff H - c2 
H - f . The outside investor cannot receive any more than H - f without violating
the incentive compatibility constraint.
   Note that  governs the severity of the financing friction. We assume   1, hence,
shirking is socially inefficient. In equilibrium, individuals will not shirk; shirking is an
off-equilibrium-path credible threat. In a frictionless world  = 0. The greater returns
to human capital imply that, if the individual puts forth effort, there are sufficient
funds to meet the IC constraint: H - f  H - f > H0  0.
   It is useful to contrast the nature of the financing friction in this model with the
standard financing friction in macro-finance. In macro-finance, the standard friction
is a collateral constraint: the entrepreneur can finance operations with debt up to a
fraction of physical capital stock (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997). Should the entrepreneur
default, the lenders can seize part of the capital and sell it at market value. Often in
these models, default can occur because the investment is sub-optimal in certain states
of the world.
   In this setting, however, we tie our hands by assuming that the investment is always
first-best optimal. Default is endogenous in that the agent cannot commit to put forth
effort. In the case where shirking occurs, there is no collateral to be seized and sold on
the market (given modern institutions). The incentivizing device is weaker (because



                                             8
no penalty is paid for default) and thus the financing friction is more severe. Rather
than being able to borrow up to a specific fraction of human capital, the agent must
commit to a specific cash flow pattern. This is what we mean by inalienability.
   This concept of inalienability is essentially the same as the concept introduced by
Hart and Moore (1994). In our model as well as in theirs, the agent will no longer choose
the efficient action if his or her payoff falls below a threshold. The "capital stock" H ,
which is what the agent brings to the production process, cannot be transfered or
seized. Therefore, the production opportunity is gone when the agent decides not
to participate. In the absence of an incentive to shirk ( = 0), we would still have
inalienable human capital; however, the outcome would be the same as if capital could
be sold, because as a practical matter, the agent would choose the efficient action.
   Table 1 summarizes the timing in the model.


Financial Contracting We assume that, at t = 0, investors and individuals can
write all forms of long-term contingent contracts, subject to (IC). We assume investors
trade contingent claims in a competitive financial market.
   Note that we assume full commitment on the part of outside investors. Appendix C
solves for the case with limited commitment from outside investors.


2.2    Agents' Optimization

Let  :   R+ denote the state-price density. In the following sections, we specify
the optimization problem of investors and individuals.




                                            9
2.2.1    Outside Investors

We assume a perfectly competitive market for investment in human capital.4 Investors
thus solve a standard consumption and portfolio choice problem in which they trade
Arrow securities indexed by  :

                                                                    
                    I   I
                  V (e ) =          (1 -
                                    max               ) log cI
                                                 +  log cI  2 ( ) dF ( )
                                                             0
                                  {cI   I
                                    0 ,c2 (.)}
                                    
                     such that: c0 +  ( )cI
                                 I                       I
                                          2 ( ) dF ( )  e .



The optimal consumption plan is simply


                                                 cI
                                                  0 = (1 -  ) e
                                                                I

                                                         
                                          cI
                                           2 ( ) =           eI .
                                                         ( )

2.2.2    Individuals

Individuals face perfectly competitive markets. They solve a consumption, portfolio
choice, and occupational choice problem. Let o :   {0, 1} denote the optimal
state-contingent occupational plan, where o = 1 implies investment in human capital.
Namely, individuals solve the following long-term financial contracting problem:

                                                                       
              V (e) =           max                (1 -  ) log c0 +       log c2 ( ) dF ( ),
                        {c0 ,c2 (·)>0,o(·){0,1}}



subject to

                            
             c0 + f - e          ( ){o( ) H + [1 - o( )](H0 + f ) - c2 ( )} dF ( )               (BC)

    4
      Namely, for investors, the returns to investing in human capital equal to the returns to investing
in the contingent claim market.




                                                      10
and
                              | o( ) = 1 :      c2 ( )  f                            (IC)

where e  {e , eh } represents the initial endowment of an individual.
   Included in the right-hand side of (BC) is the individual's payoff from either in-
vesting or not investing in human capital. If o( ) = 1, the individual produces H .
If o( ) = 0, the individual pays back the fixed investment cost f , and works in the
traditional sector, producing H0 . The individual's budget constraint implies that the
market value of the individual's state-contingent consumption plan must not exceed
her endowment plus the value of her human capital. However, (BC) is not the only con-
straint that the individual faces: for the individual's plan to be incentive-compatible,
the plan must meet (IC). The incentive-compatibility constraint is the source of market
incompleteness.
   Note that (BC) has a flow-of-funds interpretation. The left-hand side of (BC) is
the (net) amount an individual raises at time 0 in the capital market; she needs funds
to cover the investment cost f and to pay for early consumption. The right-hand side
of (BC) is the time-0 value of the resources that she can promise to repay in period 2;
if she invests in human capital (o = 1) she produces H and if not (o = 0) she would
return the investment fund and also the labor income of traditional sector; period 2
consumption is deducted from what she can produce.
   Ultimately (BC) and (IC) form the optimal contract between the investor and the
individual. The investor commits to provide funds f in states of the world in which
(IC) is satisfied. Equation BC is a participation constraint for the outside investor.
By definition, the individual consumes c0 and c2 (·). Thus the outside investor pays
f - e - c0 and receives o( ) H + [1 - o( )](H0 + f ) - c2 ( ) in state of the world  . The
budget constraint (BC) implies that the net present value to the investor is greater
than or equal to zero.



                                           11
    Equation BC implies that setting aside f at time 0 is a prerequisite to investment
at time 1. An alternative modeling choice would be to allow f to be paid out of
production. If this were the case, f would not appear on the left-hand side of (BC),
but rather it would be subtracted from H on the right hand side. The requirement
that f be set aside at time 0 implies, realistically, that there is a gap between investment
and production, namely that time to build is required.


Solution to the individual's problem. Let  be the shadow price of (BC). Ap-
pendix A.1 shows that, given an occupational choice plan o(·), the optimal consumption
plan satisfies

                                     1-
                            c0 =
                                     
                                      c2 ( ) 
                                                  1
                                                              if o( ) = 0
                                                   ( )
                        c2 ( ) =
                                     max{c2 ( ) , f } if o( ) = 1



Here, c                                                             5
       2 ( ) is the optimal consumption plan in the absence of (IC). The second-best

allocation requires the individual to consume at least f , assuming o( ) = 1, in order
to keep incentives aligned. For h-individuals, endowment e is high, and thus  is
relatively low. For these individuals, c2 ( )  f for all  . The incentive compatibility

constraint (IC) does not bind, and the first-best allocation holds: o( ) = 1 for all  .
    For -individuals, e is low and  is relatively high. There are states of the world
in which, in the absence of (IC), the individual would prefer to consume less than f :
c2 ( ) < f . Supposing that o( ) = 1 (we discuss o( ) below), (IC) requires that the

individual consumes more than she would under the first-best allocation. Utility in
these states is higher than it would be under the first-best, but the budget constraint
   5
     That is, c2 is the optimal consumption plan for the agent, taking  and  as given. This is not to
be confused with this agents' consumption in a frictionless economy, which will take the same form,
but for which the numerical values of  and  will change.



                                                 12
tightens (it is more difficult to meet the participation constraint of outside investors).
   The optimal occupational choice o( ) is based on the tradeoff between the added
gains from efficient investment, and inefficient over-consumption. As Appendix A.1
shows, the optimal occupational choice satisfies:

   i) f  c2 ( ) = o( ) = 1

  ii) f > c2 ( ) : o( ) = 1, 
                                 (                       (        ))
                                                            f
               ( )[H - f - H0 ] -  ( )[f - c2 ( )] -  log 
                                            
                                                                      0.                       (2)
                                                           c2 ( )
                   efficiency gain
                                                     cost of over-consumption


If the unconstrained solution (what the agent would consume in the absence of incentive
compatibility) lies above f , the individual always invests in human capital, because
it is more efficient then the alternative. This is statement (i). If the unconstrained
solution lies below f , the individual faces a tradeoff, captured by (2). Equation 2
shows the difference in indirect utility between investing (o( ) = 1), and not investing
(o( ) = 0), in the region where the agent is constrained (states  where c2 > f ).
                                                                                  6


Thus (ii) simply states that o( ) = 1 when the utility from investment is higher.
   We see that the decision to invest trades off between the gain in efficiency from
investing (the first term) and the cost of inefficient consumption (the second). Efficiency
gain is (H - f - H0 ), multiplied by its value today ( ( )), and the benefit of relaxing
(BC), . When the individual invests she must consume more to meet (IC). The cost of
over-consumption incorporates the utility difference between constrained consumption
f and unconstrained consumption c2 , as well as the cost of greater-consumption,

state-by-state, multiplied by the cost of tightening (BC).
   We conclude this subsection by discussing the role of commitment on the part of
   6
    In this exercise we consider a deviation from optimal o( ) in each state of the world, so that 
remains fixed. See Appendix A for detail.



                                                13
outside investors. Consider states of the world  such that


                                            H - c2 ( ) < f                                      (3)


(the left hand side is the payoff to the investor and the right hand side denotes the
funds she provides). In these states, the outside investor would prefer not to invest
in human capital.7 Thus the outside investor has an incentive to violate the contract
when (3) holds. Note that (3) also implies

                                                               (1 + )f
                                  H - f  f =  
                                                                  H

because c2 ( )  f . Thus               (1+)f
                                         H
                                             ,   is a sufficient condition for the outside investor
to wish to renege on her investment.
   Under the benchmark calibration, there is a region of outcomes  for which invest-
ment is part of the optimal contract but the outside investor would prefer to renege.
We assume a legal environment in which there is always such commitment on the
investor's side, but we also solve for the limited commitment case in Appendix C.


2.3     Equilibrium

We define equilibrium as

    - a state-price density:  (·),

    - a set of consumption plans and occupational choices for investors, - and h-
       individuals: cI    I
                     0 , c2 (·), o (·), c0 , c2 (·), o (·), c0 , c2 (·),
                                                      h      h    h



such that

   1. given prices, allocations maximize optimization problems specified above, and
   7
     This argument assumes that if the investors reneges, she does not get to claim H0 . However, if
she does get to claim H0 , the same argument goes through, as we show in the Appendix.


                                                    14
    2. markets clear at time 2:

                                          
         cI                   h h
          2 ( ) + m c2 ( ) + m c2 ( ) =           mj {oj ( ) H + (1 - oj ( ))(H0 + f )} + I, (MC)
                                          j =,h


       where I  0 stands for the amount of resources that agents might keep in inven-
       tory.
                                 
    3. Storage is costless: if       ( ) dF ( ) < 1, then I = 0. Otherwise, I is such that
       
          ( ) dF ( ) = 1.

    Appendix A.2 shows that the cut-off rule described in the previous section is an
equilibrium result. We jointly solve for  c and  ( ) as a function of  and I . We then
solve for  and h .



3      Frictionless Case:  = 0

The case without frictions offers a useful point of comparison. In this case, all in-
dividuals set o(·) = 1 as the (IC) constraint does not bind. Optimal consumption
equals

                                                  1-
                                            cj
                                             0 =                                              (4)
                                                   j
                                                     
                                          cj
                                           2 ( ) =                                            (5)
                                                    ( )j

for all types of agents: j  {, h, I}.
    The Lagrange multipliers j satisfy the budget constraints. For investors,


                                            I = 1/eI ,                                        (6)




                                                   15
while for individuals,

                   (                      )-1
                  = e +  ( ) H dF ( ) - f
                   j j
                                              ,                  j  {, h}.            (7)

                   
We can interpret        ( ) H dF ( ) - f as the time-0 value of the individual's human
capital. In the frictionless case, human capital becomes a traded asset. Because human
capital is the same across individuals, only the initial endowment determines differences
in consumption. This is in sharp contrast to the case with frictions, in which the payoffs
to human capital positively correlates with initial cash-on-hand.
   Market clearing (MC) determines the state-price density. Assume parameters are
                                                             
such that the equilibrium riskfree rate is non-negative, i.e.  (·) dF ( )  1 (this will
be the case in our calibration, assuming no frictions). Then inventory I = 0. Noting
that all individuals invest in human capital (o(·) = 1), and substituting in from (5),
we have the following simplified version of the market clearing condition (MC):

                                     (                )
                                         1   m mh
                                           +  + h         = H.
                               ( )       I     

Define
                                         
                               wH            ( ) H dF ( ) - f

as the time-0 value of total human capital in the economy (note that m + mh = 1).
Substituting in from (6) and (7), we have


                           [eI + m e + mh eh + wH ] =  ( ) H.                         (8)


Integrating over  implies that wH must satisfy


                            [eI + m e + mh eh + wH ] = wH + f.                        (9)



                                               16
Therefore,
                                        [eI + m e + mh eh ] - f
                               wH =
                                               1-

Substituting into (8) and solving for  (·) implies:

                                        [eI + m e + mh eh - f ]
                               ( ) =                            .                             (10)
                                             (1 -  ) H

Thus  ( )   -1 . This is the standard representative agent result with log utility.
Market clearing implies that aggregate consumption at time 0 equals eI + m e +
mh eh - f and aggregate consumption at time 2 equals H , pinning down the constant
of proportionality.



4       Results

4.1       Calibration

As an illustrative calibration, we assume a time-discount rate of 0.95 and zero payoff in
the traditional sector (H0 = 0). We normalize f to 1. We calibrate H so that 5% of the
time, low cash-on-hand () individuals do not invest in human capital. We interpret this
lowest 5% of the the TFP distribution as corresponding (endogenously) to economic
disaster states. We assume that 50% of individuals have low cash on hand and 50%
have high cash on hand. We assume aggregate TFP  is approximately lognormal such
that log   N (0, 0.10). We censor draws of  so that (1) obtains.8 We set endowments
so that the riskfree rate is equal to 1/ in the frictionless economy, in effect calibrating
the economy so that the final period represents a stream of consumption flow into the
future.
    8
     Censoring occurs with probability less than 0.0001 in our benchmark calibration. Thus  is very
close to lognormal.




                                                17
4.2     Occupational choice

Under our assumptions, the individual with high cash-on-hand will choose to invest in
human capital in any state of the world. However, the low-cash-on-hand individual's
occupation choice displays state-dependence. For values of  sufficiently low, it is
not optimal for the investor to pay the individual a sufficiently high wage to satisfy
incentive compatibility (IC). Without incentive compatibility, the individual cannot
commit to not shirk. This problem, endogenously, does not exist for the high cash-on-
hand individuals, who invest using their own funds and receive both the dividend and
the wage.
   Figure 1 shows the occupation choice of the low cash-on-hand individual as a func-
tion of the state of the world  .9 This choice is always 1 for  sufficiently high. There is
a region in which equilibrium determines the fraction of agents who invest and who do
not. The region for which this fraction is not 1 or zero is very small. For  sufficiently
small, occupational choice is zero. The case with a convex technology (which we solve
for in Appendix B) also features state-dependence, but is a smooth function at lower
levels of  .


4.3     Consumption, dividends, and asset prices

Figure 2 shows aggregate consumption as a function of  . In the frictionless case, all
agents consume in proportion to TFP. In the case with frictions, aggregate output (and
hence consumption) is equal to that of the frictionless case, as long as individuals make
the efficient occupational choice. . In the lowest states, agents no longer make efficient
occupational choices, and aggregate consumption is sharply lower at the point in the
distribution where agents stop investing in human capital. In the case of a convex
occupational choice, aggregate consumption is lower, but the effect is smooth over the
   9
     In this and in subsequent figures, policy functions and equilibrium outcomes are shows as func-
tions of the cumulative distribution function of  rather than  itself.


                                                18
outcomes of  . Namely, disasters are more rare in the non-convex case, but they are
also more severe.
   The similarity between consumption in the frictionless case and in the case with
frictions masks sharp distributional differences. These distributional differences turn
out to be important for asset pricing. Figure 3, Panel A shows the dividend to investors:


                    D2 ( ) = ((1 - o ( ))[H0 + f ] + o ( )H - c       
                                                               2 ( ))m ,                (11)


where o is the fraction of -individuals who invest in human capital. Figure 3, Panel B
shows the payoff to low cash-on-hand individuals. These two payoffs show how investors
and low cash-on-hand individuals share aggregate risk. For most of the range of TFP,
investors bear nearly all of the risk. Again, this effect is present for a convex opportunity
set, but is amplified in the non-convex case. The consumption of low cash-on-hand
investors is flat over this range, whereas, relative to the frictionless case, the dividend
displays excess sensitivity to the aggregate state. Note that excess dividend sensitivity
is a endogenous outcome of the contracting problem. The investor "overcompensates"
the individual in certain states of the world because otherwise the individual cannot
commit to work.
   The state-price density reflects imperfect risk sharing, as Figure 4 shows. In the
frictionless case, the state-price density is proportional to the inverse of consumption,
which in turn is proportional to the inverse of TFP. Bad states receive higher prices,
as in the standard Lucas (1978) economy. As compared to the case with no frictions,
frictions imply a state-price density that is weakly higher at every level of  . At very
high values of  , the state-price densities are the same (the economy is close to the
frictionless case, because all individuals consume enough to make effort optimal). At
the lowest values, they are also nearly the same (investment in human capital is not
optimal in the world with frictions and barely efficient in the frictionless world). For


                                             19
most of the state space, state prices are quite different.
   The increase in the state-price density relative to the frictionless case reflects an
intertemporal distortion. Consider the decision of the low cash-on-hand investors. In
the frictionless case, the value of human capital becomes a traded asset, and the in-
dividual's consumption and savings decision is determined only by the standard Euler
equation. In the case with frictions, however, human capital is not traded, because
the individual cannot commit to provide effort unless he or she receives sufficient com-
pensation.10 This compensation amounts to a claim on the project. By self-financing
(consuming less today, in return for earnings from the project in the future), the agent
shrinks the region in which efficient investment fails to take place. Self-financing the
project, is, of course, a form of savings, in that it shifts consumption from the time 0
to time 2. This savings raises the prices of all future states relative to the current state
(because investors need to buy the claims to these states), lowering the equilibrium
interest rate.
   There is a second channel leading to a lower interest rate. In equilibrium, outside
investors must bear more of the risk relative to the frictionless case. Besides leading
to a more volatile state-price density, it also leads to a greater precautionary motive,
and thus higher state-price densities overall.
   It is also of interest to compare the state-price density under the convex and non-
convex technologies. One might think that the convex case would be a smoothed
version of the non-convex case. For many outcomes, this is correct: it is a smoothed
version of occupational choice (Figure 1), aggregate consumption (Figure 2), and even
-individual per-capita consumption in period 2 (Figure 2).11 However, the state-price
density under the convex case is qualitatively different than that under the non-convex
  10
      The higher the consumption in the second period, the smaller the distortion from having to
over-consume in low- states. See (2) and the subsequent discussion.
   11
      Note that even here, the welfare consequences for -individuals are quite different, as will be
discussed below.



                                                20
case. When the technology is not convex, the state-price density is non-monotonic
in TFP: there is a level of  at which it spikes upward and then declines. In con-
trast, the convex technology (like the frictionless case) implies state-price density that
monotonically declines in the state. This upward spike is purely due to imperfect risk
sharing. In Figures 1­4, the convex and non-convex case differ when  falls below 20th
percentile value. At this value, all individuals invest in human capital when opportu-
nities are non-convex. Under the case of convex technology, all individuals invest, but
they do not invest the full amount. While aggregate consumption is higher for some
outcomes in the nonconvex case, risk sharing is less efficient, as seen in the sharply
higher state-price density and in the lower dividend to outside investors.12 For aggre-
gate consumption, it does not matter much if some investors are partially employed,
versus some fully employed and some not employed. However, for individual outcomes,
and for the equity premium, it clearly matters.
   These figures highlight the differences between our economy and complete-market
endowment and production economies, and even economies with financial frictions such
as Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). First, aggregate consumption exhibits a disaster state
relative to TFP (Figure 2). Second, Individuals of differing levels of endowments have
quite different consumption profiles. Specifically, the low cash-on-hand individuals is a
non-participant in the equity market, explaining the non-participation puzzle (Guve-
nen, 2009) among individuals with low financial wealth --Campbell (2016) shows that
these agents are much more likely to be non-participants.13 Third, dividends are pro-
cyclical, a fact that matches the data, but which endowment economies take as a given.
Production economies, on the other hand, struggle to match this result (Kaltenbrunner
and Lochstoer, 2010). In a standard production setting with time-varying investment
  12
      On average, individuals need to be paid more under the non-convex case because they can divert
the full amount.
   13
      Berk and Walden (2013) also link non-participation to the optimal wage contract between in-
vestors and workers.



                                                21
opportunities, dividends counterfactually fall in good economic states. In our model,
however, dividends rise more than consumption in good economic states. Finally, rela-
tive to Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), markets are incomplete, leading to a more volatile
state price density, relative to what would be implied by aggregate consumption.
   The dividend and consumption dynamics also speak to puzzles in macroeconomics.
The flat consumption profile of the low-cash-on-hand investor indicates a wage that
is insensitive to the economic state, without the need to assume complicated wage-
setting procedures.14 The model speaks to why economic growth (multiple realizations
of a good economic state) might lead to a declining labor share, a well-known em-
pirical finding (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013). Figure 3 shows that, relative to
TFP, -individuals give up some consumption (wages) in high states, in order to meet
the pledgeability constraint (combined with investors' participation constraint) in less
good states of the world. Thus, when times are good, investors benefit more than
proportionally (Figure 3).
   Figure 3 also highlights an important tradeoff in matching the data that will be
ubiquitous in models with a moral hazard friction. The high and volatile state-price
density occurs because of imperfect risk-sharing, a problem that grows worse as pro-
ductivity falls. However, for very low values of TFP  (the states agents attempt to
avoid), it is the low cash-on-hand individuals, not the investors who bear all of the
risk. In these states, investors cease supplying external capital. Their dividends rise.
Because consumption for investors is higher in these states, the state-price density
jumps downward ­ a non-monotonicity reflected in Figure 4. This effect will hurt the
model's ability to match the equity premium puzzle. That said, the existence of this
  14
     A large literature in macroeconomics focuses on wage setting mechanisms that might lead wages
to be sticky (Christiano et al., 2016). Favilukis and Lin (2014) show that a model with exogenous
sticky wage, together with long run risk and recursive utility can explain the equity premium. Kilic
and Wachter (2018) show that partially sticky wages can account for excess volatility and the equity
premium in a model with rare disasters. Ai and Bhanderi (2019) endogenize sticky wages through a
contracting problem. However, unlike us, they assume that workers cannot invest in the stock market.



                                                22
state determines the equity premium in the model in the first place.


4.4     Quantitative implications

Table 3 describes the quantitative implications of our model. As we assume log util-
ity and normally distributed log TFP in a static setting, the model does not have
the mechanisms that explain the equity premium in the existing literature (high risk
aversion, exogenous disasters, long run risk). Nonetheless, the model generates some
quantitatively significant results. In the frictionless case, the equity premium is 1%,
with an unrealistically high riskfree rate of 5%. In the cases with frictions, the riskfree
rate falls to 0%, and, in the case of the non-convex technology, the equity premium
doubles to more than 2%. Meanwhile, the volatility of log dividends (equal in this case
to the volatility of log returns), rises from 10% per annum to almost 20%. As Figure 3
shows, this higher volatility reflects greater sensitivity to the economic state. The
higher volatility of dividends (endogenous leverage) is only part of the reason for the
higher equity premium. The state-price density is also more volatile than in the fric-
tionless case, as Figure 4 shows. This greater volatility, which comes from endogenous
market incompleteness, generates a higher equity premium.15
    Does our assumption of a non-convex choice set matter for our results? Quantitative
results for aggregate consumption, the state-price density, and the equity premium are
indeed smaller in the case of the convex occupational choice, as compared with our
benchmark case. Non-convexities amplify the effects of financial frictions on these
variables. There are, moreover, some results that are qualitatively different when the
occupational choice is non-convex. These are the results pertaining to the -individual.
Consumption for the -individual has a bimodal distribution in the non-convex case,
but not in the convex case. The -individual is more likely to find herself in a very low
  15
     The aggregate consumption claim also has a higher equity premium than in the frictionless case.
This arises from higher volatility of the state-price density (from imperfect risk sharing) and the fall
in consumption in poor economic states. By definition there is no leverage on the consumption claim.


                                                  23
state in this case than when occupational choices are convex. These states represent
large shifts to the left relative to better economic times. This is reflected in consumption
that is more than twice as volatile in the non-convex case than the convex case (see
Table 3). In our model, consumption and wages are the same for -individuals. The
extreme sensitivity of wages at the low end to aggregate market conditions (Guvenen
et al., 2014) suggests that non-convexities are an important aspect of the return to
human capital.
   Table 3 also shows the effect of raising the return to human capital H , and the
effect of increasing the mass of low-cash-on-hand individuals to one (so that there are
no high cash-on-hand individuals from the economy). Increasing H increases the equity
premium from 2.2% to 2.8%.16 Both increasing H and setting m = 1 increases the
equity premium to 4%, explaining the majority of the equity premium in the data,
even despite the assumption of log utility.


4.5     Comparative statics

In this section, we explore the effects of changing the mass of low-cash-on-hand indi-
viduals (higher m ) and the return to human capital investment (H ). In each case we
recalibrate endowments so that, in the frictionless economy, the riskfree rate stays the
same and is equal to  -1 .
   We first consider the effect of raising m . Comparing the left and right panels of
Figure 5 shows that raising m leads fewer low cash-on-hand individuals to choose to
invest in human capital (the red line shifts to the right). It is not obvious that this
should be the case, as this figure shows occupational choice per individual (it does not
simply reflect the fact that the total number of individuals investing in human capital is
smaller). The larger number of individuals failing to make the efficient investment leads
  16
    As we explain below, we recalibrate endowments so that the riskfree rate in the frictionless
benchmark remains the same.



                                              24
to more severe consumption disasters, that occur slightly more frequently (Figure 6).
Changing m affects per-capita consumption of the -individual (Figure 8), as well
as the per-share dividend (Figure 7), in a second-order way. Mainly, it affects the
state-price density (Figure 9).
   We can conclude from Figures 5­9 that the most important affect of a change in
m is on risk sharing (through the state-price density). The state-price density, is both
higher and more volatile (except in the very worst states) if more individuals require
outside financing. When m equals to 1, these individuals are the sole producers of the
time-2 consumption good. Moderately low states, in which they consume too much,
relative to their marginal product, are thus extremely costly.
   It may seem surprising that increasing the return to human capital increases the
equity premium and the quantity of risk in the economy. To further investigate this
effect, we show display various quantities as a function of the excess return to hu-
man capital (H - H0 - f )/f . Note that these are comparative statics results, and in
each case we recalibrate the economy so that, in the frictionless case, the riskfree rate
equals  -1 (thus eliminating any effects stemming purely from a higher growth rate of
consumption). The benchmark case in Table 3 corresponds to (H - H0 - f )/f = 0.965.
   Figure 10, Panel A shows the disaster probability, where a disaster state is one in
which individuals do not fully invest in human capital. The higher is H , the lower
is the disaster probability. This makes sense: a higher value of H makes it easier to
persuade outside investors to participate, given the need to compensate individuals. It
is therefore not surprising that expected aggregate consumption in the second period
is also, for the most part, increasing in H (Panel B). In both cases, there is a value of
H sufficiently large for which all individuals invest in human capital across all states
(so that the disaster probability equals zero), and for which aggregate consumption
is equal in expectation to the frictionless case. Note that these values are slightly
different. For H implying a probability equal to zero, but close to the boundary at


                                           25
which the probability exceeds zero, second period aggregate consumption is above the
frictionless benchmark. In this economy, an econometrician would not see any disasters.
This is an endogenous outcome; the disasters still matter, and agents save in order to
(successfully) avoid them.
   Panel C shows the riskfree rate as a function of (H - H0 - f )/f . The riskfree
rate figure has a very different pattern than the disaster probability and aggregate
consumption. For values of H far above those that generate observed disasters, and
for which aggregate consumption appears identical to the frictionless case, distortions
caused by the financial friction still matter. Agents still have a greater precautionary
motive, and the interest rate is still depressed toward its zero lower bound, for virtually
the entire region we consider. This figure emphasizes the result that the disaster
probability of zero in Panel A and well-behaved aggregate consumption, are endogenous
outcomes. Avoiding disasters has a strong effect on asset prices.
   Panel D shows the equity premium. The equity premium is non-monotonic in
(H - H0 - f )/f , illustrating the tradeoff we described in Section 4.3. Lower values
of (H - H0 - f )/f clearly worsen the friction. They raise the probability that some
individuals fail to invest (the disaster probability in Panel A), and they lower the
riskfree rate in Panel B. However, they lead to a lower equity premium because outside
investors offload the risk onto the low cash-on-hand individuals. In low states of the
world, investment is suboptimal, leading to higher values of dividends. To summarize,
the lower is (H - H0 - f )/f , the greater the friction, and the less risky the dividend.
Thus, the equity premium increases in (H -H0 -f )/f , even as the probability of disaster
falls, and the riskfree rate rises. However, for sufficiently high values of (H - H0 - f )/f ,
the friction becomes sufficiently unimportant and risk comes closer to being perfectly
shared. The equity premium still is far above the frictionless benchmark, but it declines
in H , because, over this range, higher H implies that there is sufficient funds to meet
the incentive compatibility constraint without too much distortion in risk sharing.


                                             26
4.6     Wealth distribution and welfare

Our model has surprising implications for the wealth distribution, and for the welfare
of agents.
   Table 4 reports the marginal utility of wealth (the Lagrange multiplier on the budget
constraint ), total wealth, and human capital for the three types of agents, for the
economy with non-convex choice set, convex choice set, and with no frictions. We
define human capital wealth for individual j , j = , h as the time-0 value of cash flows
generated, less the investment cost:

                   
                          (                                )
                       ( ) oj ( ) H + (1 - oj ( ))(H0 + f ) dF ( ) - f.


Total wealth for individual j is simply human capital plus the time-0 endowment ej .
Because of the log utility assumption, the marginal utility of wealth for the investor
is simply equal to the inverse of the initial endowment, and does not vary across
economies. This is not the case for individuals endowed with human capital. For the
-individual, marginal utility of wealth ( ) is sharply higher in the non-convex case, as
compared with the convex case, and is sharply higher in the convex case as compared
with the frictionless case. Because marginal utility of wealth is proportional to marginal
utility of time-0 consumption at the optimum, this indicates that the individual cuts
her time-0 consumption to rely on internal funds to cover investment cost as much as
possible.17 Interestingly, the marginal utility of the h-individual's wealth is slightly
lower in the economies with friction (though the magnitude is not large). Below, we
explain why this occurs.
   Panel B of Table 4 reports total wealth (in units of time-0 consumption), which
includes both cash-on-hand and human capital. For investors, this does not vary across
  17
     Note that reduced time-0 consumption helps the individual meet the participation constraint for
investors, given incentive compatibility. This agent saves more than in the case without frictions.



                                                27
economies, as the value of total wealth is simply cash-on-hand (the time-0 endowment).
Wealth is very slightly higher for the -individual, and moderately higher for the h-
individual. This implies aggregate wealth that is higher in the case of the economies
with frictions.
   This result seems surprising. Why is aggregate wealth higher, when, as Table 3
reports, the equity premium attached to wealth rises, while aggregate cash flows fall?
Moreover, why is aggregate wealth higher, even for the -individual when the marginal
utility of wealth is also higher? The reason is that the value of wealth masks the state-
dependence of the payoffs at time 2, which is what matters for utility. This wealth is
not something that the agent is capable of selling, and turning into consumption in any
manner that he or she pleases. For the -individual, moral hazard constraints dictate
that wealth must be consumed in a largely suboptimal state-independent way, except
in the worst economic states, in which case consumption falls sharply. Moreover, the
fact that state prices are higher overall hurts this investor, whose wealth has not risen
with the state prices to the same degree that the h-individual's wealth has. One can
understand this result in terms of a Campbell and Shiller (1988) decomposition: higher
state prices overall imply a lower riskfree rate: the lower riskfree rate overwhelms the
equity premium and cash flow effects.
   The h-individuals are unconstrained, and in their case, wealth is proportional to the
inverse of the marginal utility of wealth. The fact that their wealth is higher, and the
marginal utility lower, in cases with frictions, indicates that they are able to sell their
human capital at a higher value because state prices are higher. On the other hand,
consuming is more expensive, which implies (due to log utility) that their certainty
equivalent is the same. Note however, that the financial interests of h-individuals are
to some extent opposed to those of the -individuals. Type h-individuals are not hurt
by the presence of financial frictions, and in fact, their wealth is substantially higher.
By comparison, -individuals suffer a substantial utility loss due to financial frictions.


                                            28
   Figure 11 considers comparative statics for welfare. We show welfare (in consumption-
equivalent terms) as a function of (H - H0 - f )/f . In the frictionless economy, welfare
for all individuals increases linearly in the quantity of goods (solid black line). For
the high cash-on-hand individual, welfare equals the value in the frictionless case. The
higher value of their human capital, but the requirement to consume at higher state
prices cancel out, and their welfare exactly equals the frictionless value. This is not so
for either the investor or for the low cash-on-hand individual. As long as there is some
probability of failure to invest in human capital, the -individual suffers a welfare loss
relative to the frictionless case. The magnitude of this loss increases sharply with the
disaster probability. When the probability of a disaster is zero, the -individual enjoys
a small welfare gain, due to the fact that she must be compensated at a greater wage.
Investors, on the other hand, suffer a (small) welfare loss that is positive at any point.
For these investors, decreased risk sharing means that they are worse off. Unlike the
h-individuals, they have no human capital to sell at a higher price to compensate.
   Importantly, the inalienability of human capital and the financing friction is not
per-se consequential for welfare. What matters is the interaction between the finan-
cial friction and aggregate risk. Table 5 reports welfare with pre-determined TFP
( (log  ) = 0), and compares this with our benchmark case. In the economy without
risk, the presence of the friction slightly raises the welfare of the -individuals (compare
the second and the fourth column, Panel D). Frictions lead the -individual to require a
high reservation wage; without uncertainty, this reservation wage is guaranteed. There
is a pure redistribution of consumption goods from investors to -individuals in the
case with frictions as compared to the case without, assuming no risk.
   Moreover, risk per-se is also not consequential for welfare. In a model without
frictions, welfare loss due to uncertain productivity is negligible (compare the third
and fourth columns, Panel D). This is the standard business-cycle cost result (Lucas,



                                            29
2003).18 However, risk in TFP considerably lowers the welfare of a -individual in a
model with frictions (see columns one and two). As explained before this is due to the
endogenous left-tail risk and imperfect risk sharing in the economy.



5        Conclusion

We have introduced a model of inalienable human capital that we show can explain
a number of macroeconomic and asset pricing facts. First, inalienable human capi-
tal exacerbates downturns, as it is no longer possible to compensate individuals for
putting forth unobservable effort. This leads to a thick left tail in consumption, even
if productivity is normally distributed. It leads to countercyclical labor income risk, as
some agents no longer can finance human capital investments in low economic states.
It also leads to dividends that are more volatile than consumption, and wages that are
fixed. All of these are consistent with the data. Most importantly, financing frictions
imply a low riskfree rate, and an equity premium that is between 2 and 4 times what
it would be in the frictionless case.
     While not explored here, our model is also consistent with a dynamic role of finance
in asset prices. We have kept various elements of the economic environment fixed,
such as financing frictions and the ability of outside investors to make commitments.
Comparative statics in our model show that an increase in financial frictions leads to
a greater equity premium, lower cash flows, and a "flight to quality" ­ a much lower
riskfree rate. A change in the ability to form commitments also has similar affects. A
generalized model has the potential to explain financial market fluctuations in terms
of changes in the institutional environment.




    18
     Unlike in earlier comparative statics, we do not change endowments so that the risk/no risk case
has the same riskfree rate. This is appropriate given that our aim is welfare comparison.


                                                 30
References

Aghion, P., Bolton, P., 1997. A theory of trickle-down growth and development. The
  Review of Economic Studies 64, 151­172.

Ai, H., Bhanderi, A., 2019. Asset pricing with uninsurable tail risk, working paper,
  University of Minnesota.

Altonji, J. G., 1993. The demand for and return to education when education outcomes
  are uncertain. Journal of Labor Economics 11, 48­83.

Banerjee, A. V., Newman, A. F., 1993. Occupational choice and the process of devel-
  opment. Journal of Political Economy 101, 274­298.

Barro, R. J., 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 823­866.

Berk, J. B., Stanton, R., Zechner, J., 2010. Human capital, bankruptcy, and capital
  structure. The Journal of Finance 65, 891­926.

Berk, J. B., Walden, J., 2013. Limited capital market participation and human capital
  risk. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 3, 1­37.

Bernanke, B. S., Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S., 1999. The financial accelerator in a quan-
  titative business cycle framework. In: Taylor, J., Woodford, M. (eds.), Handbook of
  Macroeconomics , Elsevier, vol. 1, pp. 1341­1393.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Sannikov, Y., 2014. A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector. American Economic Review 104, 379­421.

Campbell, J. Y., 2016. Restoring rational choice: The challenge of consumer financial
  regulation. American Economic Review 106, 1­30.



                                          31
Campbell, J. Y., Shiller, R. J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of
  future dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1, 195­228.

Card, D., 1999. The causal effect of education on earnings. In: Ashenfelter, O. C.,
  Card, D. (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics , Elsevier, vol. 3, chap. 30, pp. 1801
  ­ 1863.

Catherine, S., 2019. Countercyclical labor income risk and portfolio choices over the
  life cycle, working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Chetty, R., Guren, A., Manoli, D., Weber, A., 2011. Are micro and macro labor supply
  elasticities consistent? A review of evidence on the intensive and extensive margins.
  American Economic Review 101, 471­75.

Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M., 1992. Current real-business-cycle theories and ag-
  gregate labor-market fluctuations. American Economic Review 82, 430­450.

Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M. S., Trabandt, M., 2016. Unemployment and Business
  Cycles. Econometrica 84, 1523­1569.

Constantinides, G. M., Duffie, D., 1996. Asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers.
  Journal of Political Economy 104, 219­240.

Constantinides, G. M., Ghosh, A., 2017. Asset pricing with countercyclical household
  consumption risk. Journal of Finance 72, 415­460.

DeMarzo, P. M., Fishman, M. J., He, Z., Wang, N., 2012. Dynamic agency and the q
  theory of investment. Journal of Finance 67, 2295­2340.

Favilukis, J., Lin, X., 2014. Wage rigidity: A quantitative solution to several asset
  pricing puzzles. Fisher College of Business Working Paper .




                                          32
Gabaix, X., 2012. Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles
  in macro-finance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645­700.

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2010. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
  cycle analysis. In: Handbook of Monetary Economics , Elsevier, vol. 3, pp. 547­599.

Gourio, F., 2012. Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review 102,
  2734­66.

Guvenen, F., 2009. A parsimonious macroeconomic model for asset pricing. Economet-
  rica 77, 1711­1750.

Guvenen, F., Ozkan, S., Song, J., 2014. The nature of countercyclical income risk.
  Journal of Political Economy 122, 621­660.

Hansen, G. D., 1985. Indivisible labor and the business cycle. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 16, 309 ­ 327.

Hart, O., Moore, J., 1994. A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human
  capital. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841­879.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2012. A model of capital and crises. Review of Economic
  Studies 79, 735­777.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic Re-
  view 103, 732­70.

Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L. J., Todd, P. E., 2006. Earnings functions, rates of return
  and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond. In: Hanushek, E., Welch,
  F. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education , Elsevier, vol. 1, chap. 7, pp. 307
  ­ 458.




                                          33
Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real
  sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663­691.

Hungerford, T., Solon, G., 1987. Sheepskin effects in the returns to education. Review
  of Economics and Statistics 69, 175­177.

Jaeger, D. A., Page, M. E., 1996. Degrees matter: New evidence on sheepskin effects
  in the returns to education. Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 733­740.

Kaltenbrunner, G., Lochstoer, L. A., 2010. Long-run risk through consumption smooth-
  ing. Review of Financial Studies 23, 3190­3224.

Karabarbounis, L., Neiman, B., 2013. The global decline of the labor share. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 129, 61­103.

Kehoe, P., Lopez, P., Midrigan, V., Pastorino, E., 2019. Asset Prices and Unemploy-
  ment Fluctuations, federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report.

Kihlstrom, R. E., Laffont, J.-J., 1979. A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of
  firm formation based on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy 87, 719­748.

Kilic, M., Wachter, J. A., 2018. Risk, unemployment, and the stock market: A rare-
  event-based explanation of labor market volatility. The Review of Financial Studies
  31, 4762­4814.

Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of political economy 105, 211­248.

Levine, R., 2005. Finance and growth: Theory and evidence. In: Aghion, P., Durlauf,
  S. N. (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth , Elsevier, vol. 1, chap. 12, pp. 865 ­ 934.

Ljungqvist, L., 1993. Economic underdevelopment: The case of a missing market for
  human capital. Journal of Development Economics 40, 219 ­ 239.



                                          34
Lucas, Robert E., J., 2003. Macroeconomic priorities. American Economic Review 93,
  1­14.

Lucas, R. E., 1978. Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46, 1429­1445.

Prescott, E. C., 1992. Prosperity and depression. American Economic Review pp. 1­15.

Rogerson, R., 1988. Indivisible labor, lotteries and equilibrium. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 21, 3 ­ 16.

Schmidt, L., 2016. Climbing and falling off the ladder: Asset pricing implications of
  labor market evenet risk, mIT Sloan Working Paper 5500-16.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2011. Fire sales in finance and macroeconomics. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 25, 29­48.

Storesletten, K., Telmer, C. I., Yaron, A., 2007. Asset pricing with idiosyncratic risk
  and overlapping generations. Review of Economic Dynamics 10, 519­548.

Wachter, J. A., 2013. Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock
  market volatility? The Journal of Finance 68, 987­1035.




                                          35
A      Non-Convex Technology

This Appendix solves the model for the benchmark case of a non-convex technology.
Section A.1 characterizes the solution to the individual's optimization problem. Sec-
tion A.2 solves for equilibrium for a given level of Lagrange multipliers and inventory.
Section A.3 then describes the algorithm for computing the full solution.


A.1      Individual's Problem

In this section, we take the state price density  (·) as given and solve the problem
of an individual with access to a non-convex investment technology. We suppress the
superscript l, h. For a given time-0 endowment e, define the value function

                                                                
  V (e) =              max                (1 -  ) log(c0 ) +       log(c2 ( )) dF ( )
             {0c0 , 0c2 (·), o(·){0,1}}
                               
  such that: c0 + f - e             ( ){o( ) H + [1 - o( )](H0 + f ) - c2 ( )} dF ( ) (BC)

                     | o( ) = 1 :            c2 ( )  f                                  (IC)


Let  and µ(·) denote the Lagrange multipliers for (BC) and (IC) respectively. For
now, we take these, and o(·) as given, and solve for for optimal consumption plans
c0 (, µ(·), o(·)) and c2 ( ; , µ(·), o(·)).
    Because log is an increasing function,  > 0. Furthermore, µ(·)  0, and µ > 0 if
and only if c2 = f . Differentiating the Lagrangian associated with the individual's
problem above leads to the following first-order conditions:

                                                  1-
                                          c0 =                                          (A.1)
                                                   
                                                      
                                     c2 ( ) =                                           (A.2)
                                                   ( ) - µ( )

If o( ) = 0, the IC constraint does not bind, and thus µ( ) = 0. It follows that

                                                  36
c2 ( ) = /( ( )). If o( ) = 1, there are two cases:

  1. µ( ) > 0 and c2 ( ) = f .

  2. µ( ) = 0 and c2 ( ) = /( )  f

Therefore, c2 ( ) = max{/( ), f } and µ( ) = max{ - /(f ), 0}. We have shown
the following Lemma:

Lemma 1. Given a value for the Lagrange multiplier on (BC)  and a state-price
density  , the following equations summarize the optimal consumption plan:

                                             1-
                                      c0 =                                        (A.3)
                                              
                                 c2 ( )   ( )
                                          
                                                      if o( ) = 0
                       c2 ( ) =        {         }                                (A.4)
                                max      ( )
                                             , f      if o( ) = 1


   Having characterized the optimal consumption plans and the shadow price of (IC),
we now characterize the optimal occupational choice o( ; ). In each state of the world
 we consider a deviation in optimal o( ). A necessary condition for an occupational
plan to be optimal is that the alternative occupation in each  delivers a lower indirect
utility. Assuming a continuum of states, a deviation in a single o( ) should not affect
. In what follows, we treat  as fixed.
   The objective function in terms of o is


       U (o(·)) =  log c2 (o(·)) +  [o(·)(H - f - H0 ) - c2 (o(·))] + const.      (A.5)


where the constant term is not a function of o(·). Define

                                             f 
                                      x
                                              


                                           37
Note that x is the ratio of f to c2 , the optimal frictionless consumption (taking  and

 as given). This dimensionless quantity, which summarizes the effects of the agent's
choices on the budget constraint through , and the effect of prices  , is the focus of
our analysis.
   First consider x  1, corresponding to c2 > f . Optimal consumption simply equals

c2 = c2 = /( ) and is independent of occupational choice o. Because H > f + H0 ,

the individual loses nothing by investment, and in fact gains because of the greater
productivity. To summarize, when x  1, U (o(·)) is a strictly increasing function of
o(·), and thus o(·) = 1.
   The interesting case is x > 1. Define scaled gain to investment:

                                           H - f - H0
                                  ( ) 
                                              f

Define
                       u(x;  )  log x + ( - 1)x + 1,       x > 1.                  (A.6)

It follows from the definition of u that


                            u = U |o=1 - U |o=0      x > 1,                        (A.7)


where we note that the utility difference on the right-hand side depends only on x,
holding  constant.
   Recall the economic tradeoffs that (A.6 ­A.7) represent: when the individual invests
in human capital, she consumes a greater amount f (x > 1 implies f > c2 ). That

is better in terms of utility (as represented by the log term). The choice to invest also
leads to more resources, as indicated by x. However, consumption is expensive, as
captured by -x.

Observation 1. Suppose   1. Then o = 1.

                                            38
For x  1, o = 1 as we observe previously. For x > 1, Observation 1 follows from the
fact that u > 0 when   1. Intuitively, when production is very successful, there are
plenty of resources to satisfy the IC constraint.

Observation 2. Suppose  = 0. Then (for x > 1), o(0) = 0.

Observation 2 follows from the fact that u(1) =  . Because u < 0 over the relevant
range, u < 0 when x > 1. When production is unsuccessful, the extra compensation
required by agents when x > 1 is a waste of resources.
Observations 1 and 2 serve as boundary conditions. The main case of interest is the
following:

Observation 3. Suppose   (0, 1). Then u takes its unique global maximum at
x = 1/(1 -  ).

Observation 3 follows from the fact that u (x ) = 0, and that u < 0.

Observation 4. Suppose   (0, 1). Then there is a unique value xc > x such that
u(xc ) = 0. Moreover, o = 0 if and only if x > xc .

For x defined in Observation 3, u(x ) > 0. Moreover, limx u(x) < 0. The existence
of xc such that u(xc ) = 0 follows from the continuity of u. Note also that u < 0 for
x > x ; hence, xc is unique. Thus u > 0 for x < xc and u < 0 for x > xc . Observation 4
follows.
   Intuitively, the log of consumption grows more slowly than the linear term in con-
sumption. When the difference between optimal frictionless consumption and con-
sumption required by the IC constraint grows sufficiently large, the cost of supporting
this consumption (linear in x) must dominate the utility gain (log in x). The cut-off
point xc is the point at which the linear term starts to dominate the log term.
We combine these results into the following proposition:


                                           39
Proposition 1. The optimal labor choice o = 1 if x < xc , o = 0 if x > xc . If x = xc ,
the agent is indifferent between o = 0, 1. The cut-off point xc satisfies

                                         
                                                      1
                                         
                                  xc =      > 1   (0, 1)
                                         
                                             1        =0


For   (0, 1), xc uniquely solves the fixed point problem:


                                    x = 1 + x + log x.                              (A.8)


Finally, xc is increasing in  .

Proof. It suffices to consider the case   (0, 1) Define


                                  F (x;  )  1 + x + log x.


First note that for
                                         xc = F (xc ;  ),

u(xc ) = 0. Thus, if xc solves the fixed-point problem, it is the cut-off point defined in
Observation 4. Moreover, manipulating (A.8) implies xc > 1/(1 -  ) > 1. The result
that xc is increasing in  follows from taking a total derivative of u with respect to
.


A.2     Market Clearing

Proposition 1 of the previous section characterized o(·) in terms of x (ratio of f to
c2 ), for a given  (gain from investment). Note that x is a positive scalar multiple of

the state-price density  , whereas  is a linear function of TFP  . In equilibrium, of


                                                 40
course, there will be a one-to-one mapping between  and  , but for now, it is useful
to think of them separately. The economic content of Proposition 1 is that (provided
productivity is in an intermediate range), there are state prices that are sufficiently
high for which it no longer is optimal to supply human capital.
   Thus the previous section solves for o(·) as a function of  (·). Now we solve for  (·)
as a function of occupational choice o(·) using the market clearing condition (MC) and
the relative population of - and h-individuals, taking as given the resources stored in
inventory I and marginal utility of wealth for - and for h-individuals  and h . We
make the following assumptions on the parameters.

Assumption 1. The endowment of the h-individual, eh is sufficiently large that oh ( ) =
1 for all  .

Assumption 1 requires that eh be high enough so that, in equilibrium, h is small, and
thus c2 ( ) is sufficiently high across all states so that (IC) does not bind.


Assumption 2. There exists a  such that, for all -individuals, o( ) = 1.

Assumption 2 states that all low cash-on-hand individuals invest in human capital in
some states of the world.
We make an assumption on the type of equilibrium permitted.

Assumption 3. Equilibrium does not permit endogenous inequality. Namely,  is the
same across otherwise homogenous agents.

Assumption 3 allows us to restrict attention to symmetric equilibria.
   At the optimum, market clearing conditions are (piecewise) linear functions of the
inverses of Lagrange multipliers and of state prices. It is convenient to define the




                                            41
following notation for these inverses:


                                ^ j  1/j
                                                j = , h, I

                              ^ (·)  1/ (·)
                              

                             ^c ( )  1/xc ( )
                             x




   Also define:


                     e  eI + mh eh + m e ,       total endowment
                         (e - I - f )
                     ^ 
                     e
                         (1 -  )f
                        I + mh H + m (f + H0 )
                     y 
                                   f
                        ^
                        
                     z      .
                        f

Here, z is the per-capita consumption of -individuals, scaled by f . Note that


                                         z^=x


from the previous section. Finally, y equals "base" output (namely, output if no -
individuals invest), scaled by f . Like  (scaled gain from investment), y is increasing
in TFP  .
   With this new notation, we can restate Proposition 1:

                             
                              1                 if    z        ^c
                                                       ^ ( ) > x
                             
                      o ( ) = 0  ·  1           if    z        ^c
                                                       ^ ( ) = x                 (A.9)
                             0                  if    z        ^c
                                                       ^ ( ) < x


                                          42
            ^c ( ) = 1/xc ( ) is strictly decreasing with   [0, 1], x
Recall that x                                                       ^c = 0 if   1 and
                      ^c  1 -  .
^c = 1 if  = 0. Also, x
x
   We now use the market-clearing conditions to characterize  as a function of optimal
occupational choice o. We will show that  and o solve a system of two equations in
two unknowns. Proposition 2 describes the solutions as functions of  :

Proposition 2. Given  and I , there exist three cut-off points, 0 , c , and f such
that the equilibrium occupational plan and state-price density satisfy
                                
                                o = 0
                        0 :                                                       (A.10)
                                 ^ = y/e
                                       ^
                                
                                o = (y - x  ^/z )/[m (1 -  - x
                                         ^c e                ^c )]
                0    c :                                                          (A.11)
                                   ^c /z
                                 ^=x
                                
                                o = 1
                c    f :                                                          (A.12)
                                 ^ = [y + m ( - 1)]/(^
                                                     e - m z )
                                
                                o = 1
                     f   :                                                        (A.13)
                                 ^ = (y + m  )/e
                                               ^


   Proposition 2 describes four regions of the state space. For  sufficiently low (below
0 ), no -individual invests in human capital. The state-price density equals its value in
a frictionless economy (given a values for  and I ). For   [0 , c ], some -individuals
invest. Those that invest consume at a constrained level. In this region, an additional
unit of investment leads to lower resources and higher state prices, because individuals
must be compensated at rates greater than their productivity. For   [c , f ], all -
individuals invest, and consume at the constrained level. At some point in this region,
state prices become independent of occupational choice, as -types consume exactly

                                           43
what they produce. Finally, for   f , all individuals invest, and consumption is once
again unconstrained. State prices are what they would be in a frictionless economy.

Proof. We normalize m + mh = 1. Recall that mI = 1. The time-0 market clearing
condition is:


                (1 -  )[eI + mh ^ h + m ^  ] = eI + mh eh + m e -f - I            (MC-0)
                                                         e


where we replace the optimal consumption choices by the outcome of agents' maxi-
mization problems. Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that the economy must set aside the
full cost f at time 0 for potential use at time 1, because there are some states of the
world in which all individuals will invest in human capital.
   The time-2 market clearing condition is


   [eI ^ + mh ^h^ + m (1 - o )^^ ] + m o max{ ^^ , f } =

                                   I + (mh + m o )H + m (1 - o )(f + H0 ). (MC-2)


where o  [0, 1] is the fraction of -individuals investing in human capital at time 1.
Because we are interested in ^ as a function of o , for now, we treat this value as fixed.
   The left-hand side of (MC-2) is a piecewise linear function of ^ . It follows that:


                                    ^ = min{
                                            ^f , ^  },                             (A.14)


where ^ f and ^  solve (MC-2) over the relevant range:

                   I + mh H + m (f + H0 ) + m o (H - f - H0 )
          ^ 
                                                                                   (A.15)
                               [eI + mh ^ h + m ^]
                   I + mh H + m (f + H0 ) + m o (H - f - H0 ) - m o f
          ^f 
                                                                                   (A.16)
                                [eI + mh ^ h + m (1 - o )^]



                                           44
(see Figure A.1).
   We use (MC-0) and the notation defined above to substitute out ^ h and to simplify

(A.15) and (A.16):

                                      y + m o
                               ^ =
                                                                                      (A.17)
                                           e
                                           ^
                                      y + m ( - 1)o
                               ^f
                                    =                                                 (A.18)
                                         ^ - m zo
                                         e

Note that ^  is the state-price density in the frictionless economy. Equations A.17
and A.18 imply that ^ =                 e - yz )/z . The left-hand side of (MC-2)
                        ^ f when m o = (^
indicates that this must occur when exactly when the frictionless consumption equals
f .
                                   ^(1 -  ) and zy  e
   We now consider two cases, zy < e                ^(1 -  ).


             ^(1 -  )
Case 1: zy < e

It follows from (A.18) that ^ f is decreasing in o , and also ^f < ^  , for o > 0, with
^f = 
     ^  for o = 0.
   Define 0 such that
                                    y (0 )   ^c (0 )
                                             x
                                           =                                          (A.19)
                                       e
                                       ^        z

The left-hand side of (A.19) is ^ from (A.18), assuming o = 0. The right-hand side is ^
from (A.9), also assuming o = 0. Therefore, o = 0, together with state prices defined
                                                                               ^c ( )
                                                                               x
by (A.19) represents an equilibrium. Moreover, for all values of  < 0 , ^<       z
                                                                                      .   Thus
                                         y (0 )
o = 0, again combined with ^ given by       e
                                            ^
                                                  represents an equilibrium.
   Figure A.2 Panel A illustrates the equilibrium. The blue line is ^ = ^ f as a
function of o and  , from (A.18). The red line is o as a function of ^ and  , from
(A.9). Equilibrium is at the intersection point. Increasing  shifts the ^ curve to the
right and the o curve to the left. At  = 0 is the maximal value of  at which o = 0



                                          45
represents an equilibrium.
   The economic content is as follows: we know from Proposition 1 that there are state
prices high enough at which -individuals cannot invest. Provided that  is sufficiently
low, this is consistent with equilibrium, because  and state prices are inversely related
(this is in spite of the fact that, for low  , investment on the part of -individuals raises
state prices).
   Now define c as
                             y (c ) - m (1 -  (c ))   ^c (c )
                                                      x
                                                    =
                                     ^ - m z
                                     e                   z

Because the left hand side is again ^ f (for o = 1), this represents an equilibrium.
For   (0 , c ), the unique equilibrium (for a given  and I ) occurs when (A.18) and
     ^c /z is satisfied ­ this pins down o  (0, 1).
^f = x



Case 2: zy  e
            ^(1 -  )

It follows from (A.18) that ^ f is increasing in o . By assumption, in this case

                                     y  1- ^c
                                           x
                                            ,
                                     e
                                     ^   z z

where the last inequality follows from Proposition 1. Note that y/e
                                                                  ^ equals ^ when
o = 0. Because ^ f is increasing in o over this range, it follows that equilibrium is
reached when o = 1 (see Panel B of figure Figure A.2, Panel B).
   The question of whether ^ =   or  f depends on the value of  . Note that for
finite f satisfying
                                     ^/z - y (f )
                                     e
                                                  =1                                 (A.20)
                                       m  (f )

^f = ^  from (A.17) and (A.18) (note that we have used o = 1). For  <  f , ^=^f <
^  : state prices are high enough that the individual consumes at the constrained level.





                                            46
For  >  f the (IC) is satisfied even for unconstrained consumption. To summarize:
                            
                                  y + m 
                             ^ =                            if   f ,
                         ^=          e
                                     ^
                                  y - m (1 -  )
                             ^f =                           if   f .
                                     ^ - m z
                                     e




   We then need to solve for  and I , using budget constraint for a -individual, and
                                                                           
the optimal decision by the investors to invest in the inventory: I = 0 if  dF < 1;
                     
otherwise, I > 0 and dF = 1.


A.3      Numerical Algorithm and Equilibrium Selection

In principle, we have not ruled out multiple equilibria. We select the equilibrium with
the lowest level of inventory I (as it is the inferior technology), and the lowest value of
 .19
   We conjecture inventory I = 0. Given this I , we solve for  ; to do so, we start
with the lowest possible value of  , solved from frictionless-world with  = 0, then we
solve for o and  using analytical expressions above and see if budget constraint for
a -individual holds; if not, we incrementally increase  and solve for a new partial
                                                                      
equilibrium at time 2. After solving for a  , given I = 0, we check if dF  1. If yes,
we are done; otherwise, we incrementally increase I , solving for  as just described.
We iterate on these two loops (the inner loop in which we solve for  and the outer
                                    
loop in which we solve for I ) until dF = 1.
  19
      Could equilibria exist with higher  ? Conjecture that such an equilibrium existed. Because
frictionless time-2 consumption would be lower, the financing constraint might start to bind at a
lower value of the state-prices. This would confirm the lower wealth consistent with higher  . For
simplicity, we rule out these (potential) equilibria.




                                               47
B        Convex technology

B.1          Individual's Problem

In this section, we take the state price density  (·) as given and solve the problem of
an individual with access to a convex technology. We suppress the superscript , h. For
a given time-0 endowment e, define the value function

                                                                
         c
    V (e) =              max              (1 -  ) log(c0 ) +       log(c2 ( )) dF ( )
                 {0c0 , 0c2 (·),0o(·)1}
                                 
    such that: c0 + f - e             ( ){o( ) H + [1 - o( )](H0 + f ) - c2 ( )} dF ( )

                        :      c2 ( )  o( )f                                              (IC')


Proposition 3. Given a set of equilibrium prices, V c (e)  V (e).

Proof. The optimal solution to the contracting problem in the benchmark model with
nonconvex technology meets the feasibility and incentive compatibility constraint in
the program with convex technology.

    Define the shadow price of budget constraint by  and the shadow price of incentive
compatibility constraint (IC') after scaling by risk neutral probabilities with µ(·)  0.
Given  and µ(·), the optimal consumption plan follows

                                            (1 -  )
                                     c0 =                                                 (B.1)
                                               
                                                     1
                                     c2   =                                               (B.2)
                                             - µ( )  ( )

    We now jointly solve for µ(·) and o(·). Suppose         1
                                                             ( )
                                                                     f . In this case the scale
of operation would be the maximal first-best level: o = 1 as (IC') does not bind. Also
µ = 0.
                              1
    Now consider the case      ( )
                                     < f . The Lagrangian is linear with o. Therefore, the

                                                48
FOC for occupational choice is independent of o:


                      [H - H0 - f ] = µ( )f  µ( ) =  ( )                       (B.3)


where as defined before  ( ) := (H - f - H0 )/f . The optimal o follows

                             
                              0       if µ( ) >  ( )
                             
                       o( ) = 0  .  1 if µ( ) =  ( )                           (B.4)
                             1        if µ( ) <  ( )


Note that µ >  is impossible, as it implies o = 0 for which eq. (IC') doesn't bind; a
contradiction to µ > 0. In the intermediate case µ( ) =  ( ), however, the optimal
scale o( ) is pinned down from (IC') which holds with equality (since µ > 0) jointly
with eq (B.2). This is the case if such solution to o( ) indeed satisfies o( )  1. In
case the individual reaches to the full capacity o = 1, µ( ) <  ( ) and (IC') with
o = 1 together with eq (B.2) solves µ( ). This is the case if such solution to µ( )
indeed satisfies µ( ) <  ( ). Straightforward calculation delivers the condition for
which each of these cases happens.
   Here is the compact form of expressing optimal consumption and occupational
choice followed from different cases above.




                                          49
                                         
           µ( ) = min { max {  -            , 0 } ,  }                            (B.5)
                                         f 
                  
                                                                    
                  1                                if    (1 -  ) 
              o =                                                   f             (B.6)
                          
                                                   otherwise
                    f (1 -  )
                  
                                                           
                                             if         
                                                           f 
                  
                                                                        
             c2 =   f                        if              , (1 -  )            (B.7)
                                                        f               f 
                                                        
                                             if             (1 -  )
                    (1 -  )                             f 
                  (1 -  )
             c0 =                                                                 (B.8)
                     

Observation 5. If  ( )  1 Then o = 1.

   This result is similar to Observation 1 in the non-convex technology case.

Observation 6. The optimal scale of option is always positive: o > 0.

   As long as either e or H0 is positive, the individual would have a finite  and
positive time-2 consumption. Then there would exist small enough, but positive scale
of operation to satisfy eq. (IC'). This contradict the results of non-convex technology,
for which the optimal choice might be to not invest in human capital for positive
measure states of the world.

Observation 7. There are some states of the world, for which the individual with
access to non-convex technology would invest: o = 1, but the with convex technology
would invest not at the full scale: o < 1.

   To see why, consider some  < 1. The condition to operate at scales less than one
from above is if z ^ is less than (1 -  ). However, from our discussion of non-convex

                                                  50
technology we know individual invests as long as z                              ^c < 1 - 
                                                                     ^c , where x
                                                   ^ is greater than x
                                                            ^c < z 
as is discussed before. Therefore, in this non-empty range: x      ^ < 1 -  the scale
of operation with convex technology is less than the one with non-convex technology.
Intuitively, with convex technology the individual is not forced to go all the way up to
the full scale and pay a high shadow price of meeting incentive compatibility constraint.


B.2       Market Clearing

Having characterized the optimal scale of investment o(·) given  (·) at each state,
we now characterize  ( ) given o( ) using the market clearing equation. This will
determine equilibrium outcomes for a given the Lagrange multiplier  and inventory
I,
      The market clearing condition for time 0 is still (MC-0). However, there is an
important difference in market clearing at time 2 between the convex and non-convex
cases. Instead of having a fraction o of individuals investing at full scale, now all the
-individuals run at potentially less than full scale. This is reflected in time-2 aggregate
consumption.


     eI ^ + mh  ^h^ + m max{ ^^ , o f } =

                                I + (mh + m o )H + m (1 - o )(f + H0 )             (MC-2)


We can solve for  as a function of  , at a given o . Using the notations we defined
        ^ :=  (e - I - f )/[(1 -  )f ], y := [I + mh H + m (f + H0 )]/(f ) and
before: e




                                            51
z := ^  /f , we have


                                         y + m o 
                                    ^ =
                                                                                   (B.9)
                                             e
                                             ^
                                      y + m  
                                             o ( - 1)
                                 ^F =
                                                                                  (B.10)
                                          ^ - m z
                                          e
                                   ^ = min{
                                           ^, ^F }                                (B.11)


Note that o is no longer in the denominator of the "distorted" state-price density (^
                                                                                     F ).
As a result ^F > ^ f for any given o < 1 (namely the distorted state price is higher in
the economy with non-convex investment).
   We now characterize equilibrium outcomes.

Proposition 4. Time 2 equilibrium objects  and o as functions of  , given I and  ,
are specified by


                                  
                                  o = yz/[^
                                          e(1 -  )]
                         C :                                                      (B.12)
                                   ^ = y/e
                                         ^
                                  
                                  o = 1
                   C    F :                                                       (B.13)
                                   ^ = [y + m ( - 1)]/(^
                                                       e - m z )
                                  
                                  o = 1
                       F   :                                                      (B.14)
                                   ^ = (y + m  )/e
                                                 ^


   where the cutoff thresholds C and F solve

                                  1 -  (C )     y (C )
                                             =                                    (B.15)
                                      z            e
                                                   ^
                                          y (F )z
                                  1=                                              (B.16)
                                      e^ - m  (F )z


                                           52
Proof. Recall from the individual's problem that if o < 1, the -individual consumes at
the constrained level c2 = of ; hence, the market clearing condition delivers ^=^F .
This is a key property, as we can claim that by increasing  , first, the operation scale
becomes one, and then the state price switches from constrained to unconstrained
version. We can define two cut-off thresholds for  , called C and F , similar to what
we did with non-convex technology, such that the equilibrium at time 2 features o < 1
and ^=^ F if  is small enough:  < C , o = 1 and ^=^ F in an intermediate range
of  : C   < F , and finally o = 1 and ^=^  if  is large enough: F   .



C       Non-Convex Technology, No Commitment

The optimal contract between a -individual and investors now should satisfy ex-post
incentive of investors to fund an individual, in any state of the world with ex-ante
planned investment in human capital. Given  (·), define the value function as a func-
tion of e by

                                                                  
    m
 V (e) =                 max                (1 -  ) log(c0 ) +       log(c2 ( )) dF ( )
               {0c0 , 0c2 (·), o(·){0,1}}
                               
 such that: c0 + f - e              ( ){o( ) H + [1 - o( )](H0 + f ) - c2 ( )} dF ( ) (BC)

                     | o( ) = 1 :            c2 ( )  f                                    (IC-1)

                     | o( ) = 1 :            H - c2 ( )  f                                (IC-2)


The left hand side of (IC-2) shows the gross return to investors which is project's return
minus consumption of the individual, and the left hand side shows the investment cost.
    First, we take the shadow price of budget constraint  and occupational choice
o(·) as given and solve for the optimal consumption. Note that o( ) = 1 requires




                                                   53
H - f  f in order to have a nonempty feasible set for c2 ( ).


                                                   (1- )
                                            c0 =     
                        
                        c2 ( ) :=
                                     1
                                                              if o( ) = 0
                                      ( )
             c2 ( ) =
                        min{ max{ c2 ( ) , f } , H - f }      if o( ) = 1


   Now we take one step back to solve for the optimal o( ), and the market clearing
price  ( ). Two cases should be considered separately.


Case 1: H - f < f .

We have o ( ) = 0 for sure as the feasible set for c             
                                                    2 ( ) given o = 1 is empty. Total

output in this state of the world is I + mh H + m (f + H0 ) and just obtained in
the benchmark economy with commitment and   0 the state price is derived by
    (1- )[I +mh H +m (f +H0 )]
=             (e-I -f )
                               .


Case 2: H - f  f .

In this case, o = 1 could be the case; however, by switching from o = 0 to o = 1 the
constrained consumption c2 ( ) may be distorted from the frictionless choice c2 ( ). We

need to consider three possible outcomes separately.


- Case 2.a. f  c2 ( )  H - f . The optimal occupation is o = 1, as c2 = c2
                                                                         


is not distorted by switching from o = 0 to o = 1; meanwhile, o = 1 expands the
budget constraint; hence, it is preferred.


- Case 2.b. c                                            
             2 ( ) < f . In this case c2 = c2 = /( ) if o = 0 and c2 = f >

/( ) if o = 1. Similar to the benchmark environment with commitment, o = 1 if




                                               54
and only if u  0, where
                              u(x) = log x + ( - 1)x + 1

Recall that x := f  ( )/ and  ( ) := (H - f - H0 )/f . This results in the same
condition o = 1 if and only if x  xc where xc as in the benchmark case is the solution
to u(x) = 0.


- Case 2.c. c2 ( ) > H - f . In this case c2 |o=1 = H - f < c2 . Therefore, if the
                                                             


individual decides to invest: o = 1 then (IC-1) would not bind. However, investing is
not necessary the optimal choice. If the individual invests, she will expand her budget,
but at the same time she is forced to consume less (H - f ) than the amount she would
be allowed to consume at o = 0 (i.e. c2 ).

   Define  := (H - f )/f . We can simplify trade-offs to conclude that the optimal
occupation follows o = 1 if and only if v  0, where


                          v (x) := log x - ( -  )x + 1 + log 


Proposition 5. There exits a unique xi <  -1 as the solution to v = 0; we have v > 0
for any x > xi and v < 0 for any x < xi . We know xi is decreasing with  and  . The
optimal occupational choice follows o = 1 if and only if xi  x.                       

Proof. As by assumption f  H - f < /( ), we have 1   < x-1 ; therefore,
x <  -1 . Also, as H0  0, we have    . In the limit x   -1 , v converges to a
positive number, which is v  / . In the limit x  0, v converges to minus infinity.
v takes its maximum at x-
                        m =  -  which is outside of the permissible range for x
                          1


(recall that  < x-1 ); for any x below xm , v is strictly increasing with x. Therefore,
there is a unique solution to v = 0.




                                             55
Summary

We can summarize the result of all cases specified above as follows in order to solve for
the optimal o ( ) for a given  ( ).
   If H - f < f , i.e.  < 1, then o = 0, for any  . The market clearing condition
solves  as in the case  < c in the benchmark case with commitment.
   Now consider the interesting cases in which H - f  f . As before, we define
z :=   
       f 
          ,   x := /z , ^ :=  -1 , x
                                   ^c := x- 1
                                                ^i := x-
                                          c and x
                                                         1
                                                                     ^c < 1 -  <  < x
                                                       i . Note that x              ^i
based on the proposition above and the arguments of the benchmark section.
   The blue curves show market clearing relationship between ^ = min{^f , ^  } and o
in the two cases 2.a and 2.b analyzed above as it is derived in the benchmark section.
Arrows show the shift in curves and cut-offs as a result of an increase in  .
   The right vertical section of o (·) is the impact of no-commitment friction. As
 increases the time-2 equilibrium shifts from o = 0 toward o = 1 since the blue
curve ^ f starts to cross the left vertical part of o . Once  passes c (see definition in
previous section) the blue curve ^ f crosses the left-top corner of the red curve o (·) and
the economy sets at o = 1; further increase in  increases ^ just as in the benchmark
economy. However, since both the blue curves ^ f and ^  are increasing with  the
equilibrium may switch back to o < 1 as the blue curves might cross the right vertical
part of o (·). I show below that this never happens; because, the right vertical part of
o (·) also shift to the right by increasing  and it shifts at a faster pace. See the technical
details at the end of this section. We have established the following proposition.

Proposition 6. The time-2 equilibrium of the economy ( ( ), o ( )) with no commit-
ment on the investors side is the same as the benchmark economy with commitment,
as long as f  H - f . Otherwise, the equilibrium simply features o = 0 and ^=y
                                                                             e
                                                                             ^
                                                                               .

   Having characterized time-2 equilibrium outcomes: o (·),  (·) at each  , we turn to
numerically solve for  and I . We follow the same algorithm and equilibrium selection

                                             56
approach as in the benchmark economy with commitment.
   We solve for this economy and report results in Table C.1 and Figure A.3). The
overall economy is much poorer and less stable in this case, but the outside investors
take less risk (reflected in a lower volatility of dividends). As a result, the equity
premium is slightly lower in this case. This is not to say that investors are insulated
from the negative affects of inability to enforce financial contracts. They still bear part
of the cost of lower aggregate consumption, in the form of lower dividends. Thus a
decline in financial sophistication would, through a cash flow channel, be expected to
lead to a decline in stock prices.




                                            57
                                Table 1: Model Summary
t=0                             t=1                                 t=2
- Individuals trade Arrow       - State of the world is realized.   - Individuals choose to work or
securities with investors.      - Individuals choose an             shirk.
- investors may put resources   occupation.                         - Returns are realized and
into inventory.                 - Investment costs are financed.    security payments are settled.
                                                                    - Everyone consumes her wealth
                                                                    and dies.




                                             58
                               Table 2: Parameter values


                           Panel A: Technology, Preferences
        Time-discount rate                                                   0.95
        Return on investment in the traditional sector H0                      0
        Fixed cost of investment in the non-traditional sector f               1
        Average return on investment in the non-traditional sector H        1.965
        Average TFP, E ( )                                                     1
        Volatility of the log of TFP,  (log( ))                              0.1
                           Panel B: Population, Endowments
        Mass of -individuals m                                               0.5
        Mass of h-individuals mh                                             0.5
        Mass of outside investors mI                                          1
        Endowment of -individuals e                                         0.049
        Endowment of h-individuals eh                                       1.049
        Endowment of outside investors eI                                   0.549
                               Panel C: Financing friction
        Private benefit (as fraction of f ),                                  1

Notes: The table reports parameter values for the benchmark calibration. We set the
initial endowments to eh = f + , e =  and eI =  + m        m
                                                             I f , and calibrate the single

free parameter  so that the risk-free rate in the frictionless economy equals  -1 . This
implies  = .049. In effect we assume that the high cash-on-hand individuals are able
to pay the investment cost (f ) out-of-pocket, whereas low cash-on-hand individuals
are not. We calibrate H so that economic disasters (periods when low-cash-on-hand
individuals are not fully employed) occur 5% of the time.




                                            59
                    Table 3: Asset prices and cash flow volatility

 Economic Environment                                   Non-Convex Convex Frictionless

                              Panel A: Benchmark Specification

 Risk free rate (%)                                          0.00        0.00        5.26
 Equity premium, Dividend claim (%)                          2.17        2.02        1.06
 Equity premium, Aggregate consumption claim (%)             1.32        1.35        1.06
  (R), Dividend claim                                        0.19        0.18        0.11
  (R), Aggregate consumption claim                           0.12        0.12        0.11
  (log D), Dividend                                          0.18        0.17        0.10
  (log C ), Aggregate consumption                            0.12        0.12        0.10
  (log C ), -individual consumption                          0.44        0.18        0.10
                                      Panel B: High H

 Risk free rate (%)                                          0.00        0.00        5.26
 Equity premium, Dividend claim (%)                          2.72        2.61        1.06
 Equity premium, Aggregate consumption claim (%)             1.33        1.33        1.06
  (R), Dividend claim                                        0.21        0.20        0.11
  (R), Aggregate consumption claim                           0.10        0.10        0.11
  (log D), Dividend                                          0.20        0.20        0.10
  (log C ), Aggregate consumption                            0.10        0.10        0.10
  (log C ), -individual consumption                          0.00        0.03        0.10
                                  Panel C: High H and m

 Risk free rate (%)                                          0.00        0.00        5.26
 Equity premium, Dividend claim (%)                          3.91        3.51        1.06
 Equity premium, Aggregate consumption claim (%)             1.94        1.93        1.06
  (R), Dividend claim                                        0.21        0.20        0.11
  (R), Aggregate consumption claim                           0.10        0.11        0.11
  (log D), Dividend                                          0.20        0.19        0.10
  (log C ), Aggregate consumption                            0.10        0.11        0.10
  (log C ), -individual consumption                          0.07        0.07        0.10

Notes: We consider three types of economies (non-convex technology, convex technol-
ogy, frictionless), and three parameterizations. In the non-convex economy, individuals'
occupational choice is in the set {0,1}, as Section 2 describes. Appendix B describes
the economy with the convex technology. Section 3 describes the economy without
frictions. Table 2 describes the parameters for the benchmark case. For the case with
a higher payout of the technology (high H ), H = 2. For the case with a greater per-
centage of low cash-on-hand individuals high m , m = 1 and mh = 0. In each panel,
endowments are adjusted so that the riskfree rate in the frictionless case equals  -1
(see Table 2). The dividend claim equals the payout to outside investors of investing
in the low cash-on-hand individuals.



                                          60
                             Table 4: Wealth across agents

        Economic Environment               Non-Convex     Convex     Frictionless

                          Panel A: Marginal Utility of Wealth
                                                7.37        3.96         1.12
        h                                       0.50        0.50         0.53
        I                                       1.82        1.82         1.82
                                    Panel B: Wealth
        -individuals                            0.96        0.95         0.90
        h-individuals                           1.99        1.99         1.90
        Investors                               0.55        0.55         0.55
        Aggregate                               3.50        3.49         3.34
                           Panel C: Value of Human Capital
        -individuals                            0.91        0.90         0.85
        h-individuals                           0.94        0.94         0.85
        Investors                               0.00        0.00         0.00
        Aggregate                               1.85        1.84         1.70
                    Panel D: Utility, Consumption Equivalent Value
        -individuals                            0.71        0.75         0.78
        h-individuals                           1.64        1.64         1.64
        Investors                               0.45        0.45         0.47

Notes: We report the Lagrange multipliers , total wealth (both cash-on-hand and
human capital), human capital wealth, and the consumption equivalent of indirect
utility (the consumption level for which the log equals indirect utility V ). Values are
reported for the three types of agents:  and h-individuals, and investors (I ). We
report wealth in units of time-0 consumption in each economy. Wealth includes time-0
consumption. Non-convex refers to the benchmark case of a non-convex choice set for
human capital investment. Convex refers to the case of the convex choice set. Both
cases imply financial frictions. The last column reports values for the frictionless case.




                                           61
                 Table 5: Welfare implications of risk and frictions

                       Non-convex technology          Frictionless economy
                       With risk Without risk        With risk Without risk
                        Panel A: Marginal Utility of Wealth
                         7.37          3.67             1.12           1.12
       h                 0.50          0.50             0.53           0.53
       I                 1.82          1.82             1.82           1.82
                                  Panel B: Wealth
       -individuals      0.96          1.01             0.90           0.90
       h-individuals     1.99          2.01             1.90           1.90
       Investors         0.55          0.55             0.55           0.55
       Aggregate         3.50          3.58             3.34           3.34
                         Panel C: Value of Human Capital
       -individuals      0.91          0.96             0.85           0.85
       h-individuals     0.94          0.96             0.85           0.85
       Investors         0.00          0.00             0.00           0.00
       Aggregate         1.85          1.93             1.70           1.70
                  Panel D: Utility, Consumption Equivalent Value
       -individuals      0.71          0.81             0.78           0.78
       h-individuals     1.64          1.65             1.64           1.65
       Investors         0.45          0.45             0.47           0.48

Notes: We report economic outcomes as in Table 4 for the economy with a nonconvex
technology in absence of risk:  (log( )) = 0 (second and fourth columns) and compare
it to the benchmark case with risk:  (log( )) = 0.1 (first and third columns). The
third and fourth columns assume no frictions ( = 1). The first column corresponds
to the benchmark case (and column 1 in Table 4).




                                         62
      Table C.1: Asset prices and cash flow volatility: The role of commitment


Economic Environment                                   Non-Convex Convex No Commit. Frictionless

Risk free rate (%)                                         0.00       0.00       0.00      5.26
Equity premium, Dividend claim (%)                         2.17       2.02       1.79      1.06
Equity premium, Aggregate consumption claim (%)            1.32       1.35       2.34      1.06
 (R), Dividend claim                                       0.19       0.18       0.17      0.11
 (R), Aggregate consumption claim                          0.12       0.12       0.22      0.11
 (log D), Dividend                                         0.18       0.17       0.16      0.10
 (log C ), Aggregate consumption                           0.12       0.12       0.21      0.10
 (log C ), -individual consumption                         0.44       0.18       0.95      0.10

Notes: We compare the economy with no-commitment, which we describe in Ap-
pendix C, with the three other types of economies, under the benchmark calibration.
See Table 3 for further detail. We report the riskfree rate, the average return on vari-
ous risky assets less the riskfree rate (Equity premium), and the standard deviation of
various quantities and log quantities.




                                          63
             Figure 1: Occupational choice for the low-cash-on hand agent




     1




     0



         0            0.2             0.4             0.6             0.8              1



Notes: The figure shows the occupational choice for the constrained agent as a function
of TFP  , where the x-axis reports the value of the cumulative distribution function
CDF( ). For example, an x-value of 0.4 represents  at the bottom 40% of the dis-
tribution. o ( ) is the occupational choice for the low cash-on-hand individual. The
solid line represents the frictionless case, the dashed line the case with the non-convex
technology (with frictions), and the dashed-dotted line the case with the convex tech-
nology.




                                            64
                          Figure 2: Aggregate consumption
      3

    2.8

    2.6

    2.4

    2.2

      2

    1.8

    1.6

    1.4

    1.2

      1
          0            0.2            0.4            0.6            0.8             1


Notes: The figure shows aggregate consumption in the final period as a function of
TFP  , where the x-axis shows CDF( ). For example, an x-value of 0.4 represents 
at the bottom 40% of the distribution. C2 ( ) is aggregate consumption in the second
period. The solid line represents the frictionless case, the dashed line the case with
the non-convex technology (with frictions), and the dashed-dotted line the case with
the convex technology.




                                            65
                         Figure 3: Payouts to investors and to individuals
            Panel A: Dividend to investors             Panel B: Consumption of -individuals
    2                                                  1.4


  1.8                                                  1.2

  1.6
                                                         1

  1.4
                                                       0.8
  1.2
                                                       0.6
    1

                                                       0.4
  0.8

                                                       0.2
  0.6


  0.4                                                    0
        0        0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1              0   0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8       1


Notes: The figure shows the dividend payout to outside investors (Panel A) and the
per-capita consumption of the low cash-on-hand individual (Panel B) as a function of
TFP  , where the x-axis shows CDF( ). For example, an x-value of 0.4 represents 
at the bottom 40% of the distribution. The solid line represents the frictionless case,
the dashed line the case with the non-convex technology (with frictions), and the
dashed-dotted line the case with the convex technology.




                                                  66
                              Figure 4: State-price density


    1.5

    1.4

    1.3

    1.2

    1.1

       1

    0.9

    0.8

    0.7

    0.6

    0.5
           0            0.2            0.4             0.6            0.8              1



Notes: The figure shows the state-price density as a function of TFP  , where the x-axis
shows CDF( ). For example, an x-value of 0.4 represents  at the bottom 40% of the
distribution.  ( ) is the state-price density. The solid line represents the frictionless
case, the dashed line the case with the non-convex technology (with frictions), and the
dashed-dotted line the case with the convex technology.




                                             67
                   Figure 5: Comparative statics for occupational choice


          Panel A: Benchmark                                       Panel B: high m


  1                                                1




  0                                                0



      0   0.2       0.4    0.6    0.8     1            0     0.2       0.4    0.6    0.8   1




                Panel C: high H                            Panel D: high H , high m


  1                                                1




  0                                                0



      0   0.2       0.4    0.6    0.8     1            0     0.2       0.4    0.6    0.8   1


Notes: The figure shows comparative statics on the occupational choice for the low
cash-on-hand individual. See Figure 1 and Table 3 for more detail.




                                              68
                Figure 6: Comparative statics for second-period aggregate consumption


                   Panel A: Benchmark                                         Panel B: high m
    3                                                             3

  2.8                                                           2.8

  2.6                                                           2.6

  2.4                                                           2.4

  2.2                                                           2.2

    2                                                             2

  1.8                                                           1.8

  1.6                                                           1.6

  1.4                                                           1.4

  1.2                                                           1.2

    1                                                             1
        0          0.2        0.4    0.6    0.8    1                  0     0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1




                          Panel C: high H                                 Panel D: high H , high m
        3                                                         3

   2.8                                                          2.8

   2.6                                                          2.6

   2.4                                                          2.4

   2.2                                                          2.2

        2                                                         2

   1.8                                                          1.8

   1.6                                                          1.6

   1.4                                                          1.4

   1.2                                                          1.2

        1                                                         1
            0       0.2        0.4    0.6    0.8       1              0     0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1




Notes: The figure shows comparative statics on the state-price density See Figure 2
and Table 3 for more detail.




                                                           69
                                  Figure 7: Comparative statics for dividends


                 Panel A: Benchmark                                                Panel B: high H
    2                                                              2

  1.8                                                            1.8

  1.6                                                            1.6

  1.4                                                            1.4

  1.2                                                            1.2

    1                                                              1

  0.8                                                            0.8

  0.6                                                            0.6

  0.4                                                            0.4

  0.2                                                            0.2
         0       0.2       0.4       0.6    0.8     1                  0     0.2        0.4    0.6   0.8   1




                       Panel C: high m                                     Panel D: high H , high m
        2                                                          2

   1.8                                                           1.8

   1.6                                                           1.6

   1.4                                                           1.4

   1.2                                                           1.2

        1                                                          1

   0.8                                                           0.8

   0.6                                                           0.6

   0.4                                                           0.4

   0.2                                                           0.2
             0    0.2       0.4       0.6    0.8        1              0     0.2        0.4    0.6   0.8   1




Notes: The figure shows comparative statics on the dividend to investors. See Figure 3
and Table 3 for more detail.




                                                            70
        Figure 8: Comparative statics for consumption of the low-cash-on-hand agent


                Panel A: Benchmark                                        Panel B: high m
  1.4                                                       1.4


  1.2                                                       1.2


    1                                                         1


  0.8                                                       0.8


  0.6                                                       0.6


  0.4                                                       0.4


  0.2                                                       0.2


    0                                                         0
        0       0.2       0.4    0.6    0.8    1                  0     0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1




                      Panel C: high H                                 Panel D: high H , high m
   1.4                                                      1.4


   1.2                                                      1.2


        1                                                     1


   0.8                                                      0.8


   0.6                                                      0.6


   0.4                                                      0.4


   0.2                                                      0.2


        0                                                     0
            0    0.2       0.4    0.6    0.8       1              0     0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1




Notes: The figure shows comparative statics for consumption of the -individual in the
second period. See Figure 3 and Table 3 for more detail.




                                                       71
                        Figure 9: Comparative statics for the state-price density


                Panel A: Benchmark                                          Panel B: high m
  1.8                                                         1.8


  1.6                                                         1.6


  1.4                                                         1.4


  1.2                                                         1.2


    1                                                           1


  0.8                                                         0.8


  0.6                                                         0.6


  0.4                                                         0.4
        0       0.2        0.4    0.6    0.8     1                  0     0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1




                       Panel C: high H                                  Panel D: high H , high m
   1.8                                                        1.8


   1.6                                                        1.6


   1.4                                                        1.4


   1.2                                                        1.2


        1                                                       1


   0.8                                                        0.8


   0.6                                                        0.6


   0.4                                                        0.4
            0    0.2        0.4    0.6    0.8        1              0     0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1




Notes: The figure shows comparative statics on the state-price density See Figure 4
and Table 3 for more detail.




                                                         72
Figure 10: Comparative statics for cash flows and asset prices over a wide range of H


            Panel A: Disaster probability                 Panel B: Aggregate time-2 consumption
  0.6                                                     2.2



  0.5                                                     2.1


  0.4                                                       2


  0.3
                                                          1.9


  0.2
                                                          1.8


  0.1
                                                          1.7


      0
                                                          1.6
      0.8         0.9       1        1.1    1.2              0.8         0.9       1         1.1         1.2


               Panel C: Risk-free rate                          Panel D: Equity premium
  6                                                 3



  5                                               2.5


  4                                                 2


  3
                                                  1.5


  2
                                                    1


  1
                                                  0.5


  0
                                                    0
  0.8            0.9       1        1.1     1.2     0.8            0.9         1       1.1         1.2


Notes: The figure reports comparative statics on asset prices resulting from varying
the productivity H . As H varies, we change the endowment parameter  so that the
risk-free rate in the frictionless economy equals  -1 . All other parameters are as in
the benchmark specification (Table 2). The equity premium and return volatility are
calculated based on the dividend claim.




                                                  73
               Figure 11: Comparative statics for welfare over a wide range of H


            Panel A: Disaster probability                Panel B: Welfare of an h-individual
  0.6                                                1.85



  0.5                                                 1.8


                                                     1.75
  0.4

                                                      1.7
  0.3

                                                     1.65
  0.2
                                                      1.6

  0.1
                                                     1.55

    0
                                                      1.5
    0.8           0.9       1       1.1      1.2         0.8              0.9         1       1.1         1.2




        Panel C: Welfare of an -individual                               Panel D: Welfare of investors
        1                                                      0.49

   0.9
                                                               0.48
   0.8

   0.7                                                         0.47

   0.6
                                                               0.46
   0.5

   0.4                                                         0.45

   0.3
                                                               0.44
   0.2

   0.1                                                         0.43
      0.8          0.9          1    1.1      1.2                  0.8          0.9       1         1.1         1.2




Notes: The figure reports comparative statics on consumption and on welfare resulting
from varying the productivity H . As H varies, we recalibrate the endowment parameter
 so that the risk-free rate in the frictionless economy equals  -1 . All other parameters
are as in the benchmark specification (Table 2). Welfare is measured in consumption
terms (see Panel D of Table 4).




                                                    74
             Figure A.1: Market clearing at time 2 (non-convex economy)




Notes: The figure illustrates market clearing. Along the x-axis is    ^ , the inverse of the
state-price density. The solid line illustrates the left-hand side of the market clearing
condition:

   [eI ^ + mh ^h^ + m (1 - o )^^ ] + m o max{ ^^ , f } =
                                            I + (mh + m o )H + m (1 - o )(f + H0 ).

(where o  [0, 1] is the fraction of -individuals investing in human capital at time
1) as a function of ^ . The dashed and dashed-dotted lines represent the left hand
side when the maximization operator is replaced by its first argument and its second
argument respectively. The dotted lines represent the right-hand side, namely output
(determined by TFP  ), for two potential values of  . The figure illustrates that

                                    ^ = min{
                                            ^f , ^  },

where ^ f is the solution when f <  ^^ and ^  is the solution when the opposite is
true.

                                            75
                 Figure A.2: Equilibrium in the non-convex economy
                  Panel A: Equilibrium when no -individuals invest
                   o
                              ^ (o ;  )
                              


                  1                                                     o (^
                                                                           ; )

                                       
                                               




                                               y                                  ^
                          y -m (1- )               ^c
                                                   x
                                               e
                                               ^   z
                             ^-m z
                             e

                  Panel B: Equilibrium when -individuals all invest
                    o

                ^/z -y
                e                                                       ^ f (o ;  )
                                                                        
                 m 

                      1                                                  o (^
                                                                            ; )

                                                           ^  (o ;  )
                                                           



                                          ^c
                                          x        y                                  ^
                                          z        e
                                                   ^



Notes: The figure illustrates the equilibrium in the economy with non-convex invest-
ment. The blue curve shows the inverse state-price density  ^ as a function of o and  ;
the red curve is the fraction of -type individuals investing, o , as a function of ^ and
 . Equilibrium, shown as , is the point at which the curves intersect.
Panel A illustrates the the low  case (Case 1 in Appendix A.2), at which o = 0
represents an equilibrium. Panel B illustrates the high  case (Case 2) in which o = 1
represents an equilibrium.




                                                   76
          Figure A.3: Real outcomes and state price density; the role of commitment
Panel A: occupational choice of the -                                    Panel B: state price density.
individual.                                                    1.5

                                                               1.4

                                                               1.3
  1
                                                               1.2

                                                               1.1

                                                                 1

                                                               0.9

                                                               0.8

                                                               0.7

                                                               0.6
  0
                                                               0.5
                                                                     0       0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8   1

      0          0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8    1




              Panel C: dividend to investors                 Panel D: second period aggregate consump-
      2                                                      tion.
                                                                 3
   1.8
                                                               2.8
   1.6
                                                               2.6

   1.4
                                                               2.4

   1.2                                                         2.2

                                                                 2
      1
                                                               1.8
   0.8
                                                               1.6

   0.6
                                                               1.4

   0.4                                                         1.2
          0        0.2     0.4     0.6    0.8       1
                                                                 1
                                                                     0       0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8   1




Notes: The figures shows asset prices and real outcomes in the case of no commit-
ment. These are shows a function of TFP  , where the x-axis reports the value of the
cumulative distribution function CDF( ). For example, an x-value of 0.4 represents
 at the bottom 40% of the distribution. o ( ) is the occupational choice of the low
cash-on-hand individual,  ( ) is the state-price density, C2 ( ) is final-period aggregate
consumption, and D2 ( ) is the dividend (output of low cash-on-hand investors, minus
consumption).




                                                        77
