                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WINNERS AND LOSERS? THE EFFECT OF GAINING AND LOSING ACCESS
   TO SELECTIVE COLLEGES ON EDUCATION AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES

                                        Sandra E. Black
                                       Jeffrey T. Denning
                                         Jesse Rothstein

                                       Working Paper 26821
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26821


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




The conclusions of this research do not necessarily reflect the opinion or official position of the
Texas Education Research Center, the Texas Education Agency, the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board, the Texas Workforce Commission, or the State of Texas. This work was
partially supported by the Research Council of Norway through its Centres of Excellence
Scheme, FAIR project No 262675. We thank Eleanor Golightly, Akiva Yonah Meiselman, and
Tomas Monarrez for excellent research assistance. We thank Zach Bleemer, Joshua Goodman,
Sarena Goodman, and participants in seminars at Brigham Young University, the University of
Hawaii, the University of Texas at Austin, Yale, NBER Labor Studies, and the Society
for Labor Economists, for their helpful comments. We also thank Rodney Andrews, Scott
Imberman, and Mike Lovenheim for sharing their data on the Century/Longhorn Scholars. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sandra E. Black, Jeffrey T. Denning, and Jesse Rothstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Winners and Losers? The Effect of Gaining and Losing Access to Selective Colleges on Education
and Labor Market Outcomes
Sandra E. Black, Jeffrey T. Denning, and Jesse Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 26821
March 2020
JEL No. I23,I24,I26

                                             ABSTRACT

Selective college admissions are fundamentally a question of tradeoffs: Given capacity, admitting
one student means rejecting another. Research to date has generally estimated average effects of
college selectivity, and has been unable to distinguish between the effects on students gaining
access and on those losing access under alternative admissions policies. We use the introduction of
the Top Ten Percent rule and administrative data from the State of Texas to estimate the effect of
access to a selective college on student graduation and earnings outcomes. We estimate separate
effects on two groups of students. The first--highly ranked students at schools which previously
sent few students to the flagship university--gain access due to the policy; the second--students
outside the top tier at traditional "feeder" high schools--tend to lose access. We find that students
in the first group see increases in college enrollment and graduation with some evidence of positive
earnings gains 7-9 years after college. In contrast, students in the second group attend less selective
colleges but do not see declines in overall college enrollment, graduation, or earnings. The Top
Ten Percent rule, introduced for equity reasons, thus also seems to have improved efficiency.


Sandra E. Black                                   Jesse Rothstein
Department of Economics and                       Goldman School of Public Policy and
School of International and Public Affairs        Department of Economics
Columbia University                               University of California, Berkeley
1022 International Affairs                        2607 Hearst Avenue #7320 Berkeley,
Building 420                                      CA 94720-7320
West 118th Street                                 and NBER
New York, NY 10027                                rothstein@berkeley.edu
and IZA
and also NBER
sblack@columbia.edu

Jeffrey T. Denning
Department of Economics
Brigham Young University
165 FOB
Provo, UT 84602
jeffdenning@byu.edu
1. Introduction

         Selective college admissions are fundamentally a question of tradeoffs: Given capacity,
admitting one student means rejecting another. Many recent debates, including challenges to the
use of affirmative action (e.g., Fisher v. University of Texas1) or to the consideration of non-
academic factors (as in the recent lawsuit over Harvard admissions or in the adoption of "SAT
optional" policies) turn explicitly on the fact that admissions rules that benefit one group of
students necessarily displace another. Assessing an admissions policy change requires
understanding both the effect of attending the selective college on the students admitted under
the policy and the effect on the students who are displaced.
         There is an extensive literature examining the returns to attending a more selective
institution. Several recent studies find significant benefits to students of attending higher quality
colleges (Cohodes and Goodman 2014; Hoekstra 2009; Zimmerman 2014; Goodman, Hurwitz,
and Smith 2017; Ge, Isaac, and Miller 2018; Bleemer 2019; Kozakowski 2019). However, these
studies generally estimate (local) average effects and so do not answer the policy relevant
question of which students benefit most from access, or how admissions can be designed so that
scarce slots go to the students who will benefit the most.
         In this paper, we take advantage of the introduction of the Texas Top Ten Percent rule
(hereafter, "TTP")--a policy that guaranteed admission to any Texas public university to anyone
in the top 10 percent of their high school class in Texas--to identify the effects of access to more
selective public universities on student short- and long-run success in a particularly policy-
relevant setting. We draw on administrative data covering the entire State of Texas that tracks
students from high school through college and into the labor market, allowing us to measure
TTP's impact on enrollment, graduation, and post-college labor market outcomes up to 15 years
after high school graduation.
         Prior to TTP's implementation in 1998, students were admitted separately at each
University of Texas campus based on a combination of class rank, test scores, and other factors
such as the student's personal statement.2 With TTP, all students whose grades placed them in


1
 570 U.S. 297 (2013); 758 F. 3d 633 (2016); 579 U.S. ____ (2016), 14-981.
2
 Before the entering class of 1997, universities also engaged in race-based affirmative action. This ended with the
Hopwood court decision in 1996, discussed further below.

                                                          1
their school's top decile were guaranteed admission even to the most selective campuses.3 This
increased opportunity for top students from disadvantaged high schools but reduced access to the
flagship campuses for some students from "feeder" high schools who did not qualify for the TTP
guarantee. We use the introduction of TTP to identify the effect of access to a selective
institution on students, many from disadvantaged backgrounds, who were previously unlikely to
attend selective institutions.
         Importantly, and in contrast to other work on college selectivity, we are also able to
identify students who lost access to the flagship campus, the University of Texas at Austin
(hereafter referred to as "UT Austin" or "UT"), as a result of the policy, and to estimate the
impacts on them. Accommodating the new TTP students required tightening admissions
standards on other margins, leading some students who would have previously attended a
selective Texas university to be denied admission. Students outside the top decile of their high
schools faced much stiffer competition; at high schools that previously sent disproportionate
shares of students to the flagship, many students who previously would have attended UT Austin
were no longer able to do so.
         We define identifiable groups of students of each type. The first group, with relatively
high performance at schools that had traditionally sent few if any students to the University of
Texas flagship campus in Austin, became more likely to attend UT Austin.4 We refer to these
students, the nominal target of TTP, as "Pulled In" by the policy. The second group of students,
who were ranked outside of the top 10 percent at high schools that had previously sent a
relatively large share of their students to UT, became less likely to attend. We refer to these
students as "Pushed Out" by TTP.
         The Pulled In students had higher test scores, took more AP classes, and had fewer
absences than Pushed Out students, but they came from schools with lower average test scores
and above average shares of underrepresented minorities and low-income students. In contrast,
Pushed Out students came from schools that were more advantaged than average. The Pulled In
students were also more racially diverse than either Pushed Out students or the average UT


3
  Other states, including California and Florida have since implemented similar policies.
4
  As we discuss below, we measure students' ranking within their high schools primarily based on their test scores.
We thus fail to identify students who scored poorly on tests relative to their grades, who might also have benefitted
from the TTP admissions rule even if they attended traditional feeder schools. Data limitations prevent us from
examining effects on these students.

                                                          2
student, though less so than the overall Texas high school population. We view the ability to
examine both groups of students as an important contribution; knowing effects on both margins
informs policy so that any benefits to new enrollees can be weighed against the costs to the
displaced students (Kane 1998). Many admissions policy controversies concern efforts to draw
in relatively successful students from non-traditional backgrounds, creating tradeoffs like the one
we study.
        A key challenge for our analysis is that data on class rank were not systematically
collected prior to the implementation of TTP.5 Thus, although the TTP would seem to lend itself
naturally to a regression discontinuity strategy (as in several prior studies of college selectivity
effects), data limitations make this infeasible. Instead, we use difference-in-differences and event
study designs that rely on students unlikely to be admitted to a flagship Texas campus before or
after TTP as a control group.
        Another consequence of this data limitation is that we cannot precisely identify either the
pre-TTP students who would have qualified for TTP admissions had the policy been in place or
the post-TTP students who would have been admitted under the more lenient pre-TTP statewide
standards. We develop machine learning strategies for identifying groups of students who are
likely to fall into each category. Specifically, we use data on post-TTP students, for whom we
observe eligibility for TTP admissions, to train a random forest prediction of top-10 percent
status, then use this prediction model to impute the likelihood of being in the top 10 percent for
students in all years. Using this imputation, we can identify both a group of students who are
highly likely to be eligible for TTP admission and a second group of still-high-achieving students
for whom this is unlikely.
        We then classify high schools by the share of students who they sent to UT Austin prior
to TTP. Our "Pulled In" treatment group consists of students with high predicted probabilities of
being in their high school's top decile, at high schools where very few students attended UT
Austin before the TTP policy was implemented. Our "Pushed Out" group consists of students
with high absolute achievement but less impressive relative performance at schools where many
non-top-10 percent students attended Austin prior to TTP. These students have low probabilities



5
  For this reason, most past TTP research has eschewed statewide administrative data, instead using data from
individual districts where class rank data were available (Daugherty, Martorell, and McFarlin 2014), survey data
(Tienda and Niu 2006b), or administrative data from a subset of universities in the state (Kapor 2015).

                                                         3
of qualifying for TTP guarantees and many were crowded out. We then compare changes in each
group's enrollment, graduation, and labor market outcomes following the implementation of the
TTP with those of a control group unlikely to have been affected by TTP.
         We contribute to the substantial literature on the returns to college quality in higher
education. The research to date suggests that college quality has positive effects on student
success, although this conclusion is not unanimous. Many of the recent studies use regression
discontinuity designs based on admissions or price thresholds. Perhaps most similar to our
setting, Bleemer (2019) compares students who just qualify and just miss the threshold for the
University of California's "Eligibility in the Local Context" admissions rule (aka the "four
percent plan"), showing that gaining access to more selective campuses benefits students.
Cohodes and Goodman (2014) study a Massachusetts merit financial aid program that influenced
the enrollment choices of price-sensitive students who were not necessarily near the admissions
margin, and also find positive effects of attending a more selective college. Finally, Daugherty,
Martorell, and McFarlin (2014) use data from a single urban Texas school district to implement a
regression discontinuity research design that compares students with class rank just above and
below the TTP cut-off. They find that eligibility for guaranteed admissions increases enrollment
at Texas flagship universities as well as the number of semesters enrolled. They also find that the
effects are concentrated in schools with high college-sending rates, concluding that these
automatic admission plans may have little effect on students in the most disadvantaged schools.6
         However, the effects of college quality are likely heterogeneous, perhaps different for
marginal students than for average students and perhaps even varying across different admission
margins. The above studies have limited ability to identify heterogeneous effects, and especially
contrasts between effects at different admissions margins. A parallel literature on "mismatch"
tests for potentially negative effects of college selectivity on students admitted due to affirmative




6
  Other, similar studies include Hoekstra (2009), Zimmerman (2014), Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith (2017), Smith,
Goodman, and Hurwitz (2019), Kozakowski (2019), and Anelli (2020). Another strategy originates with Dale and
Krueger (2002, 2014), who estimate the effect of attending a more selective college based on comparisons of
students who made different matriculation decisions within similar choice sets. They find little effect of selectivity
on average, though the (small) subsample of black students did appear to benefit. Ge et al. (2018) update Dale and
Krueger and, using different sample selection criteria, find benefits for female students. Mountjoy and Hickman
(2020) apply this strategy to the Texas ERC data. Similar to Dale and Krueger, they find small effects of attending
more selective campuses.

                                                          4
action preferences, with decidedly mixed results.7 This literature explicitly emphasizes potential
heterogeneity: A presumption is that students at the traditional admissions margin ­ those who
would be admitted under race-blind admissions rules ­ would not suffer from mismatch, though
few studies model this heterogeneity explicitly.8
        Our paper advances these lines of research in several ways. First, our difference-in-
differences identification strategy, while relying on a traditional "parallel trends" assumption,
allows us to identify effects away from the admissions discontinuity and, in particular, allows us
to analyze separately the effects on Pulled In and Pushed Out students. Second, we use data on
the population of Texas students rather than a single school district, giving a larger view of the
effects of the policy. Third, we follow students beyond college, considering labor market
outcomes using administrative earnings records linked to high school and college data.
        Consistent with past research, we find evidence that TTP dramatically changed student
enrollment patterns (Long, Saenz, and Tienda 2010, Niu and Tienda 2010). Pulled In students
became more likely to attend both the flagship UT campus at Austin and the other, less selective
four-year campuses as a result of the policy. This was not merely a shift from community
colleges. Instead, on net, TTP pulled students into the Texas public higher education system
(from not attending college, from private colleges, or from out of state institutions).9 More
distally, we find that TTP increased the share of Pulled In students who graduated with
bachelor's degrees within six years after high school. The increases in graduation are similar to
what would be expected given average graduation rates at the institutions that students were
induced to attend. We also find that it substantially increased log wages nine to eleven years after
high school. These are reduced-form effects, so they combine effects of increased selectivity
with returns to college accruing to those induced to attend college at all by TTP. Our research


7
  See, for example, Rothstein and Yoon (2008); Sander and Taylor (2012); Dillon and Smith (2017); Dillon and
Smith (forthcoming); and Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Hotz (2016). These papers focus on academic mismatch; there
is other work that discusses other potential causes for mismatch, such as a type of cultural mismatch where students
from disadvantaged backgrounds are less able to successfully navigate the college experience. See, for example,
work by Armstrong and Hamilton (2013) and Jack (2016).
8
  An exception is Kapor (2015), who uses a structural model to estimate the effect of TTP on college enrollment and
academic performance, allowing college treatment effects to vary linearly with students' SAT scores. He finds that
minority students admitted under TTP achieved higher college GPAs than minority students admitted under a
points-based affirmative action policy would have achieved.
9
  Similar to our result, Dynarski et al. (2018) find that a clearly communicated policy offering access to a highly
selective college, the University of Michigan, draws in students who otherwise would not have attended college at
all.

                                                         5
design does not allow us to isolate the two components. We can establish, however, that that the
net effect of TTP on Pulled In students is positive in terms of enrollment, graduation, and
earnings and that the Pulled In students who attend UT Austin as a result of TTP have graduation
rates comparable to the average UT Austin student, suggesting that these students were not
mismatched.
        For Pushed Out students the pattern is different. As expected, TTP reduced Pushed Out
students' enrollment at UT Austin. About two-thirds of the displaced students enrolled in less
selective public four-year colleges in Texas, while another one-third enrolled in Texas
community colleges. The net effect on total enrollment at public colleges and universities in
Texas is near zero. Thus, for the Pushed Out group, the policy experiment amounts to a reduction
in college selectivity with no change at the extensive margin of enrollment. We find no reduction
in Pushed Out students' college graduation probabilities, in part because the colleges that they
attended had only slightly lower graduation rates than in the pre-TTP counterfactual and in part
because the Pushed Out students previously had below-average graduation rates at UT Austin.
We do not find any sign that TTP reduced wages for Pushed Out students. This suggests that the
benefits of attending a more selective public institution may be quite small for these students.
       Our results pose a puzzle that we cannot fully resolve: Why does gaining access to
selective institutions help students whereas losing access does not affect measured student
outcomes? We speculate, but cannot prove, that this pattern reflects differences that correlate
with students' Pulled In or Pushed Out status: Pushed Out students are likely to come from
families with more support for college success, so may be less dependent on inputs received
from the college itself. This is consistent with evidence, from a variety of settings, that
disadvantaged students are more sensitive to school inputs or characteristics (see, e.g., Krueger
and Whitmore 2001; Dale and Krueger 2014; and Deming et al. 2014). Another potential
explanation is that the primary benefits of the policy for Pulled In students may have come on
the extensive margin, via students induced to attend college by the publicity surrounding TTP
and the accompanying clarity about admissions rules, with small or no effects of attending a
more selective college relative to a less selective one.
       Regardless, taken together our results suggest that access to UT Austin improved
outcomes for students who would not have attended absent the TTP and did not substantively
damage graduation rates or earnings for students who were displaced. Contrary to claims that

                                                  6
expanding access to students disadvantaged by more standard admissions policies will induce
mismatch, the TTP experience indicates that, if anything, this would improve student outcomes
on average.
         The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional details on the Texas higher
education system and the Top Ten Percent plan. Section 3 describes the data and Section 4
details our empirical strategy. Section 5 presents our results and Section 6 presents a variety of
tests to verify the robustness of our results. Section 7 then provides a discussion and concludes.


2. Background and Institutional Detail

         Texas has a large public higher education system, with over 30 four-year universities and
over 60 two-year colleges. The flagship of the University of Texas System, and its most selective
university, is the University of Texas at Austin (known as "UT"); Texas A&M University is also
nationally prominent though less selective. Most students who attend college attend public
universities, with only 18.8 percent of Texas students (vs. 26.2 percent nationally) attending
private colleges, and only 9.8 percent attending out-of-state colleges.10
         Prior to the entering class of 1997, admission to UT was based primarily on continuous
high school class rank and SAT or ACT scores, with affirmative action preferences for students
from underrepresented groups. In 1996, the 5th Circuit ruled in Hopwood v. Texas11 that the
consideration of race in admissions at UT, and by extension throughout the state, was
impermissible. Following Hopwood, the UT entering class of 1997 was admitted based on
academic preparation, distilled in an "Academic Index" (AI), and a "Personal Achievement
Index" (PAI), assigned by readers based on essays, leadership, extracurricular activities, and
special circumstances such as family structure, among other factors.
         In May 1997, the Texas legislature passed HB 588, creating the TTP. This guaranteed
admission to any public university in Texas for students in the top decile of their high school
class, as calculated by the high school and measured at the end of the junior year.12 This was


10
   Authors' calculations from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), distributed by the
National Center for Education Statistics.
11
   78 F.3d 932 (5th Cir. 1996).
12
   University of Texas at Austin Office of Admissions (2008) indicates that UT Austin implemented a top-10
percent admissions rule through an institutional policy for the class entering in 1997, prior to HB 588, though this
was not widely known. We treat the 1997 high school class as prior to TTP. As we discuss below, TTP affected
enrollments in large part through its impact on student application decisions ­ students guaranteed admission were

                                                          7
primarily binding for students applying to UT; at other campuses, nearly any top decile student
would have been admitted even under the pre-TTP rule. For students outside of the top decile,
the AI and PAI were used to admit students, though given the large number of TTP students, UT
admissions were quite competitive for non-TTP applicants.
         Effectively, UT shifted from a single admissions rule that was based to a large extent on a
weighted average of SAT scores and high school performance, with preferences for minority
students, to a regime where it used two separate rules: One that used only the within-high-school
component of high school grades and a second that maintained the old SAT and rank weighting,
albeit without racial preferences, but raised the bar considerably.
         The TTP was an attempt to maintain diversity among admitted students without explicitly
considering race in admission decisions by taking advantage of the substantial racial and
economic segregation across Texas public schools (Tienda and Niu 2006a). Admissions from a
statewide pool (based, for example, on SAT scores) disproportionately draw students from high-
income, primarily white high schools. But if students in the top 10 percent of their high school
classes are roughly representative of the high schools as a whole, a university admissions pool
comprised of them will be roughly representative of the statewide student population.13
         TTP was not just a change in admissions, but a change in students' perceived admissions
chances. The 10 percent threshold was more transparent than the earlier rules, so students could
assess their prospects more easily. Moreover, the TTP law mandated that every high school post
a sign explaining the law and that a letter be sent to every parent of a qualifying student, and the
policy change was widely covered in media. Flagship institutions, concerned about declines in
minority enrollment following Hopwood, also increased efforts to recruit traditionally
underrepresented students, including opening outreach centers, visiting high schools that were




more likely to apply than when admission was merely highly likely ­ and this mechanism did not operate in 1997,
when the new rule was not known to be in place. Insofar as a TTP-like admissions rule was in use in 1997, this
should attenuate our estimates of the impact of TTP on all dimensions.
13
   In addition to the shift from a statewide competition to a series of school-by-school competitions, TTP also shifted
emphasis from SAT scores to high school grades. Minority and low-income students typically do better on the latter
than the former metric (e.g., Rothstein 2004). Of course, students at the top of their classes are not likely to be fully
representative. See, e.g., Harris and Tienda (2010); Long and Tienda (2008); Long (2004); Niu, Tienda, and Cortes
(2006); Long, Saenz, and Tienda (2010).

                                                           8
outside of traditional feeder-school networks, and reorienting scholarships to target non-feeder
high schools rather than minority students.14
         TTP transformed enrollment at the UT flagship, by far the most selective campus. In
1998, 41 percent of freshmen from Texas high schools were admitted under the TTP. By 2003,
this share had reached 70 percent (University of Texas at Austin Office of Admissions 2007),
though many of these students also ranked highly statewide and would have been admitted in
any case under the pre-TTP policy.15 While the admissions rule did not change during this
period, the TTP share grew due to changes in application patterns of students who gradually
came to understand that they were now guaranteed admission.16 As we show below, post-TTP
admissions were notably less concentrated at traditional feeder schools than under the pre-TTP
regime.


3. Data

         We use linked individual-level secondary school, higher education, and workforce
administrative data from the Texas Education Research Center (ERC). The data include all
students in public secondary schools in Texas and cover enrollment, courses taken, absences, and
standardized test scores, in addition to demographic information such as race, gender, and free
and reduced lunch status. At the post-secondary level, the data contain enrollment, major, and
graduation information for the population of students from all public universities and colleges in
Texas. These data are matched to quarterly earnings records from the Texas Unemployment
Insurance (UI) system through 2017.



14
   Andrews, Imberman, and Lovenheim (2016) evaluate the Longhorn Opportunity Scholars and Century Scholars
programs at UT Austin and Texas A&M respectively. These were targeted outreach programs at low-income high
schools.
15
   In 2011, SB 175 allowed UT to limit the number of automatically admitted students to 75 percent of the incoming
class by setting the threshold higher than the top 10 percent. This was after the period covered by our data, which
end with the high school class of 2002.
16
   Long and Tienda (2010) find that the characteristics of applicants did not change appreciably after the
implementation of the TTP policy. Cullen et al. (2013) find that some students switched to less competitive high
schools in order to qualify for TTP admissions. This group was quantitatively very small ­ Cullen et al. (2013)
estimate only 211 students statewide. As we describe later, we test the sensitivity of our results to this response by
limiting our sample to the first two post-TTP cohorts, for which the policy could not have induced mobility because
students who arrived at a school after 10th grade were not guaranteed TTP admissions even if they ranked in the top
10 percent of the new school. Golightly (2019) finds that TTP raised high school attendance and graduation rates
throughout the ability distribution, suggesting the information aspect of the program may have played an important
role.

                                                          9
         Our universe consists of students who graduated from Texas public high schools between
1996 and 2002 for whom we have 10th grade standardized test scores.17 We refer to students by
the year that they graduated high school. Thus, the first treated year is the 1998 students. A key
limitation is that the data do not include class rank or high school GPA. Beginning with the
graduating class of 1999, however, we observe for each student who applied to any Texas public
higher education institution a single indicator of whether the student was TTP-eligible (i.e., in
the top 10 percent of his/her high school class). As we discuss below, we use this measure to
impute a probability of being in the top 10 percent for every student, before and after TTP,
regardless of whether he or she applied to college. Our imputation uses information about
students' positions within their high schools' test score distributions, as well as course-taking
patterns and absences.
         We consider several outcome measures. First, we examine college enrollment in the year
after high school graduation. We distinguish several classes of institutions: community colleges,
four-year campuses, and the two most selective campuses, Texas A&M and UT Austin. Impacts
on enrollment serve as a sort of "first stage" for our analysis (though for reasons discussed below
we do not compute two-stage-least-squares estimates of the effects of college selectivity).
Second, we examine college completion, measured as whether an individual graduated with a
bachelor's degree from a Texas public institution within six years of high school graduation, and
attainment of a bachelor's degree in a scientific (STEM) field. In general, bachelor's degrees
may be granted by a different institution than the one where the student initially enrolled, though
we separately examine UT graduation rates for initial UT enrollees. Lastly, we examine labor
market outcomes, looking at earnings nine to eleven calendar years after high school graduation,
at ages roughly 27 to 29, as well as thirteen to fifteen years after graduation. Because students
may be absent from the earnings records either because they are not working or because they are
working but not in Texas, in some analyses we average earnings only over the years where non-
zero earnings are reported, excluding years with no observed earnings. We also analyze an



17
   We use the Texas high school exit exam, TAAS, administered in 10th grade. Students who were absent on the day
of the test or who failed on the first attempt could re-take the exam at later dates, as it was offered several times each
year. We use each student's first recorded score. We limit to high school graduates. As noted above, Golightly
(2019) finds that TTP affected high school graduation. She finds, however, that this occurs throughout the top 80
percent of students and is not driven by students at the top of the test score distribution. In order for the graduation
response to affect our results, it would need to be differential for the directly treated relative to those just below

                                                           10
indicator for ever appearing in the earnings data, which captures both long-term non-
employment and absence from the state.18
         Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 present summary statistics for our full sample of Texas high
school graduates. In the pre-TTP 1996 and 1997 cohorts, shown in column 1, 55 percent of
students enrolled in college in the year after high school graduation and 18 percent graduated
with a bachelor's degree within six years. The sample is 28 percent Hispanic, 12 percent Black,
and 52 percent female. Three quarters of students had positive earnings in Texas at some point in
the ninth, tenth, and eleventh years after high school graduation, with average annual earnings of
$35,487 in the years that they worked or $25,816 across all three years.19 These statistics are
quite similar in the post-TPP data (column 2), covering the 1998-2002 high school cohorts.
         Texas is highly segregated based on race and socioeconomic status. The average student
in our sample in the pre-TTP 1996 and 1997 cohorts attends a school that is 12 percent Black and
30 percent Hispanic, but the average Black student attends a school that is 37 percent Black and
the average Hispanic student attends a school that is 60 percent Hispanic. Similarly, while 22
percent of students receive free or reduced-price lunches, the average free lunch recipient attends
a school where this rate is 42 percent. This segregation is closely related to UT Austin
attendance: Prior to TTP, the average free or reduced-price lunch student attended a high school
where 1.9 percent of students attended UT Austin, while the average non-subsidized-lunch
student attended a school where the fraction attending UT Austin was almost double this, at 3.7
percent.
         Insofar as the top decile of each high school is demographically representative of the
school as a whole, in the presence of segregation across high schools, admission by high school
would yield a much more diverse class than statewide admissions. However, schools are
internally stratified as well as segregated, with top ranked students whiter and richer than their
peers. The impact of TTP on racial diversity has thus been controversial from the start, and the


18
   UI records cover employers who pay at least $1500 in gross wages to employees or have at least one employee
during twenty different weeks in a calendar year. We winsorize earnings at the 99th percentile. All earnings are in
2012 dollars. A key concern is that we only observe individuals who work in Texas. Andrews, Li, and Lovenheim
(2016) show that students who leave the state do not have substantially different wages than students who do not.
19
   We classify earnings as observed if a student has at least one quarter of non-zero earnings during this three-year
period, indicating that he or she was likely living in Texas at that time. Our first average earnings measure excludes
years with no observed earnings and is missing for those never observed with earnings. Our second measure assigns
zeros to any year in which no earnings are observed (and zero average earnings to those never observed with
earnings).

                                                         11
evidence since has been mixed. It appears that there was an initial small dip in minority students'
enrollment after the policy was implemented, but that minority enrollment increased
subsequently (Tienda and Sullivan 2009; Tienda et al. 2003). More recently, Kapor (2015) finds
that TTP did increase minority representation at flagships. Columns 3-4 of Table 1 show that the
demographics of UT Austin enrollees did not change dramatically in the early years of TTP,
though the post-TTP enrollees are more highly ranked within their high schools' test score
distributions.


4. Empirical Strategy

        We use a difference-in-differences strategy for identifying the effect of TTP on students'
outcomes. We compare changes in outcomes following the implementation of TTP for students
affected by the policy to those for students who were not directly affected.
        As mentioned above, a key feature of our study is that we can distinguish between the
effects of TTP on two different groups of students for whom we expect the impact could be quite
different. The first group includes students with high class ranks from schools that have
traditionally sent few students to the flagship Austin campus--these students were "pulled in" to
selective campuses by the policy. The second group of students includes students with lower
class ranks and test scores from traditional feeder schools--these students were "pushed out."
We estimate separate difference-in-differences coefficients for Pulled In and Pushed Out
students, comparing each to a control group of students who were above average in achievement
but were unlikely to be admitted to UT Austin under either the pre-TTP or the post-TTP regime.
        Our key identifying assumption is that outcomes for these three groups of students would
have evolved similarly between the 1996 and 2002 cohorts had admissions policies been held
stable. While we cannot test this directly, we present suggestive evidence in support of this
assumption below. Specifically, we see changes in relative outcomes that coincide with the
introduction of TPP, with few changes in the preceding or subsequent years.20




20
   Our estimates of TTP effects would be biased if there were a sudden change in 1998 in some other determinant of
outcomes that differentially affected the three groups. We are aware of no such change. As noted above, a few years
after the TTP plan the flagship institutions implemented programs--the Century Scholars and Longhorn Scholars--
targeting students at selected high schools (Andrews, Imberman, and Lovenheim 2016). As we show later, our
results are robust to the exclusion of these schools.

                                                        12
        The major challenge in implementing our research design is identifying which students
were pulled in and pushed out by the policy. The policy's effect on a student is a function of the
student's class rank, but this is not measured in the statewide pre-TTP data and only limited
information is available after TTP. This makes it difficult to identify students' counterfactual
admissions outcomes under alternative policies.
        We address this issue by estimating each student's likelihood of being in the top 10
percent given her other observables, most notably her rank within her high school's test score
distribution, and by exploiting the fact that high schools differed substantially in the likelihood
that their top students attended UT Austin in the pre-TTP period. We identify Pulled In students
as those with high probabilities of being at the top of their classes at schools with low pre-TTP
sending rates. As we show below, less than four percent of these students attended UT prior to
TTP. Similarly, we identify Pushed Out students as those with strong relative performance, but
not strong enough to be likely to be in the top decile, at "feeder" schools with high pre-TTP
sending rates. Prior to TTP, 17 percent of these students attended UT. This is nearly quadruple
the rate for the Pulled In students, despite the latter group having higher academic achievement.
Following TTP, the Pulled In group's UT enrollment rate more than doubled, while the Pushed
Out group's rate fell by one-quarter.
        Figure 1 illustrates the general strategy schematically. We array students on two
dimensions, by class rank, r, and a measure of how many students from a particular high school
were attending UT Austin before TTP, s. This latter dimension captures several sources of
variation, including socioeconomic composition, distance to Austin, and academic strength. We
interpret it as a propensity for a relatively high-achieving student to apply to, be admitted to, and
choose to attend UT Austin. Prior to TTP, enrollment can be approximated as depending on the
sum of (appropriately scaled versions of) r and s: At schools with low s, no one attended UT
Austin; at schools with moderate s, only the highest ranked students did; and at schools with the
highest s, Austin dipped deeper into the pool. This admissions rule is represented by the grey
triangle at the upper right of the first panel of Figure 1.
        After TTP was implemented, any student in the top decile of his or her high school class
was guaranteed admission. This had little effect on top decile students at the highest-s schools,
where any such student who wanted to attend was already likely to do so. However, at lower s
schools it induced a large number of new students to apply and/or be admitted. The new

                                                   13
enrollees are represented by the blue bar at the top of the second panel of Figure 1.
Accommodating these students required making space available by reducing admissions offers to
students outside the top decile, who necessarily came from high-s schools. This is indicated by
the smaller grey area in Figure 1; the students who would have attended but were crowded out
are indicated by the orange region. In our analyses, the Pulled In students are represented by the
blue region, while the Pushed Out students are represented by the orange area. We compare each
to a control group of students with high r and s, but not high enough to attend UT Austin under
either regime. These are indicated by the cloud in Figure 1.
         Figure 1 is purely schematic. Because we do not observe class rank (r), we cannot
implement this design exactly. However, we can construct a proxy for r that allows us to
implement a version of it. We develop our methodology in three steps. First, we describe our
calculation of the likelihood that each student is in the top 10 percent of his or her high school
class. Second, we describe how we use that imputed probability along with s to define the three
comparison groups. Finally, we present the difference-in-differences estimator, which can be
interpreted as an intention-to-treat estimator that captures the reduced-form effect of the policy
on access across the range of Texas institutions.21

Step One:
         Our first step is to construct a measure of the likelihood of qualifying for TTP admissions
that is defined consistently throughout our sample. Let X be a vector of student characteristics,
let W be an indicator for a student from the 1999-2002 cohorts who applied to at least one public
college in Texas, and let T=1(r>0.9) be an indicator for being in the top 10 percent of the high
school class. We observe T only for the W=1 subsample.
         We include in X observable characteristics that are measured consistently throughout our
sample period. These include TAAS exit exam scores in reading, writing, and math, measured
both in statewide percentiles and as the percentile within the school; 16 indicators for math and
science course-taking (e.g., advanced math in 11th grade); the number of foreign language
courses taken in high school; the number of courses failed in high school; the number and
percentage of school days absent in 12th grade; an indicator for being 18 upon graduation; the


21
  Bleemer (2019) discusses the interpretation of reduced-form estimates like ours in terms of the effects of specific
institutions.

                                                         14
school's racial, gender, and socioeconomic (free & reduced-price lunch) composition; and the
share of students at the school who are classified as special education. A complete list of
variables are reported in Appendix Table 1, along with summary statistics.
         To impute the probability of being in the top 10 percent of an individual's high school
class for the full sample, we assume that the relationship between X and T does not vary with W:
E[T | X, W=1] = E[T | X]. 22 Our challenge is thus to estimate p = E[T | X, W=1] as flexibly as
possible. A straightforward approach is to fit a simple logit. Coefficients and average marginal
effects are reported in Appendix Table 1. Not surprisingly, the school-level percentiles are by far
the strongest predictors among the test score variables, though course-taking, school
composition, and course failures are also strongly predictive.
         One can substantially increase the predictive accuracy by adding non-linear and
interactive terms to the model; with nearly 200,000 observations, we can easily afford to do this.
However, through cross-validation exercises we have found that it is easy to over-fit the data
even in our large sample. Over-fitting would make our predicted top-10 percent probabilities
better proxies for actual top-10 percent status in the post-TTP training sample than in the pre-
TTP data, potentially generating spurious changes in enrollment rates and outcomes.
         To accommodate nonlinearities while avoiding over-fitting, we use a random forest
model to predict top 10 percent status. The random forest builds on repeated decision trees,
which allow for arbitrary non-linearities and interactions, but reduces over-fitting by averaging
across many trees, each generated probabilistically by considering branches based on random
subsets of the predictors and of the data.23 There is no compact description of a random forest
model analogous to the coefficients of a logit regression. In Appendix Table 1, we summarize
the model by regressing the predicted values from the random forest on the predictor variables in
an OLS regression. The resulting coefficients approximate the highly nonlinear prediction
function in much the same way as do average marginal effects for logit models. They are
generally similar to the logit marginal effects, though some variables seem to play larger or

22
   W reflects not just cohort but also application decisions; it equals 1 only for those who applied to a Texas public
institution in 1999 and thereafter. Differences between applicants and non-applicants in the relationship between
covariates and top 10 status would violate this assumption. Long and Tienda (2010) is broadly consistent with this
assumption.
23
   See James et al. (2013) for a thorough discussion of random forests. We allow trees to branch until each leaf has
50 observations and take the average prediction from 1000 trees. Random forests can still over-fit; we show,
however, that predictions are very highly correlated across forests fit to different subsets of the data, and discuss
other validation strategies below.

                                                          15
smaller roles in the random forest model. We use the random forest predictions in our main
analysis, though our results are similar when we use the logit model instead.
         Having fit the prediction model, we generate for each student in both the pre- and post-
TTP subsamples a predicted probability of being in the top 10 percent of their high school. We
label this  to emphasize both that it is a probability, not an estimate of the continuous rank, and
that it is estimated with some error. Figure 2 shows the distribution of  in the pre- and post-
periods. Unlike a logit, a random forest model can generate predicted probabilities of exactly
zero. Indeed, we find that fully 23 percent of students have zero predicted probability of being in
the top 10 percent of their high school. The second panel of Figure 2 shows the distribution
among those with  > 0.1. We see only small differences in the distribution of  across years,
with about 1 percent more students having high  values in the post-TTP period than prior to
TTP.
         Our strategy relies on  being an equally accurate prediction of the student's true class
rank in each year. Threats to this assumption include the possibilities that the measurement of
some of our predictors may have changed over time, that the relationship between class rank and
other characteristics changed, or that our model is over-fit to the years that we use to estimate it.
         We take two approaches to assess these threats. First, we show that our estimates of  are
highly robust (Appendix Table 2). Our logit and random forest models generate  s that are
correlated 0.94 with each other,24 and varying the smoothing in the random forest model (e.g., by
allowing larger or smaller final "leaves") does not generate meaningful differences in  . Second,
we show that our estimates are invariant to the specific data used to fit the models. A random
forest model fit to 1999-2000 data is correlated 0.96 with a model fit to 2001-2002 data, strongly
suggesting that there are no meaningful changes in the measurement of X or its relationship with
class rank over this period. As we discuss below, the treatment effects of TTP on Pulled In and
Pushed Out students are not sensitive to the specific  measure used.
         It is convenient for the rest of our analysis to discretize the  distribution. We create
categories that each correspond to two percent of our sample, combining the 23 percent with  =
0 into a single category.25 We let ) represent the category number, labeling the first bin 1 and the

24
  The standard deviation of  is 0.20 using the random forest model and 0.19 with the logit model.
25
  Our  is an average across 1,000 trees, each of which predicts that each individual will either be in the top 10
percent or not. It therefore has precision 0.001. There are smaller mass points at  = 0.001, 0.002, 0.003, and 0.004,
each of which leads us to skip values in the  ) sequence.

                                                         16
remaining bins 12 through 50. Figure 3 shows E[ |) ]. Because most individuals have low
predicted probabilities of being in the top 10 percent, E[ |) ] is low for most ) . However,
starting around the 44th or 45th group (the 88th or 90th percentile of  ), we see that the predicted
probability increases dramatically. In the very top group () =50), the probability of being in the
top decile of the class is 85 percent. The curves are essentially identical in the pre- and post-TTP
periods.


Step 2:
          The second dimension of Figure 1 is the high school's propensity to send students to the
selective university. We measure this as the share of students from each high school in the 1996
and 1997 (pre-TTP) cohorts who enroll at UT Austin. We divide high schools into deciles,
denoted by s. Figure 4 shows the share of students from schools in each decile who attend UT
Austin, in both the pre-TTP and post-TTP cohorts.26 Schools are highly skewed prior to TTP:
The top decile of schools sends 13 percent of students to Austin, while the bottom five deciles
each send less than two percent of students. In the post-TTP data, this skew is still evident but a
bit reduced: The share of students from the top-decile schools who attend Austin falls to 11
percent, while the schools that previously sent few students to Austin send slightly more.27
          We use our estimated top-ten-percent probability categories ) and school sending rate
deciles s to define the Pulled In, Pushed Out, and control groups. Figure 5 shows several
empirical analogues to the schematic in Figure 2. Panel A shows the fraction of students going to
UT Austin from each ) -s cell in 1996 and 1997, while Panel B shows the corresponding fraction
in 1998-2002. These figures show the expected patterns: Within an s column, attendance rises
with ) in both periods, but s is a much stronger predictor in the pre-TTP period than after TTP.
Even in the highest ) bins, very few students from low-s schools attended UT in 1996 and 1997,
but this share rises substantially in 1998-2002. Similarly, before TTP a substantial fraction of
students with moderate ) from the highest s schools attended UT, but this share is much lower in
the later years.




26
   Appendix Table 3 shows average student characteristics by s group. In Figure 4, the s=1 and s=2 groups are
suppressed by ERC's disclosure avoidance rules because the share attending UT in the pre period is so low.
27
   We have examined contrasts across other periods to verify that this is not simply reversion to the mean.

                                                        17
         As an illustration, consider the ) =50, s=1 cell, the upper left corner of the figures. This
represents the high-ranking students from non-traditional schools that TTP was meant to
identify. Less than 1 percent of students from this cell attended Austin prior to TTP, but after
TTP nearly 8 percent did, exactly as intended. Now contrast this with the ) =21, s=10 cell, in the
middle of the right column. These are students who are very unlikely to be in the top of their
class, from schools that sent many students to Austin prior to TTP. In this cell, the pre-TTP share
attending UT Austin was around 8 percent (comparable to the post-TTP share in the first cell),
but it fell to 5.5 percent following TTP.
         Panel C shows the change in UT shares between 1996-7 and 1998-2002, the simple
difference between the shares plotted in Panels A and B. Again, the expected pattern emerges:
For high ) , low s students, the share attending UT Austin rose substantially, while for students
with high s and moderate ) ­ who are unlikely to be in the top decile, as indicated by Figure 3 ­
the share fell. We interpret this graph as showing that our prediction of T captures the probability
of being in the top 10 percent fairly well.
         We use a simple rule for defining the three groups--Pulled In, Pushed Out, and control--
though we explore alternative methods as well. Any cell where the share attending UT Austin
rose (respectively, fell) by more than 3 percentage points is included in the Pulled In (Pushed
Out) group. In order to avoid giving too much weight to idiosyncratic and/or sampling variation,
cells with changes larger than 1.75 percentage points in absolute magnitude that are bracketed
(above and below, or on the left and right) by included cells are also included. We add an ad hoc
rule to exclude the ) =50, s³9 cells from the Pulled In group, as they would otherwise be
included but appear distinct from the rest of this group.28 For the control group we use two
blocks of cells that are close to the treated groups but show small changes in the probability of
enrollment at UT Austin: ) between 25 and 40 and s in the 6th through 8th deciles, and )
between 40 and 45 and s in the 3rd through 5th deciles, except where they are otherwise included
in our treatment groups. The groups are marked in Panel D of Figure 5. Note that despite our
interpolation, the Pushed Out group is far from contiguous.




28
   The increase in the UT attendance rates in these cells are consistent with other research that TTP drew some top
students into UT who would otherwise have gone to private colleges (Daugherty et al. 2014). Our results are
unchanged when we include these cells in the Pulled In group.

                                                         18
         Table 2 displays summary statistics for each group, in both the pre- and post-TTP
subsamples. Columns 1-3 show the Pulled In students, 4-6 the Pushed Out students, and 7-9 the
control group. It is notable that the racial minority share of Pulled In students is lower than for
high school graduates as a whole, but higher than among all UT students. Pulled In students do
come from schools that have above average fractions of underrepresented minorities. They also
have high test scores, with average test score percentiles (in the statewide distribution) ranging
from 85-89, and an average predicted probability of being in the top 10 percent of around 70
percent. Pulled In students have relatively high college enrollment rates even before TTP, at 65
percent, with 49 percent attending four-year institutions but only 4 percent attending UT Austin.
We observe employment nine to eleven years after high school graduation for 77 percent of the
students, and average yearly earnings in this period, when working, are $46,682. When we
compare the pre-TTP and post-TTP means, we see that for this group college enrollment
increases, UT enrollment increases, and college graduation increases following TTP. These
preview our DD results.
         Pushed Out students are substantially less likely to be underrepresented racial minorities
than the Pulled In students, but are more likely to be Asian. As expected, Pushed Out students
come from schools that have fewer underrepresented minorities than the sample as a whole.
Their average test scores range from the 75-80th percentile (statewide) depending on the subject ­
notably, this is lower than for the Pulled In group.29 Prior to TTP, the Pushed Out students also
enroll in college at relatively high rates, with 61 percent attending any college and 47 percent
attending 4-year colleges. While these are similar rates to those seen in the Pulled In group, the
share attending UT Austin, 17 percent, is not. Among all Pushed Out students, 39 percent
graduate with a BA within six years, lower than the rate among Pulled In students.
         These summary statistics yield insights into the types of students affected by TTP.
Marginally admitted students were more academically prepared, as measured by the state tests;
came from more diverse high schools; and were more likely to be racial minorities, relative to
marginally pushed out students. The policy clearly had a large effect on the share of these
students who actually attended UT Austin.



29
  This is perhaps due in part to our use of scores rather than grades to measure class rank. There may be another
group of students with low test scores but high grades who are also pulled in by TTP, but we are unable to identify
them.

                                                         19
          Our control group is somewhat less academically successful than either treatment group,
but the differences are not large. Students have average test scores that range from the 64th to 66th
percentile depending on the subject. The underrepresented minority share lies in between those
of the Pulled In and Pushed Out groups, while the fraction receiving free or reduced price lunch
is slightly higher than that of the Pulled In group (19 percent). College enrollment rates are
somewhat lower than those of the Pulled In and Pushed Out groups, and control students had
lower bachelor's degree attainment rates. Note that our identification strategy does not require
that the treatment and control groups be identical, just that they would have trended in a similar
way in the absence of TTP. We will provide a number of tests to validate this assumption.
          Given that our rule for defining the three groups is somewhat arbitrary and may over-fit
to the change in attendance rates, we have extensively tested the sensitivity of our results to this
choice. As an alternative, we used an automated machine learning approach to pick the Pulled In
and Pushed Out groups. Conceptually, in our baseline specification, we choose the Pulled In and
Pushed Out groups based on the observed mean change in enrollment at UT in the s-) cell
between the pre and post TPP periods. Figure 5 indicates that there is substantial idiosyncratic
noise in these cell means, and as a result the groups ­ especially the Pushed Out group ­ are quite
discontinuous. To reduce the influence of noise, in our alternative approach we smooth the cell
means using a LASSO estimator, described in the Appendix. Figure 6 shows the Pulled In,
Pushed Out, and control groups based on our LASSO estimation. As we show below, our results
are qualitatively similar using this strategy, even though the treatment groups are much more
inclusive in LASSO. Our results are also robust to defining treatment in a continuous way rather
than discretely, as the (smoothed) change in the share of students in the cell attending UT.


Step 3:
          Once the treatment and control groups are defined, the final step is to estimate the effect
of TTP on the outcomes of students in the Pulled In and Pushed Out groups. Using the students
in these two treatment groups and the chosen control group, we estimate the following equation:
                -. = 0 + 2 -. + : -. + ? -.  -.
                             +B -.  -. +   + d + -.
Here, i indexes students; t indexes cohorts; -. is a student outcome such as
graduation;-. and -. are indicators for the two treatment groups; -. is

                                                   20
an indicator for the cohorts affected by TPP, from 1998 onward; dt represents year indicators;
and  is a vector of individual characteristics such as gender, race, ethnicity, and free and
reduced lunch status. We also include in  indicators for the ten s deciles, a cubic in  , and a
linear interaction of s and  , to absorb changes in the distribution of student characteristics
within the three groups over time that might otherwise confound our estimates. -. is an
idiosyncratic error term.
       For our main results, we present standard errors clustered at the school district level.
However, these do not reflect uncertainty in the estimate of  or in the definitions of the three
groups. We also estimate bootstrapped standard errors, re-estimating the top 10 percent
imputation model and allowing the group definitions to vary freely on each bootstrap draw. As
we show, standard errors tend to be very similar using the two methods. Because the
bootstrapped standard errors are quite computationally intensive, our main results use the
analytic standard errors.
       The interpretation of the difference-in-differences estimates bears some discussion. Our
groups are not defined by actual admission to UT Austin or even by the true change in
admissibility to UT Austin brought about by TTP. Thus, our estimates cannot be seen as the
causal effect of enrollment at or admission to UT Austin. Rather, our Pulled In and Pushed Out
indicators are imperfect proxies for the groups affected by TTP. Each group includes some
students who are eligible for TTP guaranteed admission and some who are not ­ with more of
the former in the Pulled In group and more of the latter in the Pushed Out group. Each group also
includes some students who would have been admitted to UT under both the pre-TTP and post-
TTP admissions rules. Thus, our estimates can be seen as intention-to-treat (ITT) estimates of the
effect of changes in access to selective colleges. The "treatment" is multi-valued, reflecting each
of the different colleges that students might attend, and TTP might affect it in complex ways. For
some students, the counterfactual in which they are not admitted to UT Austin sees them
attending A&M, while for others it is a less selective UT campus, a community college, or no
college at all. Moreover, even for students who do not attend UT Austin under either admissions
policy, TTP may affect their choices among other alternatives. For these reasons, we do not




                                                 21
attempt to construct treatment-on-the-treated estimates, focusing instead on the ITT for the TTP
policy.30


5. Results

         We first preview our results visually in an event study framework. In our difference-in-
differences equation, we replace indicators for -. with indicators for each cohort in the
sample and replace the -. -treatment group interactions with interactions between the two
treatment groups and the full set of cohort indicators. The 1997 cohort, immediately prior to the
policy, is the omitted category. Results are shown in Figures 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11.
         The event study specifications are useful for assessing our assumption that the treated and
control groups would have moved together absent the change in admissions policy. This
assumption would be less credible if they were not moving together prior to the policy. While
our analysis is limited to the two cohorts prior to the implementation of the policy, we see in
each Figure that the outcomes of the treatment and control groups do appear to be trending
similarly prior to the policy change. This suggests that our underlying identification assumption
of similar outcomes in the absence of treatment is reasonable. Following TTP, we see that Pulled
In students were more likely to enroll at UT Austin, more likely to enroll in a four-year college
overall, more likely to earn four-year degrees, and have higher earnings, in each case relative to
the control group. Pushed Out students were less likely to enroll at UT Austin, with no change in
their likelihood of enrolling in a four-year college overall or of earning degrees, or in their post-
college earnings.


Enrollment



30
   See Bleemer (2019) for further discussion in a similar context. Our ITT will likely substantially understate the
impact on students actually affected by TTP. Students we identify as Pulled In have an average probability of being
in the top 10 of 0.49. Many of these students would have been admitted to UT under pre-TTP rules, while the
remaining 51 percent of students who are considered "pulled in" by our measure were not actually in the top of their
classes and did not have access to UT due to TTP. As a result, the net change in UT access in our Pulled In group is
no larger than 0.49, and likely much smaller than that. Our estimates of the change in outcomes for Pulled In
students are attenuated relative to the change for students who actually gained access by at least a factor of two.
Similar logic applies to the Pushed Out group. In this group, 37 percent of students are in fact in the top 10 percent
of their high schools, so are not actually displaced but gain an admissions guarantee with TTP. Thus, a lower bound
for the effect of losing access to UT can be obtained by dividing our Pushed Out effects by 0.63, or multiplying by
1.5.

                                                         22
        Table 3 presents the DD results (equation 1) in tabular form for a range of outcomes.
Column 1 presents the Pulled In*Post coefficients. We can see that Pulled In students are no
more likely to enroll in community college following TTP, but are 6.6 percentage points more
likely to attend a public four-year college in Texas. When we look more narrowly, we see that
Pulled In students are 5.3 percentage points more likely to attend UT Austin as a result of the
policy change (from a base of 2.8 percentage points). They are 1.0 percentage points less likely
on net to attend Texas A&M, the second most selective UT campus, although this is not
statistically significant.
        Unfortunately, it is impossible to know the counterfactual enrollment behavior for
specific students; we can only recover the net enrollment effects. For example, some students
may switch from no college to community college while some may switch from community
college to UT Austin. Moreover, some of the increase in college enrollment may have come
through students switching from private or out-of-state universities to Texas public institutions,
though we think this unlikely to be common for the relatively disadvantaged Pulled In students.
In any case, we can say that Pulled In students were more likely to enroll in college in our
sample and were more likely to attend UT.
        We can also examine the overall quality of the schools these individuals attended,
conditional on enrollment. As summary measures of college quality, we use the college
graduation rate of students who attended the college, averaged over the pre-TTP 1996 and 1997
cohorts, as well as the average math percentile (in the state distribution) of the students who
attended, again measured using the pre-TTP cohorts. We find that the policy led Pulled In
students to attend colleges with average graduation rates that are 1.9 percentage points higher
than the colleges they attended before TPP. They also attend colleges with better peers than they
did before TTP, by 1.5 percentiles on average. These numbers are conditional on enrollment,
which likely leads to an underestimate of the effect on college quality due to the substantial
increase in college attendance. If we include students who don't enroll in college by treating
them as attendees of an institution with the average college completion rate and math score of
non-college students, we see a larger increase in college quality--Pulled In students attended
colleges with graduation rates and math test scores that were higher by 4.1 percentage points and
1.9 percentiles in the state distribution, respectively, relative to the pre-period. Overall, the



                                                  23
Pulled In students were more likely to attend college, more likely to attend UT Austin, and
attended higher quality institutions overall after the implementation of the TTP plan.
         Column 2 presents the results for Pushed Out students. These students were 3.7
percentage points less likely to enroll at UT Austin after the implementation of the TTP plan.
This decrease was offset by increases in enrollment at other four-year schools (2.2 percentage
points) and at community colleges (1.1 percentage points). The net effect on total four-year
enrollment is a small, statistically insignificant -0.6 percentage points, while the effect on college
enrollment overall is zero to three decimal places. For Pushed Out students, then, there was no
net change in college enrollment rates, but these students shifted away from UT Austin and
toward less selective institutions. This is confirmed when one looks at the peer quality in the
institutions they attended; we see statistically insignificant, small declines in institution
graduation rates and meaningful declines in peer math scores. This foreshadows what we find
when looking at graduation as an outcome: Students did not attend schools with worse average
graduation rates. Interestingly, the null effect on any in-state enrollment suggests that there was
very little shifting towards out-of-state schools in response to the policy. This is consistent with
work by Tienda and Niu (2006b), which shows that second decile students at feeder schools have
preferences for and enroll at out of state institutions at similar rates to first decile students.


Graduation and Labor Market Outcomes
         When looking at graduation outcomes, we see that Pulled In students were 3.9 percentage
points more likely to graduate with a BA from UT Austin within 6 years after high school
graduation and 3.7 percentage points more likely to graduate from any four-year college in the
state after the implementation of TTP, relative to control students. The UT Austin effect implies
a graduation rate of 74 percent (3.9 / 5.3) for marginal enrollees at UT Austin. This is quite
similar to the average UT Austin graduation rate of 75 percent in the post period, and is higher
than the pre-period graduation rate of 70 percent, suggesting that marginal students brought in by
the TTP do not struggle more than inframarginal students.31


31
  This divides all UT graduates by all initial UT enrollees. These groups are not fully comparable, as some UT
graduates might have transferred there after first enrolling elsewhere. We have also examined effects on the joint
outcome of initially enrolling at UT and then obtaining a BA from there. The difference-in-differences coefficient
for this outcome is 0.038 (SE 0.003). This implies that the marginal student who initially enrolled at UT due to TTP
has a graduation rate of 72 percent.

                                                         24
        Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Hotz (2016) find that marginally admitted students in
California are less likely to graduate in science (STEM) majors. We find that Pulled In students
are 0.8 percentage points less likely to graduate with a degree in a STEM major despite the
overall increase in bachelor's degree receipt, but this effect is not statistically significant.
        We next consider the labor market effects of the policy. We first show that the probability
of having observed earnings (being employed in our sample) does not change as a result of the
policy for either the Pulled In or the Pushed Out students, suggesting that selection into
observing earnings--as might occur if TTP affected the likelihood that a student remains in
Texas--is unlikely to be an issue.
        We consider three measures of earnings. Our preferred measure averages only across
years when earnings are observed, and excludes students for whom earnings are never observed.
Among Pulled In students, earnings nine to eleven years after graduation increase by $692 after
TTP with a large standard error; when we include students and years with zero earnings, the
estimate falls to $359 and remains insignificant. When we consider the log of average earnings
(including zeros in the average and conditioning on observing positive earnings in at least one
quarter), however, we find an increase in log earnings of 5.5 percentage points which is
statistically significant. When we look at earnings thirteen to fifteen years after graduation, this
earnings effect disappears. Overall, these results are imprecise but suggest positive effects on
earnings. Importantly, the estimates offer no evidence for the hypothesis that Pulled In students
are substantially mismatched at the schools they are pulled into and therefore worse off than they
would have been without TTP. Rather, our results are more consistent with well-prepared
students from poorer high schools benefiting from attending higher quality colleges, though they
also reflect extensive margin effects of the increase in the share of students who attend college at
all.
        Overall, we find that following TTP Pulled In students were more likely to attend UT
Austin and other four-year universities, were more likely to graduate from college, and had equal
or higher earnings. This is consistent with estimates from Goodman et al (2017), Hoekstra
(2009), and Zimmerman (2014) that indicate that access to more selective colleges improves
student graduation and earnings outcomes.
        When we examine the outcomes for students Pushed Out of UT Austin by TTP, we find
little evidence that they were harmed. While they were significantly less likely to graduate with a

                                                   25
BA from UT Austin (2.1 percentage points), this was fully offset by increases in BA attainment
at other public schools in Texas. The net change in BA attainment was -0.1 percentage points
with a standard error of 0.6 percentage points. The implied UT graduation rate for the marginal
initial UT enrollees is only 57 percent. Pushed Out students are slightly less likely to obtain BAs
in STEM majors (0.2 percentage points), but this is again not statistically significant. This is
consistent with the fact that Pushed Out students attended schools with similar graduation rates
after the policy.
        When we turn to labor market outcomes for the Pushed Out students, we see that these
students are slightly more likely to be observed with positive earnings in Texas following TTP,
though this effect is not statistically significant. This again counters the hypothesis that many
Pushed Out students might have left Texas for out-of-state institutions and stayed elsewhere after
graduation. When we look 13-15 years after graduation, we see no statistically significant
effects. Importantly, while our estimates are imprecise, there is little sign that being displaced
from the most selective schools harmed Pushed Out students' labor market outcomes.
        Table 4 presents estimates that vary the covariates in the DD specification. The first set of
estimates are for a sparse specification that includes just indicators for the two treatment groups,
year indicators, and the treatment times post TTP interaction. The second set adds individual
controls ­ race, gender, and free lunch and immigrant status. The third set adds school level
racial composition, free lunch share, English language learner share, and special education share.
The fourth replaces the school characteristics with indicators for the ten s deciles and a linear
control for  . The fifth adds a linear interaction between the school's pre-TTP UT Austin share
and  , while the sixth adds square and cubic terms in  , as in our specifications in Table 3. None
of these yields appreciably different results.
        Overall, Pushed Out students were not any less likely to enroll in or graduate from
college in Texas. There is also no evidence of negative earnings effects. Taken together, our
results suggest that the Top Ten Percent policy helped Pulled In students via increased
graduation rates and earnings but did not harm displaced students' graduation rates or earnings.
This suggests important heterogeneity in the returns to attending a selective college, which may
help to explain the mixed results in the college quality literature. An intriguing, speculative
hypothesis is that the heterogeneity may reflect differences in student disadvantage, with college
quality mattering more for disadvantaged students.

                                                 26
Heterogeneity
         The effects of the TTP policy may vary based on individual characteristics within the
treated groups. For example, more disadvantaged students, who may have less knowledge about
or exposure to role models with college degrees, may be more affected. We next examine
whether the policy had heterogeneous effects based on income (proxied by an indicator of
whether the student was eligible for free/reduced price lunch in high school), race, and gender.
The results, from separate estimates of equation (1) for each group of students, are presented in
Table 5.
         We begin with racial and ethnic heterogeneity. The introduction of TTP overlapped with
the elimination of affirmative action preferences in Texas, so we might expect smaller
enrollment effects for students from underrepresented minority groups. We do not see this. In
particular, the increase in UT enrollment among Pulled In Black and Hispanic students is larger
than that for white students, while Pushed Out students ­ where we might expect to find non-
white students harmed by the loss of affirmative action preferences­ show similar declines in UT
enrollment across races.32
         Across other outcomes, there are few large differences by race/ethnicity. Pulled In Black
students see somewhat larger boosts in graduation rates (6.5 percentage points), while Hispanic
students see the same boost as whites (3.6 vs. 3.5 percentage points) despite their larger UT
Austin enrollment effect. There is no evidence of harm to any Pushed Out students' graduation
rates, with a statistically insignificant, positive estimate for Black students. Similarly, earnings
effects are, if anything, larger for Pulled In Black students nine to eleven years after graduation,
though point estimates are positive for both Pulled In and Pushed Out students from all
ethnicities. Again, we find no effects on earnings thirteen to fifteen years after graduation for any
students.
         The second set of columns show differences by family socioeconomic status, contrasting
the effects for students who receive free and reduced-price lunch with the effects for those who
do not. Estimates are generally similar across groups, with a pattern of somewhat better impacts
on free lunch students in the Pulled In group than on non-free-lunch students.


32
   Of course, the removal of affirmative action preferences might have had other effects on enrollment that do not
align with our TTP treatment groups.

                                                         27
           The final set of columns shows heterogeneity by gender. Here, we see a bit more
evidence for differences in the effect of TTP. While men and women have similar changes in
enrollment patterns, Pulled In men do not see a statistically significant increase in graduation
despite increases in college attendance, both overall and at UT Austin, while women's
graduation does increase substantially. The earnings effects nine to eleven years after graduation
are also very large for Pulled In women, who see a statistically significant 7.9 percentage point
increase in earnings, while Pulled In men see an earnings boost one-third as large.33 However,
we see no effect on earnings for either men or women thirteen to fifteen years after graduation.
Gender differences are much smaller for Pushed Out students ­ the (positive) male earnings
effect 9-11 years after graduation is statistically significant while the female effect is not, but
point estimates are not so far apart. Again, we see no effect on earnings for either Pushed Out
men or women 13-15 years after graduation.
           Overall, while we find some evidence of heterogeneity of effects, the general picture is
quite consistent across race, gender, and free and reduced-price lunch status.


6. Robustness Checks


We conduct a number of checks to verify the robustness of our conclusions.

Longhorn Opportunity/Century Scholars
           Our key assumption is that there were no concurrent policy changes that differentially
affected our treated students. A possible violation of this assumption is the initiation of programs
at UT Austin and Texas A&M to actively recruit students from some high schools. These
programs--the Longhorn Opportunity Scholars and Century Scholars programs for UT Austin
and Texas A&M respectively--gave a suite of financial and social support to students from
targeted high schools to encourage them to attend the University of Texas Austin or Texas A&M
(Andrews, Imberman, and Lovenheim 2016). Appendix Table 4 presents results that exclude the
high schools targeted under these programs. Our results are unchanged.


Choice of Prediction Method


33
     This larger return for women is consistent with Ge et al. (2018).

                                                            28
       As discussed above, a key limitation of our analysis is that we do not observe top 10
status prior to the implementation of the top 10 policy. As a result, we must predict this status for
the pre-period data. As noted earlier, we tried a variety of methods to generate predictions of
whether a student was in the top 10 percent of his or her high school class, and these predictions
were highly correlated (Appendix Table 2).
       Because we only observe top 10 status in the post-TTP period, one might worry that we
are better fitting T in the post period and thus generating spurious relationships between our ) by
s cells and enrollment changes. This could also occur if the relationship between the predictors
and top ten status changed in the post period; if so, our ) will better proxy actual top ten percent
class rank in the years that we used to fit the prediction model than in earlier years. While the
adequacy of our T prediction model for years when T is not observed is inherently untestable, we
can test whether results are sensitive to the specific years used among those where T is available.
We assess this by dividing our sample into two subsets, one consisting of the years 1996,1999,
and 2000 and the other consisting of 1997, 2001, and 2002. Each of these subsets has one pre-
TTP year and two post-TTP years. Using each subset, we use the two post-TTP years to train the
prediction of  and to construct the Pulled In and Pushed Out treatment groups. We then use the
resulting ) and group definitions in the other subset to estimate our DD model. This cross-
validation exercise both reduces overfitting and allows us to assess whether the relationship
between the predictors and top 10 percent is changing substantially.
       Results are presented in Appendix Table 5. Columns 1 and 4 present results when we use
the 1999-2000 data to generate predictions and the 1997-2001-2002 data to estimate the DD
model, and Columns 2 and 5 present results when we use the 2001-2002 data to generate
predictions and the 1996-1999-2000 data for the DD. The results are generally consistent,
suggesting that the relationships between covariates and top 10 status are not changing over time.
This allays some concerns about overfitting. (Appendix Table 2 shows that the  s are very
highly correlated, 0.96, between the two subsamples, so it is unsurprising that other results are
unchanged.)
       In our main specifications, we used a random forest method of generating our prediction
of the top 10 status. As a further robustness check, we also predict the top 10 status by estimating
a simple logit that includes the extensive set of demographic, course, and high school
characteristics described earlier, without polynomial or interaction terms. From this, we generate

                                                 29
new predicted probabilities of being in the top 10 percent of the class. As mentioned earlier and
shown in Appendix Table 2, the correlation between the random forest prediction and the logit
prediction is quite high--approximately 0.94, which is reassuring. We then re-define our
treatment groups and re-estimate the DD specifications using the logit estimates of  . The results
are presented in Columns 3 and 6 of Appendix Table 5. Results are again very consistent,
highlighting that our conclusions are insensitive to the choice of prediction.


Choice of Treatment Groups
       As discussed earlier, our definition of the Pulled In and Pushed Out groups is somewhat
arbitrary. To test the sensitivity of our results to this definition, we use an alternative method-the
LASSO technique described in Section 4 and in the Appendix--to choose our treatment and
control groups. This method yields much larger treatment groups, as shown in Figure 6. We
present DD results using these groups in Table 6. Because the LASSO treatment groups include
a number of cells in which the change in UT Austin enrollment is quite small, the estimated TTP
effect on UT Austin enrollment, effectively the first stage for our analysis, is much reduced for
both the Pulled In and Pushed Out groups. Not surprisingly, all of the other coefficients are also
attenuated. Importantly, the ratios of the effects on earnings or graduation rates to the effects on
enrollment are quite similar to the baseline specification.
       Another robustness check takes advantage of variation in the intensity of treatment by
defining Pulled In and Pushed Out groups more continuously. To do this, rather than using
binary classifications, we use the continuous variation in the change in UT Austin enrollment
shares from the LASSO specification. This then identifies the policy effect not just from
contrasts between Pulled In/Pushed Out groups and the control group, but also from variation
among cells with larger and smaller shares of Pulled In (Pushed Out) students within the Pulled
In (Pushed Out) group. To make the resulting estimates comparable to earlier results, we rescale
the LASSO-smoothed change in the UT Austin share by dividing by the change seen in the cell
with the largest change, separately for cells with positive and negative changes. This ensures that
treatment dosages vary between 0 and 1, so that the coefficients represent the effect on the most
heavily treated cells relative to those with no change in UT Austin enrollment. We allow the
dose-response relationship to differ for cells with increases and reductions in UT Austin
enrollment, to permit separate Pulled In and Pushed Out effects.

                                                  30
       Table 7 presents these results. In general, the conclusions are very similar to our main
specification. Pulled In students are more likely to graduate as a result of TTP and Pushed Out
students are no less likely to graduate. We find similar patterns in earnings, with no evidence of
negative effects for either Pulled In or Pushed Out students. One slight difference from our main
specification is that Pushed Out students are more likely to have observed earnings. As our
primary concern was that Pushed Out students would leave Texas, creating a sample selection
problem for us, this does not much concern us. It does not change our overall conclusion of no
negative effects of the TTP on Pushed Out students' earnings.


Inference
       Our results thus far present standard errors from the difference-in-differences regression
(1), allowing for clustering at the school district level but not accounting for error deriving from
our estimation of the  model. In Appendix Table 6, we present results from bootstrapping our
entire procedure, from the estimation of our top ten percent prediction model through the choice
of control groups and from the difference-in-differences regression. We use a clustered
bootstrap, with high schools as clusters. Results are nearly identical to the much less
computationally intensive analytic standard errors reported elsewhere.


Mobility
       As a final specification test, we explore sensitivity to student mobility. Cullen, Long, and
Reback (2013; see also Estevan et al., 2017) point out that TTP created incentives for parents to
move their children to different high schools where they were more likely to make it into the top
decile. They find empirical evidence for this, though the magnitudes are small ­ Cullen et al.
(2013) estimate that only 211 students per cohort, statewide, moved from more competitive
schools to take advantage of TTP, while results in Estevan et al. (2017) suggest a somewhat
larger response.
       To address potential mobility, we take advantage of the fact that, when the policy was
implemented, the first two affected cohorts would not have had much opportunity to move in
response, as they were already enrolled in the 10th grade and the class rank used for automatic
admission is calculated at the end of junior year. (In addition, high schools were permitted to
exclude students from their top ten percent calculations who had enrolled after 10th grade, though

                                                 31
we do not have data on how often this occurred.) We thus limit attention to the pre-TTP cohorts
and the first two post-TTP cohorts. Students in these four cohorts enrolled in 10th grade before
HB 588. When we conduct our analysis on this restricted sample, our results are quite similar to
those from the full sample, as expected given the consistency of effects across cohorts seen in the
event study plots.


Discussion/Conclusion
       Our results show that the Top Ten Percent rule increased college access and completion
in Texas. Pulled In students gained access to more selective institutions, with increased
enrollment at the flagship campus. This was not just a reallocation of students across campuses;
many Pulled In students would not have attended any college absent the policy. This shift
substantially increased the share of students who earn BAs, with no indication that these students
suffered from attending more selective colleges. In contrast, Pushed Out students lost access to
UT Austin but offset this with higher enrollment rates at less selective campuses, with no change
in overall college enrollment. Despite the decline in the quality of the initial college attended by
Pushed Out students, we find no evidence of negative effects on graduation rates or earnings for
this group.
       Our results have interesting implications for the returns to college quality. We show
meaningful improvements in graduation rates and suggestive evidence of earnings gains for
students who gain access to a selective institution. However, we do not find reductions in
graduation rates or earnings for students who lose access to selective institutions. Our finding
that college quality does not matter for Pushed Out students contrasts with much of the existing
work on college quality, which finds that college quality increases student achievement
(Zimmerman 2014, Hoekstra 2009, Goodman et al. 2017, Cohodes and Goodman 2014, Bleemer
2019, Kozakowski 2019).
       The primary difference between the Pulled In and Pushed Out groups is the high schools
they attended. This yields some insights into possible mechanisms for the different effects of
access to selective institutions on these two groups. Our results are consistent with college
selectivity mattering for students from disadvantaged schools but not mattering for students from
more advantaged schools. Interestingly, our results based on student-level measures of
disadvantage suggest that the story is most consistent with school or community levels of

                                                 32
disadvantage, rather than individual levels of disadvantage within schools, affecting the returns
to college selectivity (Chetty et al. 2014). These different effects may be driven by peers,
mentors, or parents who can help insulate students displaced from selective institutions.
However, our results are inconsistent with academic mismatch for marginally admitted students
under the Top Ten Percent policy.
       Our results suggest that the benefits of access to selective institutions are not zero sum. In
our setting, some students seem to benefit more from access than others, and TTP seems to have
redirected the allocation of scarce spots toward students who could benefit more from them than
did those who were displaced. College admissions decisions, especially at public colleges, could
account for these differences by offering spots to students most likely to benefit. Future research
should carefully consider not only if college quality matters, but when college quality matters.




                                                 33
References

Andrews, Rodney J., Scott A. Imberman, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. "Recruiting and
      Supporting Low-Income, High-Achieving Students at Flagship Universities." NBER
      Working Paper 22260.
Andrews, Rodney J., Jing Li, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. "Quantile Treatment Effects of
      College Quality on Earnings." Journal of Human Resources 51 (1): 200-238.
Anelli, Massimo. 2020. "The Returns to Elite University Education: a Quasi-Experimental
        Analysis." Journal of the European Economic Association.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/jeea/jvz070
Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban M. Aucejo, and V. Joseph Hotz. 2016. "University
       Differences in the Graduation of Minorities in STEM Fields: Evidence from California."
       American Economic Review 106 (3): 525-62.
Armstrong, E. A., & Hamilton, L. T. 2013. Paying for the Party. Harvard University Press.
Bleemer, Zachary. 2019. "Affirmative Action, Percent Plans, and the Return to Postsecondary
      Selectivity." Working paper.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. "Where is the Land of
       Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States." The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1553-1623.
Cohodes, Sarah R., and Joshua S. Goodman. 2014. "Merit Aid, College Quality, and College
      Completion: Massachusetts' Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy." American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (4): 251-85.
Cullen, Julie B., Mark C. Long and Randall Reback. 2013. "Jockeying for Position: Strategic
       High School Choice under Texas' Top Ten Percent Plan." Journal of Public Economics
       97: 32-48.
Dale, Stacy B, and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. "Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective
       College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables." The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1491-1527.
Dale, Stacy B., and Alan B. Krueger. 2014. "Estimating the Effects of College Characteristics
       over the Career Using Administrative Earnings Data." Journal of Human Resources 49
       (2): 323-358.
Daugherty, Lindsay, Paco Martorell, and Isaac McFarlin Jr. 2014. "Percent Plans, Automatic
      Admissions, and College Outcomes." IZA Journal of Labor Economics 3 (10).
Deming, David J., Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2014. "School
      Choice, School Quality, and Postsecondary Attainment." American Economic Review
      104 (3): 991-1013.
Dillon, Eleanor W., and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2017. "Determinants of the Match Between Student
        Ability and College Quality." Journal of Labor Economics 35 (1): 45-66.
Dillon, Eleanor W., and Jeffrey A. Smith. forthcoming. "The Consequences of Academic Match
        Between Students and Colleges." Journal of Human Resources.

                                                 34
Dynarski, Susan, C.J. Libassi, Katherine Michelmore, and Stephanie Owen. 2018. "Closing the
      Gap: The Effect of a Targeted, Tuition-Free Pormise on College Choices of High-
      Achieving, Low-Income Students." NBER Working Paper 25349.
Estevan, Fernanda, Thomas Gall, Patrick Legros, and Andrew F. Newman. 2017. "The Top-Ten
       Way to Integrate High Schools." CEPR Discussion Paper DP11910.
Ge, Suqin, Elliott Isaac, and Amalia Miller. 2018. "Elite Schools and Opting-In: Effects of
       College Selectivity on Career and Family Outcomes." NBER Working Paper 25315.
Golightly, Eleanor. 2019. "Does College Access Increase High School Effort? Evaluating the
       Impact of the Texas Top 10% Rule." Working paper, University of Texas at Austin,
       August.
Goodman, Joshua, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. 2017. "Access to 4-year Public
     Colleges and Degree Completion." Journal of Labor Economics 35 (3): 829-867.
Harris, Angel and Marta Tienda. 2010. "Minority Higher Education Pipeline: Consequences of
        Changes in College Admissions Policy in Texas." The ANNALS of the American
        Academy of Political and Social Science 627: 60-81.
Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. "The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings: A
       Discontinuity-Based Approach." The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4): 717-724.
Jack, A. A. 2016. "(No) Harm in Asking: Class, Acquired Cultural Capital, and Academic
       Engagement at an Elite University." Sociology of Education, 89(1), 1-19.
James, Gareth, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. 2013. An Introduction to
       Statistical Learning with Applications in R. Springer Science+Business Media: New
       York.
Kane, Thomas. 1998. "Racial and Ethnic Preferences in College Admissions." In The Black-
       White Test Score Gap (Christopher Jencks and Meredith Philips, eds.). Brookings
       Institution Press.
Kapor, Adam. 2015. "Distributional Effects of Race-Blind Affirmative Action." Yale University
       Working Paper.
Kozakowski, Whitney. 2019. "Are Four-Year Public Colleges Engines for Mobility? Evidence
      from Statewide Admissions Thresholds." Unpublished manuscript, Nov 5, 2019.
Krueger, Alan B., and Diane M. Whitmore. 2001. "The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the
      Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from
      Project STAR." The Economic Journal 111 (468): 1-28.
Long, Mark C. 2004. "Race and College Admissions: An Alternative to Affirmative Action?"
      The Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (4): 1020-1033.
Long, Mark C., and Marta Tienda. 2008. "Winners and Losers: Changes in Texas University
      Admissions Post-Hopwood." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 30 (3): 255-
      280.
Long, Mark C., and Marta Tienda. 2010. "Changes in Texas Universities' Applicant Pools After
      the Hopwood Decision." Social Science Research 39 (1): 48-66.


                                                 35
Long, Mark C., Victor Saenz, and Marta Tienda. 2010. "Policy Transparency and College
      Enrollment: Did the Texas Top Ten Percent Law Broaden Access to the Public
      Flagships?" The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 627
      (1): 82-105.
Mountjoy, Jack, and Brent R. Hickman. 2020. "The Returns to College(s): Estimating Value-
      Added and Match Effects in Higher Education." Unpublished manuscript.
Niu, Sunny X., and Marta Tienda. 2010. "The Impact of the Texas Top Ten Percent Law on
       College Enrollment: A Regression Discontinuity Approach." Journal of Policy Analysis
       and Management 29 (1): 84-110.
Niu, Sunny X., Marta Tienda, and Kalena Cortes. 2006. "College Selectivity and the Texas Top
       10% Law." Economics of Education Review 25: 259-272.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2004. "College Performance Predictions and the SAT." Journal of
       Econometrics 121 (1-2): 297-317.
Rothstein, Jesse, and Albert Yoon. 2008. "Affirmative Action in Law School Admissions: What
       Do Racial Preferences Do?" University of Chicago Law Review 75 (2): 649-714.
Sander, Richard, and Stuart Taylor Jr. 2012. Mismatch: How Affirmative Action Hurts Students
       It's Intended to Help, and Why Universities Won't Admit it. Basic Books.
Smith, Jonathan, Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz. 2019. "The Economic Impact of Access to
       Public Four-Year Colleges"
Tienda, Marta, Kevin T. Leicht, Teresa Sullivan, Michael Maltese, and Kim Lloyd. 2003.
       "Closing the Gap? : Admissions and Enrollments at the Texas Public Flagships before
       and after Affirmative Action." Office of Population Research, Princeton University
       Working Paper 303
Tienda, Marta, and Sunny X. Niu. 2006a. "Capitalizing on Segregation, Pretending Neutrality:
       College Admissions and the Texas Top 10% Law." American Law and Economics
       Review 8 (2): 312-346.
Tienda, Marta, and Sunny X. Niu. 2006b. "Flagships, Feeders, and the Texas Top 10% Law: A
       Test of the "Brain Drain" Hypothesis." The Journal of Higher Education 77 (4): 712-739.
Tienda, Marta, and Teresa Sullivan. 2009. "The Promise and Peril of the Texas Uniform
       Admission Law." In The Next Twenty Five Years, Affirmative Action and Higher
       Education in the United States and South Africa, 155-174.
University of Texas at Austin Office of Admissions. 2007. "Implementation and Results of the
       Texas Automatic Admissions Law (HB 588) at The University of Texas at Austin."
University of Texas at Austin Office of Admissions. 2008. "Implementation and Results of the
       Texas Automatic Admissions Law (HB 588) at The University of Texas at Austin."
Zimmerman, Seth D. 2014. "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal
     Students." Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4): 711-754.




                                              36
Figures

Figure 1. Schematic description of Top Ten Percent plan effect on enrollment
   A. Enrollment prior to TTP                   B. Changes with TTP
Within-school                           Enrollment          Within-school   New TTP enrollment
rank                                    prior to TTP        rank


                                                                                            Control gr
                                                                                                      oup



                                                                                                                    Crowded
                                                                                                                    out under
                                                                                                                    TTP




                              Pre-TTP school sending rate                                             Pre-TTP school sending rate




Figure 2. Distribution of predicted top ten probability (" ) before and after TTP
   A. Full distribution                          B. Excluding    " <0.1




Notes: Figures show the CDF of estimated top-ten-percent probability ( ) across all students in the
sample, separately for 1996-1997 (Before TTP) and 1998-2002 (After TTP). Predicted probabilities of
being in the top ten percent are derived from a random forest model fit to 1999-2002 data. Right panel
shows the portion of the CDF for  > 0.1.
Figure 3. Mean predicted top ten probability (" ) by bin (")




Notes: The x-axis represents  ' bins, ordered from 1-50, with bins defined by dividing the distribution of 
(the predicted top ten percent probability) into 50 cells. There are fewer than 50 bins because of mass
points in the  distribution ­ for example, bin 1 contains all observations with  =0. The y-axis shows the
mean of  within each bin.
Figure 4. Share of students from high school attending UT Austin, by school pre-TTP
decile (s)




Notes: High schools are divided into deciles based on the share of students who attended UT Austin in the
1996 and 1997 graduating classes. Deciles 1 and 2 have very low UT Austin sending shares, and are
suppressed for disclosure avoidance.
Figure 5. Share of students attending UT Austin by school sending group (s) and predicted
top ten probability bin (")




Notes: X-axis represents the high school pre-TTP UT Austin share decile, as illustrated in Figure 4. Y-
axis represents the ' bins of the student's predicted top-ten-percent probability, based on a random forest
model fit to 1999-2002 data. Panels A and B show the share of students in each cell who attended UT
Austin in 1996-1997 and 1998-2002, respectively. Panels C and D show the difference between the two
periods; Panel D overlays the definitions of treatment and control groups using the algorithm described in
the text. Cells shaded grey are suppressed for disclosure avoidance, due to too few students attending UT;
changes are suppressed if the level in either panel A or panel B is suppressed. Treatment and control
groups illustrated in Panel D are defined based on the unsuppressed values.
Figure 6. Pulled in, pushed out, and control groups using LASSO




Notes: Axes are defined as in Figure 5, though only the upper half ('  18 )is shown. Outlines indicate
treatment and control groups selected using the LASSO method described in the text.
Figure 7. Event study of effect of TTP on UT Austin enrollment for students in Pulled In
and Pushed Out groups




Notes: Figures shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for 23  3 and
23  3 interactions in an event study version of Equation 1 that replaces the 23
indicator with a set of 3 indicators. 1997 is the excluded category. Dependent variable is an indicator
for enrollment at UT Austin following high school. Standard errors are clustered at the school district
level.
Figure 8. Event study of effect of TTP on 4-year college enrollment for students in Pulled
In and Pushed Out groups




Notes: See notes to Figure 7. Dependent variable is an indicator for enrollment at any Texas public four-
year college following high school.
Figure 9. Event study of effect of TTP on 2-year college enrollment for students in Pulled
In and Pushed Out groups




Notes: See notes to Figure 7. Dependent variable is an indicator for enrollment at any Texas public
community college following high school.
Figure 10. Event study of effect of TTP on college completion (BA attainment) for students
in Pulled In and Pushed Out groups




Notes: See notes to Figure 7. Dependent variable is an indicator for attainment of a bachelor's degree
from any Texas public institution within six years following high school.
Figure 11. Event study of effect of TTP on earnings 9-11 years after high school completion
for students in Pulled In and Pushed Out groups




Notes: See notes to Figure 7. Dependent variable is the log of average earnings in the 9th, 10th, and 11th
calendar years following high school. Years in which no earnings are recorded are excluded from the
average; students with no recorded earnings in any year are excluded from the analysis.
Appendix Figure 1. LASSO-smoothed changes in UT Austin enrollment shares

    A. Raw                                              B. With LASSO regularization




Notes: Panel A shows the same data that is displayed in Figure 5C; the vertical axis is the change in the
share of students in the cell who attended UT Austin between 1996-1997 and 1998-2002. Panel B
presents estimates obtained by fitting a LASSO model to the data in Panel A, as described in the
Appendix, then fitting OLS using only the explanatory variables whose estimated LASSO coefficients are
not zero.
Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                Full sample                 UT Enrollees
                                           1996-1997 1998-2002         1996-1997 1998-2002
                                                   (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)
N                                             258,240     766,962           8,633      24,805
Demographics & high school characteristics
    Hispanic                                     28%          30%             13%         14%
    Black                                        12%          12%              3%          3%
    Asian                                         3%           3%             14%         16%
    Female                                       52%          52%             50%         52%
    Free/Reduced Lunch                           23%          22%              5%          7%
    Math score (statewide %ile)                  50.3         50.7            81.5        81.2
    Reading score (statewide %ile)               50.3         50.6            77.9        78.5
    Writing score (statewide %ile)               50.4         50.6            77.6        78.1
    Math score (%ile within school)              44.4         45.8            67.5        70.7
    Reading score (%tile within school)          44.2         45.7            64.2        67.6
    Writing score (%ile within school)           43.9         45.6            63.8        67.5
    Number of AP courses taken                   0.78         1.36            3.24        5.16
    Days absent                                    8.4         8.4             5.8         5.5
    School: Fr. Black                            12%          12%             10%         10%
    School: Fr. Hispanic                         30%          29%             21%         22%
    School: Fr. FRL                              22%          22%             13%         14%
    School: Attend UT Austin                    3.3%         3.4%            7.8%        7.3%
P & S variables
    Actually Top 10 (applicants only)                       23.0%                      53.5%
    Applied & top 10 (all)                                   6.1%                      43.3%
    Fitted pr(Top 10)                           8.4%         9.4%          28.5%       36.0%
    School pre-policy UT rate
     Bottom two deciles                        20.0%        19.5%            0.8%        5.0%
     Top two deciles                           20.2%        20.9%          58.4%       53.7%
Enrollment
    UT Austin                                   3.3%         3.2%           100%        100%
    Any 4-year                                   25%          24%           100%        100%
    Community College                            32%          31%              4%          4%
    Any college                                  55%          53%           100%        100%
Six-year Graduation
    UT Austin                                   2.9%         2.9%             70%         75%
    Any BA                                       18%          18%             74%         79%
    Any degree                                   23%          24%             74%         79%
Employment outcomes
    9-11 Years After HS Graduation
     Employment (0/1)                          76.0%        74.9%          76.7%       76.3%
     Average wage (with 0s)                   $25,816     $24,708         $35,376    $35,687
     Average wage (excluding 0s)              $35,487     $34,547         $49,212    $49,971
    13-15 Years After HS Graduation
     Employment (0/1)                          71.1%        71.4%          69.5%       70.7%
     Average wage (with 0s)                   $29,688     $30,210         $43,257    $46,405
     Average wage (excluding 0s)              $43,567     $44,075         $66,598    $69,820
Notes: Years at top of columns refer to the high school graduating class.
Table 2. Summary Statistics for Treatment and Control Groups
                                        Pulled in          Pushed out                    Control
                                     1996-97 1998-02    1996-97 1998-02              1996-97 1998-02
                                          (1)     (2)        (3)      (4)                (5)     (6)
N                                         5,004     19,809      13,917    41,065      31,137      90,235
Demographics & high school characteristics
   Hispanic                                20%        24%         13%       15%          26%        29%
   Black                                    9%         8%          5%        6%           7%         9%
   Asian                                    3%         3%          8%        9%           3%         3%
   Female                                  53%        57%         51%       52%          52%        52%
   Free/Reduced Lunch                      18%        20%          7%        8%          19%        19%
   Math score (statewide %ile)             88.8       88.3        79.6      77.7         66.2       65.6
   Reading score (statewide %ile)          84.9       83.8        75.1      74.3         64.6       63.2
   Writing score (statewide %ile)          86.7       85.4        75.1      74.3         64.2       63.5
   Math score (%ile within school)         81.2       81.4        64.3      66.6         59.2       60.0
   Reading score (%tile within school)     77.5       78.1        60.4      62.7         57.3       57.6
   Writing score (%ile within school)      78.0       78.5        60.4      63.2         56.4       57.5
   Number of AP courses taken              2.40       4.39        2.09      3.16         0.86       1.53
   Days absent                               3.6       3.6         6.7       7.3          7.7        7.8
   School: Fr. Black                       15%        14%         10%       10%          11%        11%
   School: Fr. Hispanic                    32%        33%         19%       20%          31%        31%
   School: Fr. FRL                         30%        30%         11%       11%          22%        22%
   School: Attend UT Austin               0.6%       0.6%        8.8%      8.6%         2.6%       2.6%
P & S variables
   Actually Top 10 (applicants only)                85.9%                 23.1%                   13.4%
   Applied & top 10 (all)                           47.7%                 10.5%                    4.0%
   Fitted pr(Top 10)                     69.6%      72.5%       13.9%     14.6%         6.5%       6.6%
   School pre-policy UT rate
    Bottom two deciles                   65.3%      62.8%        0.0%      0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
    Top two deciles                       0.0%       0.0%       73.4%     71.5%         0.0%       0.0%
Enrollment
   UT Austin                                4%         9%         17%       12%         2.7%       2.1%
   Any 4-year                              49%        53%         47%       44%          33%        30%
   Community College                       18%        18%         16%       19%          32%        33%
   Any college                             65%        69%         61%       60%          63%        61%
Six-year Graduation
   UT Austin                              3.6%       7.4%       13.7%     10.9%         2.3%       1.9%
   Any BA                                  44%        47%         39%       37%          25%        23%
   Any degree                              48%        52%         41%       40%          31%        31%
Employment outcomes
   9-11 Years After HS Graduation
    Employment (0/1)                     77.7%      76.3%      70.3% 69.9%            76.5% 75.3%
    Average wage (with 0s)             $34,587     $33,573    $29,857 $28,647        $27,992 $26,484
    Average wage (excluding 0s)        $46,682     $46,083    $44,951 $43,333        $38,189 $36,735
   13-15 Years After HS Graduation
    Employment (0/1)                     73.1%      72.3%      63.9% 65.3%            71.4% 71.5%
    Average wage (with 0s)             $42,715     $41,907    $35,495 $36,197        $32,222 $32,280
    Average wage (excluding 0s)        $61,142     $60,588    $58,608 $58,425        $46,925 $46,922
Notes: Years at top of columns refer to the high school graduating class. Groups are defined as
explained in text, using the baseline algorithm and random forest predictions.
Table 3. Baseline Difference-in-Difference Analysis
                                                    DD estimates            Pre-policy means [SDs]
                                                Pulled In Pushed Out      Control Pulled In Pushed Out
                                                      (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)
Enrollment outcomes
 UT Austin                                          0.053       -0.036       0.03       0.04         0.17
                                                   (0.005)      (0.004)     [0.16]     [0.19]       [0.37]
 Texas A&M                                         -0.010        0.008       0.04       0.14         0.09
                                                   (0.007)      (0.004)     [0.19]     [0.34]       [0.28]
 Any college                                        0.052        0.000       0.63       0.65         0.61
                                                   (0.011)      (0.007)     [0.48]     [0.48]       [0.49]
 Any 4-year                                         0.066       -0.006       0.33       0.49         0.47
                                                   (0.011)      (0.008)     [0.47]     [0.50]       [0.50]
 Any community college                             -0.004        0.011       0.32       0.18         0.16
                                                   (0.008)      (0.005)     [0.47]     [0.38]       [0.37]
 Any other 4-year                                   0.024        0.022       0.26       0.31         0.22
                                                   (0.009)      (0.006)     [0.44]     [0.46]       [0.41]
Characteristics of institution attended (fixed at pre-policy levels)
 Graduation rate (conditional on enrollment) 0.019              -0.006       0.41       0.53         0.55
                                                   (0.005)      (0.004)     [0.18]     [0.20]       [0.22]
 Math state %ile (conditional on enrollment)          1.47       -1.14       57.1       64.2         68.0
                                                     (0.33)      (0.26)     [12.2]     [13.1]       [13.7]
 Graduation rate (with non-enrollment as            0.038       -0.006       0.27       0.36         0.36
 institution)                                      (0.006)      (0.005)     [0.23]     [0.28]       [0.30]
 Math state %ile (with non-enrollment as              1.87       -0.84       52.4       57.3         58.9
 institution)                                        (0.32)      (0.24)     [11.4]     [14.1]       [15.7]
Degree attainment within 6 years
 Bachelors from UT Austin                           0.039       -0.021       0.02       0.04         0.14
                                                   (0.004)      (0.003)     [0.15]     [0.19]       [0.34]
 Bachelors from any institution                     0.037       -0.001       0.25       0.44         0.39
                                                   (0.010)      (0.006)     [0.43]     [0.50]       [0.49]
 Associates or better                               0.032       -0.006       0.31       0.48         0.41
                                                   (0.010)      (0.007)     [0.46]     [0.50]       [0.49]
 Bachelors with STEM major                         -0.007       -0.001       0.03       0.13         0.07
                                                   (0.006)      (0.003)     [0.16]     [0.33]       [0.26]
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                                  -0.000        0.008       0.77     0.78          0.70
                                                   (0.009)      (0.006)     [0.42]   [0.42]        [0.46]
 Average annual earnings (excluding 0s)                692        -122     38,189   46,682        44,951
                                                      (525)       (479)   [24,104] [27,594]      [28,867]
 Average annual earnings (including 0s)                359         305     27,992   34,587        29,857
                                                      (596)       (384)   [26,329] [30,645]      [30,979]
 Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s) 0.055                0.036      10.24    10.47         10.38
                                                   (0.019)      (0.017)     [1.01]   [0.99]        [1.08]
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                                  -0.007        0.012       0.71     0.73          0.64
                                                   (0.010)      (0.006)     [0.45]   [0.44]        [0.48]
 Average annual earnings (excluding 0s)               -977         -68     46,925   61,142        58,608
                                                      (836)       (675)   [31,818] [39,690]      [40,995]
 Average annual earnings (including 0s)             -1130          719     32,222   42,715        35,495
                                                      (878)       (506)   [33,550] [41,888]      [41,346]
 Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s) -0.004              -0.004      10.43    10.73         10.64
                                                   (0.020)      (0.017)     [1.04]   [0.98]        [1.05]
Notes: Each row represents a separate difference-in-differences regression. Standard errors, clustered at the school
district, in parentheses; standard deviations in square brackets. N=201,167 for DD specifications, with smaller
samples when outcome is not available for all observations (e.g., log earnings).
Table 4. Sensitivity of Difference-in-Difference Estimates to Controls
                                                       Pulled In                                                    Pushed Out
                                   (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)        (9)    (10)          (11)        (12)
Controls
 Individual demographics                     y        y         y        y         y                      y          y          y          y          y
 School demographics                                  y                                                              y
 S group dummies                                                y        y          y                                           y          y           y
 Predicted top-ten probability                                  y        y      y (cubic)                                       y          y       y (cubic)
 s-by-p                                                                  y          y                                                      y           y
Enrollment outcomes
 UT Austin                        0.057    0.057    0.057     0.050    0.054      0.053      -0.038     -0.038     -0.036     -0.036     -0.036     -0.036
                               ( 0.005) ( 0.005) ( 0.005) ( 0.005) ( 0.005)     ( 0.005)    ( 0.004)   ( 0.004)   ( 0.004)   ( 0.004)   ( 0.004)   ( 0.004)
 Any college                      0.054    0.052    0.052     0.053    0.051      0.052       0.001      0.001     -0.001     -0.000     -0.000      0.000
                               ( 0.011) ( 0.011) ( 0.011) ( 0.011) ( 0.011)     ( 0.011)    ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)
 Any 4-year                       0.074    0.075    0.074     0.065    0.066      0.066      -0.006     -0.006     -0.005     -0.007     -0.007     -0.006
                               ( 0.011) ( 0.011) ( 0.011) ( 0.011) ( 0.011)     ( 0.011)    ( 0.008)   ( 0.008)   ( 0.008)   ( 0.008)   ( 0.008)   ( 0.008)
Degree attainment within 6 years
 Bachelors from UT Austin         0.043    0.043    0.043     0.037    0.041      0.039      -0.023     -0.023     -0.021     -0.021     -0.021     -0.021
                               ( 0.004) ( 0.004) ( 0.004) ( 0.004) ( 0.004)     ( 0.004)    ( 0.003)   ( 0.003)   ( 0.003)   ( 0.003)   ( 0.003)   ( 0.003)
 Bachelors from any               0.051    0.048    0.048     0.037    0.038      0.037       0.001     -0.000      0.002     -0.001     -0.001     -0.001
 institution                   ( 0.010) ( 0.010) ( 0.009) ( 0.010) ( 0.010)     ( 0.010)    ( 0.007)   ( 0.006)   ( 0.006)   ( 0.006)   ( 0.006)   ( 0.006)
 Associates or better             0.044    0.040    0.039     0.031    0.032      0.032      -0.004     -0.005     -0.005     -0.006     -0.006     -0.006
                               ( 0.010) ( 0.010) ( 0.009) ( 0.010) ( 0.009)     ( 0.010)    ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)   ( 0.006)   ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)   ( 0.007)
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                -0.001 -0.001 -0.001         0.002    0.000     -0.000       0.009    0.009    0.006    0.008    0.008    0.008
                               ( 0.010) ( 0.010) ( 0.009) ( 0.009) ( 0.009)     ( 0.009)    ( 0.006) ( 0.006) ( 0.006) ( 0.006) ( 0.006) ( 0.006)
 Log average annual earnings 0.060        0.065    0.064     0.051    0.053      0.055       0.035    0.036    0.039    0.035    0.035    0.036
 (excluding 0s)                (  0.019) ( 0.018) ( 0.018)  ( 0.019) ( 0.019)   ( 0.019)    ( 0.017) ( 0.017) ( 0.017) ( 0.018) ( 0.018) ( 0.017)
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                -0.009 -0.009 -0.008 -0.006 -0.007              -0.007       0.012    0.013    0.010    0.012    0.012    0.012
                               ( 0.010) ( 0.010) ( 0.010) ( 0.010) ( 0.009)     ( 0.010)    ( 0.007) ( 0.006) ( 0.006) ( 0.006) ( 0.006) ( 0.006)
 Log average annual earnings 0.002        0.011    0.012 (0.006) (0.002)        (0.004)     (0.005) (0.003) 0.001 (0.004) (0.005) (0.004)
 (excluding 0s)                ( 0.022) ( 0.020) ( 0.020) ( 0.020) ( 0.020)     ( 0.020)    ( 0.017) ( 0.017) ( 0.016) ( 0.017) ( 0.017) ( 0.017)
Notes: Each row presents estimates from six separate difference-in-differences regressions: One model is presented in columns 1 and 7, another
in 2 and 8, and so on. Standard errors, clustered at the school district, in parentheses. All specifications include calendar year and group (Pulled
In, Pushed Out) indicators. Individual demographics are indicators for race (Hispanic, Black, Asian, other), gender, free or reduced price lunch,
and immigrant status. School demographics are the school fraction Black, Hispanic, Asian, free or reduced price lunch, English language learner,
or special education.
Notes: N=198,962.
Table 5. Heterogeneity

                                         By race               By free lunch status        By gender
                              Black    Hisp. White/ p          No       Yes      p      Fem. Male    p
                                               Asian
                               (1)      (2)     (3)  (4)        (5)     (6)      (7)     (8)      (9)     (10)
Enrollment outcomes
 UT Austin     Pulled In      0.07    0.06   0.04 0.03          0.05     0.07    0.02    0.06     0.05    0.16
                             (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)              (0.00)   (0.01)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out -0.03 -0.05 -0.03 0.43               -0.04    -0.04    0.71   -0.03    -0.04    0.17
                             (0.02) (0.01) (0.00)              (0.00)   (0.01)          (0.01)   (0.01)
 Any college Pulled In        0.07    0.08   0.04 0.20          0.05     0.05    0.77    0.06     0.05    0.49
                             (0.03) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out 0.04 -0.03         0.00 0.06          0.00    -0.01    0.37   -0.00     0.00    0.59
                             (0.02) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
 Any 4-year Pulled In         0.05    0.07   0.07 0.92          0.07     0.04    0.15    0.08     0.05    0.13
                             (0.03) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out 0.03 -0.03 -0.00 0.11                -0.00    -0.03    0.19   -0.01    -0.00    0.68
                             (0.03) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
Degree attainment within 6 years
 BA from UT Pulled In         0.05    0.05   0.03 0.06          0.04     0.04    0.33    0.04     0.03    0.20
 Austin                      (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)              (0.00)   (0.01)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out -0.02 -0.02 -0.02 0.87               -0.02    -0.02    1.00   -0.02    -0.02    0.53
                             (0.01) (0.01) (0.00)              (0.00)   (0.01)          (0.00)   (0.00)
 BA from any Pulled In        0.06    0.04   0.04 0.39          0.03     0.06    0.08    0.06     0.02    0.02
 institution                 (0.02) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out 0.02 -0.01         0.00 0.27          0.00     0.01    0.37   -0.00     0.00    0.46
                             (0.02) (0.01) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
 Associates or Pulled In      0.06    0.04   0.03 0.44          0.02     0.07    0.02    0.05     0.01    0.03
 better                      (0.02) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out 0.02 -0.02 -0.00 0.37                -0.01     0.01    0.25   -0.01    -0.00    0.41
                             (0.02) (0.01) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
 Employment Pulled In        -0.04    0.02 -0.00 0.06          -0.01     0.04    0.02    0.00    -0.01    0.42
 (0/1)                       (0.02) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out 0.01        0.01   0.01 0.96          0.01    -0.01    0.45    0.00     0.01    0.47
                             (0.02) (0.01) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
 Log average Pulled In        0.10    0.04   0.05 0.78          0.04     0.10    0.16    0.08     0.03    0.17
 annual                      (0.07) (0.04) (0.02)              (0.02)   (0.04)          (0.03)   (0.03)
 earnings      Pushed Out 0.02        0.05   0.03 0.91          0.03     0.09    0.29    0.03     0.04    0.67
                             (0.06) (0.04) (0.02)              (0.02)   (0.05)          (0.02)   (0.02)
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
 Employment Pulled In        -0.02    0.02 -0.01 0.14          -0.02     0.03    0.01   -0.00    -0.01    0.75
 (0/1)                       (0.03) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
               Pushed Out 0.01        0.01   0.01 0.92          0.01     0.01    0.94    0.01     0.02    0.63
                             (0.02) (0.02) (0.01)              (0.01)   (0.02)          (0.01)   (0.01)
 Log average Pulled In       -0.06    0.00 -0.00 0.63          -0.02     0.04    0.26    0.02    -0.02    0.33
 annual                      (0.06)  (0.05) (0.03)             (0.02)   (0.04)          (0.03)   (0.03)
 earnings      Pushed Out -0.03       0.00 -0.01 0.93          -0.00    -0.01    0.88    0.01    -0.01    0.55
                             (0.07) (0.04) (0.02)              (0.02)   (0.05)          (0.02)   (0.02)
Notes: Each stacked pair of entries (Pulled In and Pushed Out) represents a separate difference-in-
differences regression, fit to the indicated subgroup. Specifications are as in Table 3, but for the sample
changes. Columns 4, 7, and 10 present p-values for the hypothesis that the coefficients are identical across
the preceding groups (which are mutually exclusive).
Notes: N=198,962.
Table 6. Alternative Definitions of Treatment Groups

                                                   Baseline                 LASSO
                                             Pulled In Pushed Out    Pulled In Pushed Out
                                                   (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)
Enrollment outcomes
 UT Austin                                      0.053      -0.036       0.016       -0.016
                                               (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.002)      (0.002)
 Any college                                    0.052       0.000       0.030        0.010
                                               (0.011)     (0.007)     (0.005)      (0.005)
 Any 4-year                                     0.066      -0.006       0.017       -0.013
                                               (0.011)     (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.005)
Degree attainment within 6 years
 Bachelors from UT Austin                      0.039       -0.021       0.011       -0.010
                                              (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.002)
 Bachelors from any institution                0.037       -0.001       0.015       -0.004
                                              (0.010)      (0.006)     (0.004)      (0.004)
 Associates or better                          0.032       -0.006       0.016       -0.002
                                              (0.010)      (0.007)     (0.005)      (0.004)
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                             -0.000        0.008       0.002        0.011
                                              (0.009)      (0.006)     (0.004)      (0.004)
 Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s) 0.055           0.036       0.016       -0.008
                                              (0.019)      (0.017)     (0.009)      (0.009)
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                             -0.007        0.012      -0.004        0.009
                                              (0.010)      (0.006)     (0.004)      (0.004)
 Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s) -0.004         -0.004       0.014        0.009
                                              (0.020)      (0.017)     (0.011)      (0.009)
Notes: Columns 1-2 repeat specifications from Table 3. Columns 3-4 present identical
specifications, this time definining treatment and control groups based on LASSO estimates
described in text. Standard errors, clustered at the school district, in parentheses.
Table 7. Continuous measures of pulled in/pushed out

                                                       Random forest                    Logit
                                                   Increase in Reduction      Increase in Reduction
                                                     Pr(UT     in Pr(UT         Pr(UT       in Pr(UT
                                                    Austin) -  Austin) -       Austin) -    Austin) -
                                                    pulled in pushed out       pulled in pushed out
                                                       (1)        (2)             (3)          (4)
Enrollment outcomes
    UT Austin                                         0.078        -0.040        0.072        -0.068
                                                     (0.007)      (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.006)
    Any college                                       0.106        0.009         0.060         0.008
                                                     (0.015)      (0.009)       (0.015)      (0.012)
    Any 4-year                                        0.103        -0.018        0.061        -0.025
                                                     (0.016)      (0.009)       (0.016)      (0.011)
Degree attainment within 6 years
    Bachelors from any institution                  0.062          -0.008        0.038       -0.010
                                                   (0.014)        (0.006)       (0.012)      (0.008)
    Bachelors with STEM major                      -0.014          -0.003       -0.013       -0.010
                                                   (0.009)        (0.003)       (0.009)      (0.004)
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
    Employment (0/1)                                0.014          0.019         0.004        0.029
                                                   (0.012)        (0.008)       (0.011)      (0.009)
    Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s)      0.073          0.009         0.046        0.001
                                                   (0.028)        (0.018)       (0.026)      (0.021)
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
    Employment (0/1)                               -0.001          0.022        -0.012        0.027
                                                   (0.012)        (0.008)       (0.012)      (0.010)
    Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s)      0.018          0.010         0.018        0.005
                                                   (0.029)        (0.016)       (0.028)      (0.019)
Note: Table reports estimates from the same difference-in-differences specification as in Table 2,
except that the Pulled In and Pushed Out variables (and their interactions) are defined to range
continuously from 0 to 1 rather than being binary. In columns 3-4, the predicted top-10% probability is
obtained from a logit rather than a random forest model.
Appendix: LASSO estimator

        Our primary analyses rely on a somewhat ad hoc rule for defining the Pulled In, Pushed
Out, and control groups. As an alternative, we also present results that use a LASSO procedure
(James et al. 2013, pp. 219-228) to select groups. This appendix describes that procedure.
        We begin by assigning each observation to an s-q cell. Let "# represent the change in the
share of students in cell s-q who attend UT Austin between 1996-1997 and 1998-2002, and let
 "# be an indicator for cell s-q. Our baseline algorithm is based on the un-smoothed "# surface.
However, the individual cell values of "# are noisily estimated, producing the volatile patterns
seen in Figure 5C and in, presented differently, in Panel A of Appendix Figure 1. We use the
LASSO estimator to smooth this surface.
        Our starting point is a simple saturated regression of "# on a full set of s-q indicators:
                                                          ")#)
                              "# =  + ("),#)).("/,#/ ) "#  ")#) + "# .                          (A1)
Here, (s0, q0) represents a base category, which we define as (s0, q0) = (5,25). Because (A1) is
saturated, the coefficient estimates are simply  2 = "/#/ and   3 "# = "# - " # , and the fitted
                                                                               / /
values exactly equal the unsmoothed "# :
                                        2"# =  2 +  3 "# = "# .                                 (A2)
We use a LASSO penalty to smooth this. Specifically, the LASSO coefficients are the solution to
the following problem:
                                                             A
                               min ",# >?"# -  -  "# @ + | "# |D.                               (A3)
                                   8,{:;< }
With  = 0, this is merely the least squares criterion, and the solutions are the coefficients of the
un-smoothed regression (A1). When  > 0, however, the  "# coefficients are smoothed toward
zero. As James et al. (2013) note, this form of penalty forces some coefficients to be exactly
zero, while others are shrunken relative to their OLS values.
        A drawback of specification (A3) is that the fitted values will remain highly "spiky" ­
when a coefficient is set to zero, the fitted value is simply   2 = "/#/ , which may be quite
different from those of adjacent cells. To avoid this problem, we reparameterize the model to
permit a smooth fitted surface. Specifically, we define a new set of variables  "# as follows:
                               P        ( )       )      ) ")#)
                               " ,#)    ,     if  R ,   R
                              " P,#) ( )  ,  )   ) ")#) if  R ,  < R
                       "# =                )      )        ")#)                                  (A4)
                              " P,#) (  ,    ) if < R ,   R
                               P ( )  ,  )   ) ")#) if <  ,  < 
                               " ,#)                                   R        R
These saturate the s-q space just as do the  "# variables, but their coefficients have a different
interpretation: Where  "# represented the fitted value for cell s-q relative to the omitted
category, the  "# coefficients represent "steps" upward or downward as one moves away from
the omitted category, and the fitted value for cell s-q is the sum of all steps on this route. When
estimated without penalization, the surface will be identical to that obtained via (A1), but the
penalized estimates are different: Here, when LASSO sets a particular "# to zero, this eliminates
a step, making the predicted value for that cell similar to those for the adjacent cells closer to the
omitted category.i
i
 Specifically, for  > R and  > R one can write    2"# = 2"VW,#VW + "VW,# + ",#VW + "# (with similar expressions
in other quadrants). Thus, if LASSO sets "# = 0 then the fitted value for cell s-q will be that for cell s-1,q-1 plus the
steps associated with (s-1,q) and (s,q-1).


                                                          35
        We use a two-step process for generating the smoothed surface. First, we fit the LASSO
regression of "# on the  "# variables. Second, we identify the subset of non-zero  "#
coefficients in the LASSO fit, and we estimate a simple OLS regression of "# on the
corresponding subset of  "# s. This OLS-after-LASSO approach means that we use the LASSO
procedure only for variable selection, and that the coefficients that are estimated are not
shrunken. We use the fitted values from this regression to define treatment groups: The Pulled In
group is the set of cells with fitted values greater than 0.003, and the Pushed Out group is the set
of cells with fitted values less than -0.003. The control group consists of all cells with 2  25
that are not included in either of the two treatment groups. We also present some analyses that
use a continuous treatment measure; these use the fitted values from the OLS-after-LASSO
model, rescaled to range from -1 to +1.
        The final issue is the choice of the smoothing parameter . A larger  will mean fewer
non-zero coefficients and a smoother surface. We use a cross-validation approach to this. We
                                                                          Z
construct two measures of the change in UT enrollment in each cell: "#      is the difference
                                              [
between the 1996 and 1998 cohorts, and "# is the difference between the 1997 and 1999
                                                                                                  Z
cohorts. We choose the  that minimizes the mean squared error when a LASSO model fit to "#
                                       [
is used to out of sample to predict "#   , then fit the LASSO model on the full sample (where "#
represents the change from 1996-1997 to 1998-2002) using the selected .
        Panel B of Appendix Figure 1 shows the fitted values from our OLS-after-LASSO model,
using the cross-validation choice of . Comparison to Panel A makes clear that the LASSO
model substantially smooths the raw data while retaining the basic features of the data.




                                                36
Appendix Table 1. Predicting the Top 10%

                                                   Summary                 Logit              Random forest
                                                    statistics                                  predictions
                                                                                                  (OLS)
                                                 Mean     SD     Coeff.     SE      Marg.     Coeff.    SE
                                                                                     effect
                                                 (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)
Math score (statewide percentile/100)            0.51   [0.29]     0.35    (0.23)    0.025     0.067   (0.027)
Reading score (statewide percentile/100)         0.51   [0.29]    -0.02    (0.27)   -0.001     0.023   (0.020)
Writing score (statewide percentile/100)         0.51   [0.29]     0.08    (0.28)    0.005    -0.043   (0.016)
Math score (percentile within school/100)        0.46   [0.26]     3.05    (0.23)    0.220     0.222   (0.025)
Reading score (percentile within school/100)     0.46   [0.26]     2.32    (0.28)    0.167     0.271   (0.015)
Writing score (percentile within school)/100     0.46   [0.26]     2.09    (0.26)    0.151     0.162   (0.020)
Indicator for taking regular math in 9th grade   0.35   [0.48]    -0.47    (0.07)   -0.032    -0.056   (0.008)
Indicator for taking regular math in 10th grade  0.51   [0.50]     0.08    (0.04)    0.006     0.012   (0.005)
Indicator for taking regular math in 11th grade  0.52   [0.50]     0.06    (0.05)    0.004    -0.006   (0.004)
Indicator for taking regular math in 12th grade  0.27   [0.44]     0.39    (0.05)    0.029     0.025   (0.005)
Indicator for taking advanced math in 9th grade 0.14    [0.34]    -0.10    (0.07)   -0.007    -0.023   (0.011)
Indicator for taking advanced math in 10th grade 0.15   [0.36]     0.32    (0.06)    0.025     0.023   (0.007)
Indicator for taking advanced math in 11th grade 0.14   [0.34]    -0.13    (0.07)   -0.009    -0.013   (0.006)
Indicator for taking advanced math in 12th grade 0.07   [0.26]     0.84    (0.07)    0.078     0.266   (0.008)
Indicator for taking any math in 9th grade       0.51   [0.50]    -0.47    (0.07)   -0.036    -0.037   (0.009)
Indicator for taking any math in 10th grade      0.60   [0.49]    -0.48    (0.05)   -0.038    -0.036   (0.005)
Indicator for taking any math in 11th grade      0.61   [0.49]     0.13    (0.05)    0.009     0.015   (0.003)
Indicator for taking any math in 12th grade      0.35   [0.48]     0.19    (0.06)    0.014     0.017   (0.003)
Indicator for taking biology                     0.86   [0.35]     0.08    (0.09)    0.006     0.025   (0.004)
Indicator for taking chemistry                   0.57   [0.50]     0.13    (0.05)    0.009    -0.001   (0.003)
Indicator for taking physics                     0.24   [0.43]     0.07    (0.04)    0.005    -0.014   (0.002)
Indicator for taking remedial algebra            0.17   [0.38]    -1.12    (0.11)   -0.056    -0.037   (0.005)
Number of foreign language courses taken         3.40   [1.99]    0.084   (0.009)    0.006     0.003   (0.000)
Number of days absent                            8.35   [8.75]   -0.009   (0.018)   -0.001    -0.003   (0.000)
Percent of schools days absent (/100)            0.05   [0.05]    -8.90    (3.18)   -0.642    -0.260   (0.058)
Percent of school Black (/100)                   0.12   [0.17]     1.13    (0.23)    0.082     0.074   (0.015)
Percent of school Hispanic (/100)                0.29   [0.30]     0.11    (0.24)    0.008    -0.005   (0.011)
Percent of school Asian (/100)                   0.03   [0.05]    -3.47    (0.69)   -0.250    -0.263   (0.063)
Percent of school other minority race (/100)     0.00   [0.00]    12.00    (4.59)    0.866     0.944   (0.340)
Percent of school on Free/Reduced Lunch (/100) 0.22     [0.21]     0.79    (0.34)    0.057     0.075   (0.019)
Percent of school female (/100)                  0.52   [0.03]     1.69    (1.40)    0.122     0.059   (0.090)
Percent of school English Lang. Learner (/100)   0.04   [0.07]     0.93    (0.78)    0.067     0.036   (0.041)
Percent of school Special Education (/100)       0.04   [0.02]     0.99    (0.98)    0.072     0.061   (0.077)
Indicator for being 18 years old                 0.16   [0.37]    -0.10    (0.04)   -0.007     0.014   (0.002)
Number of courses failed                         0.95   [1.70]    -0.59    (0.09)   -0.042    -0.006   (0.001)

Notes: N=195,710. Columns 6 and 7 present coefficients of an linear (OLS) regression of the predicted
values from the nonlinear random forest model on the covariates.
Appendix Table 2. Stability of predicted top 10% probability across specifications

                                                 RF     Logit RF 1999- RF 2001-       RF 25     RF 100
                                                               2000     2002
                                                 (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)           (5)       (6)
Panel A. Full sample
  Random Forest                                   1
  Logit                                         0.94      1
  Random Forest (fit to 1999-2000   data)       0.98    0.93        1
  Random Forest (fit to 2001-2002   data)       0.99    0.95      0.96         1
  Random Forest (Leaf=25 obs.)                  0.99    0.94      0.97       0.97       1
  Random Forest (Leaf=100 obs.)                 0.99    0.93      0.98       0.98      0.97        1
Panel B. 1996-1997 (pre TTP)
  Random Forest                                   1
  Logit                                         0.95      1
  Random Forest (fit to 1999-2000   data)       0.99    0.94        1
  Random Forest (fit to 2001-2002   data)       0.99    0.95      0.97         1
  Random Forest (Leaf=25 obs.)                  0.99    0.96      0.98       0.98       1
  Random Forest (Leaf=100 obs.)                 0.99    0.93      0.98       0.99      0.97        1
Panel C. 1998-2002 (post TTP)
  Random Forest                                   1
  Logit                                         0.94      1
  Random Forest (fit to 1999-2000   data)       0.98    0.93        1
  Random Forest (fit to 2001-2002   data)       0.99    0.95      0.96         1
  Random Forest (Leaf=25 obs.)                  0.99    0.93      0.97       0.97       1
  Random Forest (Leaf=100 obs.)                 0.99    0.92      0.98       0.98      0.97        1

Notes: The baseline random forest model discussed in the text, fit to 1999-2002 data and using a "leaf"
size of 50 observations, is labeled "random forest" here. Table shows correlations of predicted values
across alternative models. Correlations are estimated at the individual level.
Appendix Table 3. Summary statistics by decile of high school pre-TTP UT sending rate (s)

                Demographics                     Mean statewide percentile       Send to UT
  s    Black Hispanic Free lunch       ELL        Math Reading Writing          Pre      Post
 1     18%     28%       31%           3%         46.0     45.7     46.3        NR       0.7%
 2     19%     44%       38%           9%         43.7     42.5     44.2        NR       1.1%
 3     10%     38%       29%           4%         48.1     47.4     48.2       0.8%      1.2%
 4      9%     37%       28%           5%         48.1     47.7     48.3       1.3%      1.5%
 5     14%     39%       29%           4%         48.0     48.1     48.8       1.8%      1.9%
 6     11%     27%       21%           3%         50.6     50.4     50.3       2.4%      2.2%
 7     11%     30%       18%           3%         51.0     51.5     51.3       3.2%      3.0%
 8     10%     21%       12%           2%         53.4     54.1     53.5       4.3%      3.7%
 9     10%     24%       13%           3%         55.4     55.5     54.4       6.6%      5.8%
 10     8%     12%        6%           2%         60.0     60.5     59.1       12.8% 10.9%

Notes: All columns present student-weighted means of school average characteristics, based
(except in final column) on pre-TTP data. S=1 represents the decile of high schools with the
lowest pre-TTP UT sending rates, and s=10 the decile with the highest rates.
Appendix Table 4. Difference-in-Differences Analysis, Excluding High Schools That
Participate in Longhorn Opportunity and Century Scholar Programs

                                                                       Pulled In   Pushed Out
                                                                             (1)          (2)
Enrollment outcomes
    UT Austin                                                            0.047        -0.035
                                                                        (0.005)       (0.004)
     Texas A&M                                                          -0.011         0.008
                                                                        (0.008)       (0.004)
     Any college                                                         0.043         0.003
                                                                        (0.011)       (0.008)
     Any 4-year                                                          0.062        -0.003
                                                                        (0.012)       (0.008)
     Any Community College                                              -0.008         0.011
                                                                        (0.009)       (0.006)
     Any other 4-year                                                    0.026         0.024
                                                                        (0.010)       (0.006)
Characteristics of institution attended (fixed at pre-policy levels)
    Graduation rate (conditional on enrollment)                          0.017        -0.006
                                                                        (0.005)       (0.004)
     Math state %ile (conditional on enrollment)                          1.42         -1.18
                                                                         (0.36)        (0.28)
     Graduation rate (with non-enrollment as institution)                0.034        -0.005
                                                                        (0.007)       (0.005)
     Math state %ile (with non-enrollment as institution)                 1.75         -0.81
                                                                         (0.35)        (0.26)
Degree attainment within 6 years
    Bachelors from UT Austin                                             0.036        -0.020
                                                                        (0.005)       (0.003)
     Bachelors from any institution                                      0.029         0.000
                                                                        (0.012)       (0.006)
     Associates or better                                                0.026        -0.005
                                                                        (0.012)       (0.007)
     Bachelors with STEM major                                          -0.013        -0.001
                                                                        (0.007)       (0.002)
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
    Employment (0/1)                                                    -0.001         0.008
                                                                        (0.011)       (0.007)
     Average annual earnings (excluding 0s)                                669          -262
                                                                          (605)         (491)
     Average annual earnings (including 0s)                                311           225
                                                                          (699)         (403)
     Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s)                          0.044         0.032
                                                                        (0.021)       (0.018)
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
    Employment (0/1)                                                    -0.007         0.012
                                                                        (0.011)       (0.007)
     Average annual earnings (excluding 0s)                               -923          -313
                                                                          (948)         (665)
     Average annual earnings (including 0s)                              -1161           613
                                                                          (998)         (538)
     Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s)                         -0.009        -0.007
                                                                        (0.023)       (0.018)

Notes: N=180,101.
Appendix Table 5. Sensitivity to prediction model

 Group:                                                  Pulled In                       Pushed Out
 Prediction model:                                  RF         RF      Logit       RF          RF       Logit

                                              1999-00 2001-02                  1999-00 2001-02
                                                  (1)     (2)            (3)       (4)     (5)            (6)
Enrollment outcomes
 UT Austin                                      0.030      0.047      0.049    -0.027      -0.034     -0.036
                                               (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.008)     (0.006)    (0.003)
 Any college                                    0.017      0.042      0.040     0.010      -0.006      0.007
                                               (0.012)    (0.014)    (0.010)   (0.011)     (0.009)    (0.007)
 Any 4-year                                     0.018      0.065      0.049     0.005      -0.009     -0.006
                                               (0.012)    (0.014)    (0.011)   (0.013)     (0.011)    (0.008)
Degree attainment within 6 years
 Bachelors from UT Austin                     0.024        0.035      0.034    -0.013      -0.019     -0.023
                                             (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.003)   (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.003)
 Bachelors from any institution               0.012        0.044      0.036     0.007       0.002      0.002
                                             (0.011)      (0.013)    (0.009)   (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.006)
 Bachelors with STEM major                   -0.011       -0.003     -0.004     0.010      -0.007     -0.006
                                             (0.006)      (0.008)    (0.006)   (0.006)     (0.004)    (0.002)
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                            -0.011        0.004      0.003     0.024       0.007      0.016
                                             (0.011)      (0.012)    (0.007)   (0.010)     (0.008)    (0.005)
 Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s) 0.051          0.045      0.050     0.050       0.040      0.030
                                             (0.024)      (0.027)    (0.018)   (0.021)     (0.025)    (0.013)
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
 Employment (0/1)                            -0.013       -0.008     -0.006     0.024       0.019      0.016
                                             (0.011)      (0.013)    (0.008)   (0.009)     (0.011)    (0.006)
 Log average annual earnings (excluding 0s) 0.003          0.004      0.020     0.022      -0.006      0.006
                                             (0.023)      (0.029)    (0.020)   (0.026)     (0.024)    (0.014)

Notes: In columns 1-2, predictions of top ten percent status are from a random forest model fit to 1999-
2000 data only. In columns 2 and 5, the random forest model is fit to 2001-2002 data. In columns 3 and 6,
predictions are based on a logit model using 1999-2002 data.
Appendix Table 6. Bootstrap vs. clustered standard errors

                                           Pulled In                              Pushed Out
                                   Baseline            Lasso              Baseline            Lasso
                               Cluster Bootstrap Cluster Bootstrap    Cluster Bootstrap Cluster Bootstrap
                                 (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)
Enrollment outcomes
  UT Austin                    0.053            0.016                  -0.036          -0.016
                             (0.005) (0.004) (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.004) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002)
  Any college                  0.052            0.030                   0.000           0.010
                             (0.011) (0.011) (0.005)      (0.008)     (0.007) (0.008) (0.005) (0.005)
  Any 4-year                   0.066            0.017                  -0.006          -0.013
                             (0.011) (0.011) (0.005)      (0.008)     (0.008) (0.008) (0.005) (0.006)
Degree attainment within 6 years
  Bachelors from UT            0.039            0.011                  -0.021          -0.010
  Austin                     (0.004) (0.004) (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.003) (0.004) (0.002) (0.002)
  Bachelors from any           0.037            0.015                  -0.001          -0.004
  institution                (0.010) (0.010) (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.006) (0.007) (0.004) (0.004)
  Associates or better         0.032            0.016                  -0.006          -0.002
                             (0.010) (0.010) (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.007) (0.007) (0.004) (0.004)
Labor market outcomes 9-11 years after HS graduation
  Employment (0/1)             0.000            0.002                  0.008            0.011
                             (0.009) (0.008) (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.006) (0.007) (0.004) (0.004)
  Log average annual           0.055            0.016                  0.036           -0.008
  earnings (excluding 0s)    (0.019) (0.019) (0.009)      (0.012)     (0.017) (0.016) (0.009) (0.011)
Labor market outcomes 13-15 years after HS graduation
  Employment (0/1)            -0.007           -0.004                   0.012          0.009
                             (0.010) (0.009) (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.006) (0.007) (0.004) (0.005)
  Log average annual          -0.004            0.014                  -0.004          0.009
  earnings (excluding 0s)    (0.020) (0.021) (0.011)      (0.015)     (0.017) (0.018) (0.009) (0.010)

Notes: All specifications use predicted probabilities of being in the top 10% from the random forest model.
In odd numbered columns, standard errors of the DD regresson are clustered at the school district level. In
even numbered columns, standard errors are computed from bootstrap replications of the entire estimation
procedure, from estimation of predicted probabilities to formation of treatment groups and estimation of
the DD regression. Bootstrap samples are clustered at the school level; standard errors are the standard
deviations across 250 bootstrap replications.
