                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                WHEN A MASTER DIES:
                            SPECULATION AND ASSET FLOAT

                                         Julien Pénasse
                                        Luc Renneboog
                                      José A. Scheinkman

                                      Working Paper 26831
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26831


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We would like to thank Marcelo Fernandes, Ed Glaeser, Florian Heider, Harrison Hong, and
seminar participants at Columbia University, at the Arrow Lecture at the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, SBFIN (Brazil), Tokyo University, University of Luxembourg, the European Winter
Finance Conference, and the Yale-RFS Real and Private-Value Assets Conference for comments,
Jialin Yu for providing the original data of Xiong and Yu (2011), and John Silberman for a
insightful conversation on artists' estates. We also thank Raghav Bansal, Zoey Chopra, Kristine
Fu, and Emilio Garcia for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Julien Pénasse, Luc Renneboog, and José A. Scheinkman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When a Master Dies: Speculation and Asset Float
Julien Pénasse, Luc Renneboog, and José A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 26831
March 2020
JEL No. G12,G4,Z11

                                          ABSTRACT

The death of an artist constitutes a negative supply shock to his future production; in finance
terms, this supply shock reduces the artist's float. Intuition may thus suggest that this supply
shock reduces the future auction volume of the artist. However, if collectors have fluctuating
heterogeneous beliefs, since they cannot sell short, prices overweigh optimists' beliefs and have a
speculative component. If collectors have limited capacity to bear risk, an increase in float may
decrease subsequent turnover and prices (Hong et al. 2006). Symmetrically, a negative supply
shock leads to an augmentation of prices and turnover. We find strong support for this prediction
in the data on art auctions that we examine.

Julien Pénasse                                   José A. Scheinkman
University of Luxembourg                         Department of Economics
Faculty of Law, Economics and Finance            Columbia University
6, rue Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi                New York, NY 10027
Luxembourg                                       and NBER
julien.penasse@gmail.com                         js3317@columbia.edu

Luc Renneboog
Tilburg University
PO Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg
the Netherlands
Luc.Renneboog@uvt.nl
              Pour moi les tableaux de grand prix
              Sont ceux que plus cher on m'ach`ete.
            es tout, que m'importe le talent? 1
         Apr`



                                   I.     Introduction
Around 1660, an Italian art dealer brought bad news to Rembrandt: his style of painting
was no longer in vogue and sold at lower prices. Rembrandt did not yield to the art
dealer's suggestion to start painting in the idealizing style of the classic painters, but
thought up a cunning plan. He disappeared and had the rumor spread that he had died
(De Wilt, 2006). As a consequence, works by a `dead' Rembrandt were sold for up to
three times the normal price.2
       This anecdote illustrates that the unexpected death of an artist leads to higher prices,
a natural consequence of the lower future supply relative to expectations. It is natural to
expect that the lower supply would also lead to a smaller volume of trade in the future
but theories of speculation based on fluctuating differences in beliefs and short-selling
restrictions (Harrison and Kreps, 1978; Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003) suggest that the
lower outstanding supply may actually lead to an increase in both prices and turnover
(Hong et al. 2006). A smaller float means that the marginal future buyer is likely to
have a more optimistic view, which makes the option to sell more valuable for the current
owner. When the marginal future buyer is more optimistic, it is also less probable that
a current owner's valuation will stay among the highest in the future leading to a higher
   1
      "For me, highly priced paintings are those that I can sell ever more expensively. After all, why
should I care about talent?" Quote from Forbeck, the art-dealer in the play "Rembrandt ou la Vente
apr`es d´ec`
           es" (by Charles-Guillaume Etienne, 1777-1845) (see Spieth 2017).
    2
      Several versions of this anecdote circulate. The aforementioned play has been performed in France
since 1800. According to the play, Rembrandt and his first wife Saskia van Uylenburgh conspired:
Rembrandt left Amsterdam for a while, Saskia spread the rumor that her husband had died and dressed
in traditional mourning clothing. As a consequence, the demand for Rembrandt's paintings and etchings
surged and the `widow' sold many, while remarking that there would be no new supply of Rembrandts
(De Wilt, 2006). After a while, Rembrandt reappeared. In a different context, a similar anecdote was
told: As a consequence of his bankruptcy, all his work was auctioned to pay off creditors. Prior to the
auction, Rembrandt faked his death to increase the proceeds from the sales.




                                                  2
average turnover.3
       In this paper we use a database of sales of modern and contemporary art at auction
to evaluate the impact of an unexpected death of an artist. Since we do not observe the
counterfactual evolution of an artists' oeuvre had she not died, we match an artist who
died prematurely and suddenly with an artist who lived for at least 10 years after the
death of the treated artist and who is otherwise similar or close in birth-year, and number
of auctioned paintings, price level, and reputation over a ten-year look-back period prior
to the death of the treated artist. We define death as premature if it takes place at an
age of 65 or earlier (we perform sensitivity analyses on this age cutoff), and sudden if it is
attributed to a heart attack, stroke, accident, murder, suicide, overdose, etc., information
that we collect from obituaries, biographies, newspaper articles and other media sources.
Our database of treated artists counts 246 cases of premature and sudden deaths out of
2,236 artists who were alive at the beginning of our sample period. We identify 57,997
auction transactions for the combined subsamples of treated and matched artists.
       Our empirical results lead to five conclusions. First, premature death increases prices
by 54.7% and sales by 63.2%. Second, if the death is also sudden, price and volume
increases amount to 80.0% and 84.0%, respectively. Third, the death effect is more
pronounced when the artist dies at a younger age, when she presumably leaves a larger
un-produced body of work. Fourth, for death to have an impact on prices and sales,
the artist needs to have a reputation, otherwise there is no effect. All these findings
are confirmed by robustness tests on the definition of premature death and of an artist's
notoriety, and with different samples (matched artists' sample, all artists' in the global
database). A placebo test reassuringly shows that the death effect in a pseudo dataset
is insignificant. Fifth, death has a permanent impact for 10 years and beyond on prices
and volume in our diff-in-diff setup, which we confirm using event study designs and a
repeat-sales analysis. Following P´
                                  enasse and Renneboog (2018), we use the number of
transactions observed each year (trading volume) to proxy for auction turnover. Since an
   3
    Mei et al. (2009) and Xiong and Yu (2011) document the negative cross-sectional correlation between
turnover and float during two speculative episodes in Chinese markets.



                                                  3
artist's unexpected death necessarily diminishes supply, the increase in trading volume
we document implies an even larger increase in turnover relative to the counterfactual.
    While popular wisdom claims that a dead artist is worth more than one alive, the
impact of death on art transactions and prices have not been studied often.4 In the
traditional hedonic regressions that aim at constructing art-indexes, some papers include
a dummy variable indicating that an artist is dead at the time of the transaction (see
e.g., Ekelund et al. 2000; Ursprung and Wiermann 2011; Renneboog and Spaenjers 2013).
These studies all conclude that death is accompanied by higher average prices.5 While
not controlling for unexpected deaths, Korteweg et al. (2016) document that paintings
do not sell more frequently subsequent to an artist's demise, "despite popular belief that
the passing away of an artist temporarily raises visibility of his or her artwork". The
authors speculate that this is because "most artists' deaths do not come as a surprise to
the market".
    The price increase following unexpected death is compatible with any theory in which
supply affects prices, and a temporary volume increase could be a consequence of the price
increase, since the current holders of the art-works of the deceased artist may decide to
consume some of the capital gains or simply to rebalance their portfolios. If auctions of
individual works are subject to fixed costs, an increase in price could affect sales volume.
However, our results on volume stand even after we add a control for yearly-average sale
price of an artist's works. The observed permanent increase in volume is more difficult
to explain by alternative theories and gives support to the hypothesis that theories of
speculation based on fluctuating differences in beliefs and short-selling restrictions apply
to the art-market.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In Section II we detail our
    4
      The impact of supply-elasticity in speculative episodes in housing markets is modeled and docu-
mented in Glaeser et al. (2008).
    5
      Our approach differs from these studies by its focus on premature and sudden deaths. In addition,
our research design relies on the set up of a matched control group. A control group effectively pins
down the counterfactual price and volume trajectories in the absence of premature and sudden death. In
the absence of a matched sample, the control group consists of all non-treated artists. It is likely these
artists exhibit different price and volume trajectories as they age, which would contaminate the estimate
of the death effect. Our research design minimizes this risk by constructing a matched sample.



                                                    4
datasets and develop the empirical strategy and econometric considerations; in Section
III we present the results and explain the robustness and placebo tests; and in Section IV,
we formulate our conclusion. In Appendix A we present a simple model of speculation
between risk-neutral agents where the premature death of an artist leads to a permanent
increase in prices and turnover of her art-works.6



                    II.      Data and empirical strategy

A.       The Art Market

The setting for our empirical work is the auction market for modern and contemporary
art. Works of art are usually sold through two types of intermediaries, dealers (galleries)
and auction houses. Auction houses effectively act as brokers and operate most of the
secondary market for art and other luxury goods. According to the Tefaf Art Market
Report 2017, the art market is worth about USD 45 billion worldwide, typically split
equally between dealers and auction houses (Pownall, 2017). Dealers are often small
businesses, lightly regulated, so that this market is largely opaque. As a result, dealer
prices tend not to be reliable or easily obtainable. We therefore work with auction
data, which aligns well with our interest in the secondary market. Auction data is both
reliable and publicly available, and has been used to study a broad number of finance and
economics questions (e.g. Beggs and Graddy (2009), Galenson and Weinberg (2000), Mei
and Moses (2005)). A drawback is that fewer artists are active on the auction market
at the time of their death. This means that we can only measure the effect of death on
prices conditional on the death of artists for whom there is a secondary market.
       The way the auction market operates has changed little over the centuries. Sellers
consign works of art to an auction house and works are grouped to create an auction.
Every auction comes with a catalog listing all of the lots in the sale with information
   6
    Bernales et al. (2019) also study a model featuring risk-averse agents with heterogeneous beliefs, in
which a reduction in supply leads to an increase in volume. Lovo and Spaenjers (2018) propose a model
where trading also arises endogenously, but do not study the effect of a change in supply.



                                                   5
about each piece and often features a public pre-sale exhibition. At the auction itself,
each item is bid on, one at a time. When an item does not attract any bids or the bids
do not exceed the reserve price, it is bought-in. If it is sold, the winner is required to pay
the hammer price along with the buyer's commission and any taxes. The auction house
also takes a seller's commission, which is deducted from the hammer price, and passes on
the remainder of the proceeds to the consignor.
   Transaction costs are substantial in the art market. Auction houses typically charge
commissions of around 10% for both parties (buyers and sellers), and transaction costs
may also include mandatory insurance and shipping charges (see Pesando (1993), Ashen-
felter and Graddy (2003)). If a lot does not sell, consignors often face "buy-back" fees,
reimbursing the auction house for its various costs, such as photographing, researching
and cataloging the item. Sellers also incur some charges, such as shipping and handling
costs even when a work of art goes unsold (i.e., it is "bought-in"). Art buyers also have to
take into account the various costs incurred to maintain, store, restore and insure works
of art, which can be non-negligible.
   Despite these large transaction costs, art-as-investment is increasingly popular. The
first formal art fund was one launched by the British Rail Pension Fund in 1974, investing
some $70 million worth of art and luxury furniture (Trucco, 1989). The Art & Finance
Report 2014, a joint report by Deloitte Luxembourg and ArtTactic, identifies 72 art
funds in operation in 2014. Art funds are of course only the tip of the art investment
iceberg. 76 percent of art buyers still view their acquisitions as investments, intending
to at least avoid negative returns (Picinati di Torcello and Petterson, 2014). There are
about 300,000 art advisors in the world today (Reyburn, 2014).
   Equally interesting is the practice of flipping art. Art flippers purchase art with
the intent of offering the piece at a profit shortly after purchase. Flipping is facilitated
by specialized firms offering high-security warehouses, in tax-free jurisdictions, specially
designed for the purpose of quickly reselling art. For example, a 2015 New York Times
Magazine article covers a new storage company, Uovo (Alden, 2015): "Everything about
the facility seems designed to remove friction from the art market--to turn physical


                                              6
objects into liquid assets. Apart from its private viewing rooms for deal making, which
are now common in the storage business, what really sets Uovo apart is its vast database.
[. . . ] [G]iving clients and prospective buyers remote access to so much data, while making
the business more efficient, also helps make the art more like a tradable unit, able to
change hands without even leaving a warehouse.7


B.      Auction data

Our primary data sources are the Blouin Art Sales database and Auction club, online
databases commonly used in research on art-markets. In the Blouin database, we retain
a million auction records from 1957 until 2016, for 8,199 artists, covering art periods from
Medieval art to Modern and Contemporary art. The selected artists also appear in the
Oxford Grove online Dictionary and/or in Artcyclopedia. Only London sales are included
until 1969, but from the 1970s, the coverage consists of almost all major, medium-sized,
and even smaller auction houses around the world. We restrict our attention to 2,051
artists who were alive in 1957, the beginning of our sample period. We expand the
universe of contemporary artists using various sources (mostly from lists complied by
Wikipedia), and obtain additional transactions from the data provider Auction club.
This additional search yields transactions for 866 artists including 185 that were not in
our initial dataset and were alive at the start of our sample window. Our final sample
thus comprise 2,236 artists.
       This paper focuses on 246 artists who passed away prematurely and no later than
2015. This enables us to observe transactions at least one year before and one year after
the death of the artist. We consider a death as premature if it occurs prior to an artist's
66th birthday (we later explore the sensitivity of our results to this cutoff). On average,
these artists died at age 54.
   7
    Buying art as an investment is not a recent phenomenon. The noted collector Peggy Guggenheim
wrote after a visit to New York in 1959 that "[T]he entire art movement had become an enormous
business venture,... Some buy merely for investment, placing pictures in storage without even seeing
them, phoning their gallery every day for the latest quotation, as though they were waiting to sell stock
at the most advantageous moment." Guggenheim (1997), page 78.



                                                   7
       The relatively young average age of decease suggests that premature death may have
suppressed a substantial body of work. To provide a rough estimate of the size of the
anticipated oeuvre which was not produced as a result of premature death, we again use
Blouin Art Sales data and select the sample of painters who were born after 1880 (and
hence active in the 20th century), lived to at least age 70, and had at least 200 sales in
auctions from 1957 to 2016.8 On average, each painter had 605 sales but Blouin provides
year-of-production for only 255 of these. The painters in this sample created, on average,
129 paintings before and including the age of 54 and 126 paintings subsequently. Hence
we can reasonably argue that the average prematurely deceased artist that we focus on
in this paper produced only half of their potential oeuvre.
       The "death events" are spread over the sample period. A group of nine artists passed
away in 1958, while the last two artists died in 2013. This is convenient from an econo-
metric point of view, because it reduces the risk that our results may be driven by the
state of the market at a narrow point in time (Figure 1).
       Whenever possible, we collect the cause of death of artists who passed away at the
age of 65 or younger. We gather this biographical information from a combination of
obituaries, biographical memoirs, newspaper articles, magazine articles, and encyclope-
dia (including Grove Dictionary of Art/Oxford Art Online and Wikipedia), in order to
ascertain the surprise element in an artist's death. We report statistics on causes of death
in Table I.
       Each auction record contains information on the artist, artwork, and sale. We observe
the name of the artist, his nationality, and his or her years of birth and death. Even in
public sales, the identity of the buyer and the seller are typically kept secret by the
auction house, and our dataset does not contain this information. The information on
the art object includes title, year of creation (for about a third of observations), medium,
size, and whether the piece is signed. The transaction information includes the auction
house, date of the auction, lot number, and hammer price. Our sample includes periods
   8
    Although catalogue raisonn´
                              es would provide more complete data, they only exist for a small number
of artists.



                                                 8
of large inflation and we calculate 2015 US dollar equivalent hammer prices using the US
consumer price index.
       Our main variables of interest are auction prices and trading volume around death
events. Few artists sell at auction every year, and many artists only sell when they reach
a certain level of notoriety. Each year-artist for which we do not observe a transaction is
recorded as a zero, provided the artist is aged 23 or older.9 Our volume panel consists
of 124,273 artist-year volume observations, of which 26,865 correspond to the treated
artists and their matched controls. Estimating the death effect on art prices imposes an
additional condition, since we need to observe at least one transaction before and after
the death of the artist. To measure the impact on prices, we thus rely on a subset of 76
artists who were active on the auction market before their death.


C.       Empirical strategy

We ask whether premature death affects two outcome variables, volume and prices. A
natural starting point is to examine whether the price and traded volume of a deceased
artist change after the artist passes away. Our hypothesis is that, everything else equal,
prices and volume should increase. That is, we are interested in the counterfactual price
and volume trajectory of the same artist if she would not have passed away prematurely.
In Appendix A, we formalize this hypothesis in a stylized model. Since both prices and
volume may correlate with age, as well as the passage of time, our specifications must
include not only artist fixed effects, but also age and time fixed effects. In particular, age
fixed effects are set irrespective of whether the artist is alive or not at the time of the
transaction, because they serve the purpose of separately identifying the effect of death
from the effect of age. Even with such a rich set of fixed effects, it is important to reflect
on what control group will serve to pin down the counterfactual prices and volume in the
absence of premature death. When the sample only includes the works of artists who
passed away prematurely, we cannot separately identify the effect of death from the effect
   9
    We set the beginning of an artist's career at the age of 23, which corresponds to the earliest sale in
an artist's career (Jean-Michel Basquiat) in our sample.


                                                    9
of old age. In our baseline specification, since the age cutoff of premature death is 65
years, the age fixed effects for ages exceeding 65 capture both the effect of age and the
effect of death. Separating the effect of death from the effect of age therefore requires the
presence of a control group of artists who did not die prematurely. Because artists may
experience different career paths--the effect of age may be different across artists--it is
a priori important to construct a control group that is as close as possible to the group
of treated artists.
   Our preferred empirical strategy therefore relies on constructing a synthetic control
group of artists that is very similar to the group of treated artists. We implement a
matching procedure to construct a control group of artists who are most comparable to
the group of 246 artists that died prematurely. We delineate a set of covariates along
which matched artists must resemble each other. The control group must consist of
artists of approximately the same age as the "treated" group, selling art in the auction
market in the same quantity and price range. We also want that the degree of notoriety
of the treated and matched artists are comparable. We then implement a variation on the
coarsened exact matching procedure (Iacus et al., 2012) to identify the artists that best
satisfy these criteria. This procedure is similar to the identification strategy used by, e.g.,
Azoulay et al. (2010) to estimate the effect of "superstar" scientists on the productivity
of their collaborators.
   To construct our synthetic control group, we first match artists based on the average
real USD price commanded by the artist's work and the average number of artworks sold
per year. Both variables are measured over a lookback period of at most ten years before
the death of the treated artist. We distinguish cases where the artist's work has been
auctioned prior to his death, to cases in which no work of the artist has been sold prior
to his death. For artists with prior sales, we search for other artists for which both past
sales and prices fall within a 50% range of the treated artist. We match the remaining
individuals without prior sales to other artists without prior sales. In the absence of price
information, we check that the reputation of the treated artists and those in the control
sample are similar at the time of death of the treated artist. To do so, following P´
                                                                                    enasse


                                              10
and Renneboog (2018), we measure the yearly "Fame" of the artist as the percentage of
mentions of each artist name in the English-language books digitized by Google Books.
We require that the control artist's Fame in the year of the death of the treated artist,
winsorized at the 5% level, falls within a 50% range of the treated artist Fame.10
       Third, we require that a matched artist is born no more than ten years before or after
the treated artist and that the matched artist is presently alive or passed away at age
of 66 or older and at least ten years after the treated artist. This ensures that matched
artists belong approximately to the same age cohort, while at the same time they do not
die prematurely, so that we can identify the effect of the treated artist's death. We match
without replacement so that each artist is assigned exactly one match. Whenever more
than one match is found, we pick the matches that minimize the (normalized) Euclidean
distance in the year of births of the two artists, sales, and price at death or fame. If several
matches satisfy this last distance criterion, we pick one at random.11 As an example, the
algorithm matches Eva Hesse, one of the pioneers of post-minimalism, who died in 1970
at age 34, with Frank Stella (1936-) a major American artist of the 20th century, who is
still active. In an online appendix, we show the list of artists and their matches.
       Finally, we note that while our design aims at capturing the causal effect of death, we
are interested in capturing the effect of the realized supply. This requires two additional
assumptions. First, premature death must affect treated artists but not their controls.
We later construct a placebo test that allow us to check that assumption. Second, death
has to leave the demand for the artist unchanged. For instance, death must not boost the
artist's (unobserved) notoriety. We consider a series of proxies for notoriety and return
to this question in Section III.F.
       Our control selection procedure matches 242 of the 246 treated artists (98.37%). We
have a total of 57,997 transactions for these artists and the control group. Table II
provides summary statistics for the variables of interest for the sample of artists who
died prematurely and their matched counterparts. Statistics on average real USD prices,
  10
    Google nGram data is unavailable after 2008; for artists that died after that, we take Fame in 2008.
  11
    We also considered a simpler procedure where we minimize the Euclidean distance for the vector of
standardized matching variables and obtained similar regression results.


                                                  11
average yearly volume and fame are computed for both samples of artists, based on the
years before the death event of the treated artists. Fame is standardized so that the cross
section of all artists in a given year has a zero mean and unit standard deviation. Both
treated and control artists are, by construction, well balanced on all covariates relating to
age, past prices, and volume. The typical artist in our sample is born in the mid-1920s.
Treated artists pass away at the age of 54.3 on average, which is 22.7 years younger
than the typical control (conditional on the later artist dying before 2016). There is
considerable variation in the age, and time, of death. For instance, the youngest artist
in our sample, Francesca Woodman, died in 1981 at the age of 23; 17 passed away at the
age of 65. On average, treated and matched artists sold one work through auction per
year in the ten years that preceded their death. 170 artists had not sold a single work of
art at the time of their death; also in this respect, matched artists are very similar.12


D.     Econometric Considerations

We use a difference-in-differences framework to estimate the impact of death on prices
and volume. Our econometric specification differs slightly depending on whether the
outcome variable is price or trading volume. For the former, our specification is


 log Pi,t,k = 0 + 1 PostDeathi,t + i + t + 1 Agei,t + 2 Artworki,t,k + 3 Artisti,t +          itk ,   (1)


where Pitk denotes the auction price of artwork k for artist i in year t, PostDeath is
an indicator variable that switches to one from the artist's death year if the artist dies
before 65, i and t are artist and year fixed effects, Agei,t corresponds to age brackets
dummies in five-year intervals, and Artworki,t,k is a vector of artwork-specific controls
that affect the price of art. This vector includes observed characteristics such as whether
a given work is signed, whether it is dated, the medium (oil, watercolor, etc.), size,
and auction house dummy variables. The vector Artisti,t includes artist characteristics
  12
    Although our sample contains both superstars and lesser known artists, Table II does not suggest
that outliers may be present. We nevertheless verified that our results do not change when we winsorize
prices and volume or drop the most traded artists.


                                                  12
reflecting the fact that artist notoriety may change over time. To proxy for notoriety, we
create a dummy variable equal to one when the artist has exhibited at the Documenta
exhibition in Cassel, and another equal to one when the artist's work has been sold at
Sotheby's or Christie's main venues, in London or New York. We also report regression
results controlling for `Fame', as defined above, since the variable is only available on
a shorter sample (up to 2008). Equations of the form of (1) are often referred to as
"hedonic regressions" in the literature on the determinants of real estate and art prices
(e.g., Renneboog and Spaenjers, 2013).
   To estimate the impact of death on the number of artworks sold Vi,t for artist i in
year t, we use the following specification, which is commonly used for count data with
many zeros:


         E [Vi,t |Zi,t ] = exp[0 + 1 PostDeathi,t + i + t + 1 Agei,t + 3 Artisti,t ],   (2)


where all variables are defined as above (Zi,t includes all right-hand side variables in
Equation (2)). In both instances, a positive 1 indicates that artists command higher
prices or volume on average after their death. We estimate the effect of death on prices in
(1) by OLS. In Equation (2) where the dependent variable is volume with a large number
of zeros, we present conditional quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimates of the fixed
effects Poisson model (Hausman et al., 1984). In both cases, we compute standard errors
using the generalized Huber-White formula clustered at the artist level. QML standard
errors are consistent even if the underlying data generating process is not Poisson, as long
as Equation (2) is the correct specification of the conditional mean (Cameron and Trivedi,
1998). Bertrand et al. (2004) show that these "cluster-robust" standard errors perform
well in the context of Differences-in-Differences estimation similars to our setting.




                                             13
                                    III.     Results

A.     Main effect of premature death

Table III gives the resulting 1 -estimates. The top panel reports the impact of death
on auction prices and the bottom panel reports the effect on trading volume. The first
column of each panel gives the results including the control group of matched artists,
whereas the second column of each panel shows the results for the treated artists only.
The table reports the number of observations as well as the number of treated artists and
the number of control artists, if any. Observe that the number of artists is smaller in the
top panel. We measure the impact of death on prices for the 76 artists who were active
on the auction market before their death. In the bottom panel, we can work with the
full sample of 246 artists.
     Overall we find that both prices and volume surge when an artist passes away prema-
turely. In our baseline specification that includes the control group (column 1), we find
that prices increase by exp(0.436) - 1 = 54.7%. Likewise, volume increases by 63.2%.
All estimates are highly significant. The effect is practically the same for volume and
are smaller but in the same magnitude for prices when we exclude artists of the control
group.
     The price and volume elasticities implicit in Table III, together with our estimate that
the premature death of our treated artists caused a halving of their float (compared to the
output of artists who did not die prematurely), allows us to calculate the elasticities with
respect to float of price and volume that are displayed in Table IV. In turn, these imply an
elasticity of price with respect to turnover of .46. This back-of-the-envelope calculation
yields a result that is not far from the point estimate of .38 obtained by Cochrane (2003)
for the elasticity of price-to-book with respect to float for Nasdaq stocks during the
internet-bubble month of December 1999 or the elasticity of the price of warrants with
respect to float for the data in Xiong and Yu (2011) (.24).




                                              14
B.     Robustness

We check the robustness of our main findings in Tables V to VII. Our results stay the
same when using the full sample of artists alive in 1957 (Table V): their premature
decease lead to both higher prices and volume, which respectively increase by 51.4% and
61.4%. The death of an artist can have an impact on his visibility and thus, on collectors'
willingness to pay, which is why we repeat the above analyses while while controlling for
an alternative definition of notoriety based on the Fame variable. The Fame variable, as
defined earlier, is the percentage of mentions of each artist name in the English-language
books digitized by Google Books.13 The coefficients remain highly significant and effects
are of similar magnitude. Finally, in Table VII, we perform a placebo test by dropping
all treated artists and by "treating" their matched controls. To this placebo population
of artists, who exhibit the same characteristics as the actually treated artists, we assign a
placebo date of death that corresponds to the date of the premature death of the matched
artists. We then match these these artists, who are assigned a placebo premature death
date, with a new group of control artists and estimate the death effect on this placebo
group.14 Reassuringly, Table VII indicates that the death effect in this pseudo dataset
on prices and volume is small and insignificant.


C.     Sensitivity of sudden death, premature decease, and artist fame

In Table VIII, we drop all artists for whom death could have been anticipated. We ex-
pect the effect of death to be stronger in that case. We gather biographical information
through a combination of the following resources: obituaries, biographical memoirs, artist
biographies on auction websites, gallery descriptions, newspaper articles, magazine arti-
cles, and Google searches (including Wikipedia articles). We classify premature deaths
as sudden, when the death is indicated as sudden in obituaries or news articles, or when
the cause of death is given as a hearth attack, stroke (for artists with no reported heart
  13
     The results in Table VI are based on the shorter sample of artists for which Fame is available in the
year of death, but same results hold if we use 2008 Fame for artists that died after 2008.
  14
     We match the large majority of artists, yielding a sample only slightly smaller of 69 (235) treated
artists in the price (volume) specification.


                                                   15
disease), accident, murder, suicide,15 overdose, sudden disease, and complication from
surgery. Deaths are classified as anticipated whenever our source mentions that an artist
was ill or in fragile condition. Table VIII indicates that prices and volume increase 80.0%
and 84.0% upon unexpected death. As expected, these estimates are larger than our
baseline estimates, so that the effect of premature death on prices and volume is larger
when death is unexpected.16
       We next explore the sensitivity of our result to the 65 year age cutoff. Death con-
stitutes a shock to the future production of the artist. The shock is larger when the
artist leaves a larger un-produced body of work, that is when the artist dies young. We
therefore expect the death effect to be stronger for younger artists. Besides, death is less
likely to be expected when it occurs at prime age, which should also contribute to the
effect being larger for younger artists. In Figure 2, we report the coefficients for the effect
of death interacted by the age of the treated artist, for age cutoffs from 50 and below to
ages exceeding 90. The sample includes all artists who are alive at the beginning of our
sample period (1957), as in Table V. Figure 2 confirms our prediction. The death effect
declines with age as expected. The price effect is insignificant at the 95% level from the
age of 65 onwards; the effect on volume turns insignificant from the age of 80.
       We also expect that the death effect would matter mainly for artists who have already
achieved a certain degree of reputation. In order to analysis the impact of fame at the
time of death, we split the sample of artists with higher and lower notoriety (as measured
by Fame). The left/right column in Table IX shows results for artist whose Fame is
within the top/bottom tercile at the year of their death. We find that the results are
driven by artists with a higher degree of notoriety, whereas there is no significant price
and volume impact for less reputable artists.
       Finally, to examine the possibility that the volume results are a consequence of the
results on prices, perhaps because the presence of fixed costs lead to art pieces being
  15
     One exception is Keith Vaughan's suicide, which was preceded by a diagnosed cancer two years
before his death.
  16
     The results are similar when we also drop potentially endogenous deaths such as suicides and over-
doses, although the sample becomes much smaller.



                                                  16
present in auctions only when their prices are above a threshold. To capture that possi-
bility, we construct artist-level price indices by interacting artists and year fixed effects
in a hedonic regression:


                            log Pi,t,k = 0 + i,t + 2 Artworki,t,k +        itk ,                       (3)


Coefficients i,t in this regression correspond to the average log price of same-quality
works sold for each artist-year. We next run Equation (2) while controlling for our
(log) artist price indices. Note that, as in Eq. (1), we can only work with the smaller
sample of artists that had an active auction-market by the time of their death. Further,
even for this smaller subset of artists, there are some years with zero-volume, for which
prices are not observed. In this case, we linearly interpolate to get continuous series (we
find similar results if we do not interpolate). Table X shows the impact of death on
volume, once we control for average prices. The coefficient associated with average-prices
is significantly positive, implying that there is indeed a positive partial price-volume
correlation. Nevertheless, the 1 coefficient retains statistical significance and is about
the same as our baseline estimate.17 This result indicates that the volume death-effect is
not a consequence of the price increases after death.


D.     Persistence

We also study the dynamics of the death effect, which is particularly important for
volume if we want to separate the change-in-supply channel from a possible portfolio-
rebalancing channel. Collectors may decide to sell some of the deceased artist work after
this work increased in value, for instance because of the associated wealth effect. Portfolio
rebalancing would therefore cause volume to increase after death. But in contrast to
the death effect we are interested in, this effect should be short-lived since portfolio
rebalancing is only necessary once. In contrast, the supply effect predicts a permanent
  17
    If we use the smaller sample but exclude the price index controls, the 1 estimates are slightly higher,
as expected (0.544 with the control group and 0.467 without).



                                                    17
effect on volume, because the change in float is permanent.
       We estimate a variant of Equations (1)-(2) as we interact the treatment effect with
indicator variables corresponding to a particular year relative to the artist's death. To
reduce noise, we pool observations by year for each year within a five-year period before
and a ten-year period after the artist's death. More concretely, the 1 coefficient is
replaced by a 15 × 1 vector and the PostDeath indicator is decomposed into 15 dummy
variables. The first dummy is equal to one for observations up to five year prior to
a treated artist death; the second dummy equals one for four years prior to a treated
artist death, etc. The year prior death is left out. The final dummy is equal to one for
observations 10 years or later after the passing away of the artist. Figure 3 suggests that
the death effect is permanent, as reflected by the point estimates and the 95% confidence
interval around them (Panels (a) and (b) correspond to columns 1 in Panels A and B in
Table III). We observe a sharp increase in both prices and volume on the year following
death. The point estimates are all insignificant in the pre-treatment years and are all
positive (mostly significant) for all years after the death of the artist.18


E.       Evidence using round-trip transaction data

So far our estimates of the price impact have been based on different items auctioned
at different periods. As is common in the literature on art and real estate, we rely on
the objective "hedonic" characteristics of the auctioned items to control for unobserved
heterogeneity. We can also estimate the death effect using observations for the same item,
provided such item has been auctioned at least twice. This is useful, because it enables
us to work directly with returns, rather than prices.
       Consider an item bought in time t and sold in time t + j . Taking the difference of
Equation (1) yields


log Pi,t+j,k -log Pi,t,k = 1 (PostDeathi,t+j -PostDeathi,t )+(Xi,t+j,t -Xi,t,t ) +t+j -t +          i,t,t+j .

  18
    We also find no evidence of extrapolative behavior, e.g. Barberis et al. (2018), as a result of death
of an artist although extrapolation is most probably present in art markets (see P´
                                                                                  enasse and Renneboog
2018).


                                                   18
The left-hand side variable is now the round-trip log return between times t and t + j .
The treatment variable is now the change in death status within the round-trip, that
is, whether the artist i died between the purchase and resale of the work of art. Notice
that all time invariant controls, including artwork specific variables and individual fixed
effects disappear in the difference. Because individual artists may exhibit different risk
characteristics, we nevertheless retain a specification with a constant and individual fixed
effects:


 rt,t+j = 0 + 1 Diedi,t,t+j + 2 Deceasedi,t + (Xi,t+j,t - Xi,t,t ) + t+j - t + i +   i,t,t+j ,   (4)


where rt,t+j = log Pi,t+j,k - log Pi,t,k and Diedi,t,t+j = (PostDeathi,t+j - PostDeathi,t ). We
also include an additional indicator variable, Deceasedi,t , that is equal to one when the
artist is deceased at purchase (i.e. at time t). A non-zero 2 tests whether treated artists
earn different returns after their death--whether there is a drift in prices. Our theory
predicts that the effect of death is permanent. We therefore expect an estimate of 1
that is close to the estimates presented in the top panel of Table III, and a 2 estimate
statistically indifferent from zero.
    To construct our repeat-sale sample, we follow P´
                                                    enasse and Renneboog (2018) to
identify artworks that have been auctioned at least twice. In this dataset, each pair of
transactions for the same item is a unique observation. We find 764 repeat sales for
70 treated artists that pass away within at least one round-trip and their 72 controls.
(We keep artists in the sample even if we did not find repeat sales for their matched
counterpart). We report the estimated 1 - and 2 -coefficients in Table XI. As expected,
the effect of death on returns is high: death events are associated with an "abnormal"
return of exp(0.477) - 1 = 61.1% on average, when compared to a typical matched artist
who does not die.
    The effect is of the same magnitude when excluding the control group, so that returns
are also abnormally high compared to other round-trips without death events. In both
specifications, 2 -coefficients are small and indistinguishable from zero, indicating returns


                                              19
are not different after death. This confirms that the effect on prices is permanent.


F.     Alternative explanations -- media attention, exhibits and estate sales

A possible alternative explanation for our results is that death increases an artist's notori-
ety, in a way that is not well-captured by our controls for notoriety, and that more famous
artists trade more often. It is reasonable to expect that death increases notoriety--
Vincent van Gogh's being a well-known example. Recall that, in Table IX, we found that
the death effect is absent for artists with low fame, suggesting that van Gogh's story is the
exception rather than the rule. Further, the effect on prices and volume declines with the
age at death (Figure 2), which means that if increases in notoriety that are imperfectly
captured by our controls were the cause of the volume and price effects, the change in
notoriety should decrease with age of death. While this seems plausible--artists that are
older are probability more famous--this is difficult to square with the observation that
the death effect is absent for artists with low fame.
     In addition, we find that the effect on volume remains about the same when we control
for the increases in artists' post-death prices (Table X). This means that an artist's added
notoriety following death has to affect volume in a way that is not only orthogonal to our
set of controls, but also to price changes.
     Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to explore further if media exposure or exhibits increase
durably after an artist's premature death, so that so that these notoriety measures can be
candidates to explain the permanent changes in prices and volume that we observe. We
perform two tests: (i) we compare the number of exhibitions (including retrospectives)
of the treated and control artists in relevant time-spans, and (ii) we compare the number
of times an artist is mentioned in the media (press) in the year before and after his death
while excluding the obituaries in the week/month after decease.
     For our first test, we use data from Artfacts.net that catalogs exhibitions from a wide
range of artists; the exhibitions go back to the 19th century. We identified 5510 solo-
exhibitions for treated artists and 6237 solo-exhibitions for the matched artists in the
Artfacts.net data. We do not find any statistical differences in the number of exhibitions

                                              20
between treated and matched artist for several time windows--the two (three) years prior
to the death of the treated artist, the two (three) subsequent years, the life span of the
treated artist or the time span subsequent to the treated artist's death.19
    As a second test, we search for all mentions of our treated artists, in Factiva, a
global news monitoring in the year before and after their deaths. This media monitoring
and communications database comprises seven main search categories (Dow Jones, All,
Publications, Web News, Blogs, Pictures, Multimedia). The vast majority of our hits
come from the category of Publications, which includes mainly articles in newspapers
and magazines in 28 languages since 1990. We would like to measure a change in artist's
notoriety but need to correct for the number of articles reporting the artist's death.
Therefore, we partition the articles into those that provide information about the artists
and their oeuvre and those that are triggered by their decease (and hence are merely
obituaries).20 Since we use Factiva data starting in 1990, we have only 55 treated artists.
On average, there were 32.7 articles written around the world in the year before their
deaths. In the subsequent year (including the date of decease), the average number of
articles by artist is 77.6, which is (borderline) significantly different from the number prior
to death (with a t-value of 1.71). When we exclude the articles including an obituary in
the week (month) after the passing of an artist, we do not find a significant difference
between these two years at the usual confidence levels (t-value is 1.36).
    Overall, our tests do not indicate a significant increase in our treated artists' exposure
through media (articles in newspapers and magazines) or exhibitions just after an artists'
deaths.
    One possible explanation for the increase in sales­though not for the simultaneous
increase in prices--is that following decease, an artist's holdings of her own work would
   19
      We count more exhibitions in the two years prior to death of the treated (212; 0.84 exhibition per
artist) than in the year of death and subsequent year (190; 0.75 per artist), but the difference is not
statistically significant. Using three years time windows yields similar results. The average number of
exhibitions during the life of treated artists (5.5) is significantly smaller than post-death (16.4), but the
post-death time window is, for most artists, much longer. If exhibitions explain the growth in reputation,
it is a gradual effect (on average, over more than four decades since death).
   20
      We screened all articles in English, French, German, Dutch, Italian and Spanish, and used Google
translate for other languages.



                                                     21
be sold-off, increasing total sales. If these estate sales were the reason for our results,
one would expect that following the death of an older artist this effect would be at
least as pronounced as the effect on younger artists, because older artists should be
able to accumulate a larger inventory of their own work, but our results in Figure 2
show that the volume effect declines markedly with age. In addition, the majority of
artists' estate/foundations appoint one or more galleries to handle sales instead of auction
houses--making it less likely that sales by estates would add to the auction sales that we
use, at least for the first few years, when the volume effect is already clearly present.21
An artist's heirs or trustees of the estate/foundation are often interested in increasing
the reputation of the deceased and galleries, particularly those who have had a long-term
relationship with the artist, are often committed to her legacy. A representing gallery
may also help underwrite the production of a "catalogue raisonn´
                                                               e" and organize exhibits
at the gallery or interested museums. In addition, auction houses do not have access to
art fairs, an important venue for finding buyers. Finally, auction houses have a mixed
reputation among artists. As Chuck Close, the great American painter and photographer,
who has been represented since the last century by New York's Pace Gallery and London's
White Cube, told the New York Times "The last thing I want messing around with my
career is an auction house."22



                                  IV.        Conclusions
We studied the impact of an exogenous negative supply shock to the float in the art mar-
ket, namely the impact of the premature and unexpected death of an artist on art prices
and the volume of transactions. When collectors have fluctuating heterogeneous beliefs,
since they cannot sell short, prices overweigh optimists' beliefs and have a speculative
component that reflects the resale option. If collectors have limited capacity to bear risk,
a decrease in float may increase the value and the frequency of exercise of this resale
  21
     Internet searches identify galleries appointed by estate/foundations of more than 90% of the first
fame-tercile of our treated artists that, as Table IX shows, is responsible for our results.
  22
     New York Times, December 1 2017.


                                                  22
option; increasing prices and turnover.
      This is indeed the case according to our difference-in-differences experiment where we
compare price-volume following an artists' death to price-volume of artists who survive
the treated artist, but are otherwise close in terms of age, "fame", market value and
transaction frequency. We document that premature death increases price by 54.7%
while volume goes up by 63.2%. When we add the restriction that the death should not
only be premature but also sudden, the price and volume increases amount to 80.0% and
84.0%, respectively.
      We also perform a sensitivity analysis on the definition of premature death (initially
set at 65 years) and show that the death-effect is more pronounced when the age at death
is lower, reflecting a potentially larger un-produced body of work. In addition, we show
that the death-effect is only present when the artist had achieved, while alive, sufficient
notoriety. Robustness tests varying the definitions of premature and notoriety, and testing
different (sub)samples confirm these results. A placebo test reassuringly shows that the
death-effect in a pseudo dataset is insignificant. We also exclude the possibility that our
findings of price-volume increases are driven by art investors' portfolio reallocation or
that the volume-effect is merely a consequence of the price-effect.
      Using data on auctions of paintings by artists that survived to age 70, recorded by
Blouin in 1957-2016, we calculate that our average prematurely deceased artist lost half
of her potential oeuvre. Remarkably, the resulting estimate of the price impact of this
loss of float is comparable to the one produced by Cochrane (2003) for the speculative
episode involving internet stocks or using the data in Xiong and Yu (2011) on speculation
on Chinese warrants. Nonetheless, while the Chinese warrants had expiration dates and
internet speculation imploded during the first semester of 2000, our results on price
and volume over the long-term (10+ years) and a repeat-sales analysis indicate that a
premature artist's death produces a permanent shock to prices and volume. The presence
of these permanent effects supports the arguments in Glaeser et al. (2008) or Scheinkman
(2014) on the role of supply responses on the implosion of speculative episodes.23

 23
      As documented by Ofek and Richardson (2003), the dot-com price crash was linked to the increase


                                                  23
                       Appendix A.                  A simple model
In this Appendix we exposit a simple model of speculation that motivates the regressions
in this paper. The model is related to the models in Hong et al. (2006) and Scheinkman
(2014), where investors speculate about dividend payments. Here, market participants
forecast how much utility they will gain from holding the asset.
    There are an infinite number of time periods t = 1, 2 · · · , and two goods: art and
a numeraire non-art good. All agents have time-separable utility functions, a common
                  1
discount rate    1+r
                       per period and are risk-neutral. Investors receive in each period an
endowment of e units of the numeraire good and access to a "risk-free" technology on
the non-art good with a gross rate of return per period of 1 + r. There are two equally
sized groups of investors. At time t, before trading occurs, investors in group i  {1, 2}
                                                                       i
forecast that each unit of art-goods will give them next period (1 + r)t units of utility on
average. Investors face a cost of carry in their art-good inventory. There is no shorting,
                                                                                1
and an investor that carries x  0 units from time t to time t + 1 incurs a cost 2  (xt )2
                                                                                       i
at time t. More precisely, the representative agent of group i  {1, 2} who has beliefs t ,
holds xt  0 units of art in period t and consumes ct units of consumption, and has a
period t utility flow

                                                        1
                              ui (xt , ct , t
                                            i     i
                                              ) = t xt -  (xt )2 + ct                           (A-1)
                                                        2

               i
We assume that t  { , h }, h >  > 0 for each (i, t) and that t
                                                             1   2
                                                               = t . For simplicity
                            i                                    i
we assume that the value of t is i.i.d. and the probability that t = h is .5. We
write ¯ = .5( + h ). Notice there is no aggregate uncertainty concerning beliefs on the

value the artist's work, although aggregate uncertainty could be easily introduced. As
the regressions in the paper, the model concentrates on supply uncertainty and ignores
demand uncertainty.
    We will assume that ct is not restricted to be positive or equivalently that e is large
enough. We write pt for the price of a unit of art in period t. Trading in period t occurs
in float that resulted from an unprecedented level of lockup expirations and insider selling.


                                                   24
      i
after t obtains and a buyer of the art-work at t holds it until time t + 1 when one may
choose to sell or to hold it for one more period.
                                         N0
   All investors start with an amount    2
                                              of the art-good, where N0 is the total supply
at time 0. In period 1 the aggregate supply (inelastically) increases to N1 , with N1 > N0 .
At t = 2 the aggregate supply N2 is either N1 (with probability  ) or µN 1 with µ > 1.
The lower supply indicates the artist died between periods 1 and 2. Aggregate supply
from period 3 on is equal to the supply in period 2, that is artists that survive to period
2 die before period 3.
   From period 2 on, there is no change in supply. We will look for an equilibrium in
which for t  2 prices remain constant and the allocation of the art-work to group i only
                                       t
depends on the current forecast (1 + r)i that is xi     i
                                                  t = x(t ) for i = 1, 2 and all t  2. If p

stands for the price of an unit of art from period 2 on, we obtain the first order condition
                                                              i
for a potential buyer in period t  2 who has forecast (1 + r)(t ):

                    i                  p
                    t - x - p +                0 with equality if x > 0.
                                      1+r

Hence,

                                               i
                                i              t - p
                              x(t ) = max            ,0 ,                              (A-2)
                                                 

             r
where  :=   1+r
                .
   The constant equilibrium price that prevails period 2 on would depend on the actual
realization of supply, N2 . There are two possibilities. The first is an equilibrium where at
each t  2, the currently most optimistic group holds the full supply of art-works. Since
this group must hold a per-capita amount N2 , this requires that the equilibrium price
that holds for t  2, p
                     ^ is given by:

                                              h - N2
                                  p
                                  ^(N2 ) =           ,                                 (A-3)
                                                 

Such an equilibrium also requires that the currently pessimistic group chooses to hold


                                               25
                                       ¯ in periods t and t + 1, that is:  -  p
zero in period t when the price equals p                                      ^(N2 )  0 or


                                        N2  h -                                           (A-4)


   Notice that condition (A-4) also guarantees the non-negativity of the price given by
(A-3). Thus (A-4) is also sufficient for the existence of an equilibrium in which only the
group that receives signal h buys art-works. Hence, if differences in utilities are large
relative to the supply (multiplied by the holding-cost coefficient  ) then, in equilibrium,
only the most optimistic agents hold the art-work. Furthermore, the buyer of the art-
work has a 50% probability of wanting to reduce her demand to zero in the next period.
If she were forced instead to hold the asset for s periods, then her demand D in period
                                            ¯ for t  2, would satisfy:
2 for art-works, if the art-work price pt = p

                                        s+2    ¯ - D
                          h                                     p¯
                           - D +                     t- 2
                                                          p
                                                          ¯-          ,
                                        t=3
                                              (1 + r)        (1 + r)s

with equality if D > 0. It is easy to check that for s large, this inequality cannot be
                                h -N2
satisfied when p
               ¯= p
                  ^(N2 ) =         
                                        and D = N2 . In fact when s = , i.e., when only buy
and hold strategies are allowed, then:

                  ¯ - N ¯                     ¯        
     ¯+                                h -  N                - h                   - h
h -  N                      =                    +                    = ^
                                                                        p (N2 ) -      <p
                                                                                        ^(N2 ).
           t=3
                 (1 + r)t-2     t=2
                                      (1 + r)t-2     t=3
                                                           (1 + r)t-2              2r

   A buyer who is optimistic today benefits from the option of reselling her art-work
to another agent who has become more optimistic than her in the future, and places a
                          h -
value on that option of    2r
                                . If resale is ruled out and only buy-and-hold strategies are
allowed, optimists would not be willing to purchase the full supply at the price p
                                                                                 ¯.
   On the other hand, if N2 > h -  then in equilibrium both types hold positive
amounts of the art-good and the equilibrium price p
                                                  ~ is

                                            + h - N2
                                      p
                                      ~=                                                  (A-5)
                                              2


                                                  26
      In this "interior" equilibrium, the amount held by the type that receives i is given
by:
                                                 i - ¯ N2
                                       x(i ) =        +                                   (A-6)
                                                        2
Again, an optimist purchases a larger quantity and gains from the option to resell. How-
ever, that option is less valuable than in the case where optimists hold the full supply,
because, in this "interior equilibrium" instead of reselling N2 art-units she would resell
        h - l
only      
                < N2 .
      Notice that both p
                       ^(N2 ) and p
                                  ~(N2 ) are strictly decreasing in the supply N2 . On the
other hand, p        ^(N2 ) if and only if h -  - N2 > 0 that is exactly in the region
            ~(N2 ) < p
where p
      ^ is the equilibrium price. Thus if an artist dies prematurely (supply equals N1 )
the post-death price for her work is larger than the post-death price of the work of an
artist who dies later (supply equals µN1 ).
      Notice that if µN1  h -  , then only the most optimistic would hold the art-works
of an artist from period 2 on, and consequently the expected turnover of both prematurely
deceased and surviving artists is 1
                                  2
                                    , for t  2. On the other hand, if N1 > h -  then in
both cases we obtain an interior equilibrium. It follows from (A-6) that the difference in
                                                               h -
holdings between the most and less optimistic buyers is          
                                                                     so that expected turnover
         h -
equals    2N2
                 . Hence, turnover is strictly lower if an artist survives to period 2, since in
this case N2 is higher than when an artist dies between periods 1 and 2. Finally, if
N1 < h -  < µN1 then if an artists dies between periods 1 and 2, in the equilibrium
for t  2, only the most optimistic agent holds the art-works and expected turnover is
1/2. However if an artist survives to period 2, the equilibrium for t  2 is interior and
                           h -    1
expected turnover is      2µN1
                                 <2 . We have thus established:

Proposition. Prices for art produced by an artist who survives to period 2 are perma-
nently lower than prices of art produced by an artist who does not survive to period 2.
Turnover of art-work produced by an artist who survives to period 2 is permanently less
than or equal to the turnover of art of an artist that dies between periods 1 and 2, the
difference being strict unless the accumulated output of a surviving artist is low enough


                                                 27
relative to the difference in marginal utility forecasts between optimists and pessimists
(µN1  h -  .)




                                           28
                               REFERENCES
Alden, William, Art for Money's Sake, 2015. New York Times Magazine.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Kathryn Graddy, 2003, Auctions and the Price of Art, Journal
  of Economic Literature 41, 763­786.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang, 2010, Superstar extinction,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 549­589.
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Extrap-
  olation and bubbles, Journal of Financial Economics 129, 203­227.
Beggs, Alan, and Kathryn Graddy, 2009, Anchoring effects: evidence from art auctions,
  American Economic Review 99, 1027­1039.
Bernales, Alejandro, Lorenzo Reus, and V&iacute;ctor Valdenegro, 2019, Art Market
  Bubbles, Limited Art Supply and Collectors' Wealth, Technical report, Universidad de
  Chile.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan, 2004, How Much Should We Trust
  Differences-In-Differences Estimates?, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249­
  275.
Cameron, Adrian Colin., and P. K. Trivedi, 1998, Regression analysis of count data
  (Cambridge University Press).
Cochrane, John H., 2003, Stocks as money: convenience yield and the tech-stock bubble,
  in William C. Hunter, George G. Kaufman, and Michael Pomerleano, eds., Asset Price
  Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and International Policies (MIT
  Press, Cambridge, MA).
De Wilt, K., 2006, Rembrandt Inc. ­ marktstrategieen van een genie (New Amsterdam).
Ekelund, R B, Rand W Ressler, and John Keith Watson, 2000, The "Death-Effect" in
  Art Prices : A Demand-Side Exploration, Journal of Cultural Economics 24, 283­300.
Galenson, David W., and Bruce a. Weinberg, 2000, Age and the Quality of Work: The
 Case of Modern American Painters, Journal of Political Economy 108, 761­777.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz, 2008, Housing supply and housing
  bubbles, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 198­217.
Guggenheim, Peggy, 1997, Confessions of an Art Addict (Ecco).
Harrison, J. Michael, and David M. Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock
  market with heterogeneous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323.
Hausman, J., B.H Hall, and Z Griliches, 1984, Econometric Models for Count Data with
  an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship, Econometrica 52, 909­938.
Hong, Harrison G., Jose A. Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2006, Asset Float and Specula-
  tive Bubbles, Journal of Finance 61, 1073­1117.

                                          29
Iacus, Stefano M., Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro, 2012, Causal inference without bal-
  ance checking: Coarsened exact matching, Political Analysis 20, 1­24.
Korteweg, Arthur, Roman Kr¨aussl, and Patrick Verwijmeren, 2016, Does it pay to invest
 in art? A selection-corrected returns perspective, Review of Financial Studies 29,
 1007­1038.
Lovo, Stefano, and Christophe Spaenjers, 2018, A Model of Trading and Price Indexes in
  the Art Market, American Economic Review 108, 744­774.
Mei, Jianping, and Michael Moses, 2005, Vested interest and biased price estimates:
 Evidence from an auction market, Journal of Finance 60, 2409­2435.
Mei, Jianping, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2009, Speculative trading and stock
 prices: Evidence from Chinese AB share premia, Annals of Economics and Finance
 10, 225­255.
Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2003, DotCom mania: the rise and fall of internet
  stock prices, Journal of Finance 58, 1113­1138.
P´
 enasse, Julien, and Luc Renneboog, 2018, Speculative Trading and Bubbles: Origins of
  Art Price Fluctuations.
Pesando, James E., 1993, Art as an investment: the market for modern prints, American
  Economic Review 83, 1075­1089.
Picinati di Torcello, A., and Anders Petterson, 2014, Art & Finance Report 2014, Tech-
  nical report, Deloitte Luxembourg and ArtTactic.
Pownall, Rachel A.j., 2017, Tefaf Art Market Report 2017, Technical report, European
  Fine Art Foundation.
Renneboog, Luc, and Christophe Spaenjers, 2013, Buying beauty: on prices and returns
  in the art market, Management Science 59, 36­53.
Reyburn, Scott, For Art Collectors, the Risk Behind the High Returns, 2014. Interna-
  tional New York Times.
Scheinkman, Jose A., 2014, Speculation, Trading and Bubbles (Columbia Univ. Press).
Scheinkman, Jose A., and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles,
  Journal of Political Economy 111, 1183­1220.
Spieth, Darius A., 2017, Revolutionary Paris and the Market for Netherlandish Art
  (Brill).
Trucco, Terry, British Pension Fund Sells $65.6 Million in Artworks, 1989. The New York
  Times.
Ursprung, Heinrich W., and Christian Wiermann, 2011, Reputation, price, and death:
  an empirical analysis of art price formation, Economic Inquiry 49, 697­715.
Xiong, Wei, and Jialin Yu, 2011, The Chinese warrants bubble, American Economic


                                          30
Review 101, 2723­2753.




                         31
                               Table I: Cause of death

                                                   N                   Share of total (%)
Panel A: All deaths
Unknown                                            88                          35.5
Cancer                                              39                         15.7
Unspecified illness                                 20                         8.1
AIDS                                                10                          4.0
Other disease                                        8                         3.2
Heart disease                                        5                         2.0
Tuberculosis                                        5                           2.0
Alcohol and drug-related disease                     4                         1.6
Suicide                                             1                           0.4
Sudden death                                       68                          27.4
Total                                              248                        100.0

Panel B: Sudden deaths
Heart attack                                       24                          35.3
Suicide                                            11                         16.2
Accident or murder                                 11                         16.2
Sudden unspecified cause                            7                         10.3
Overdose                                            5                          7.4
Sudden disease                                      4                          5.9
Stroke                                              4                          5.9
Complications from surgery                          2                          2.9
Total                                              68                         100.0
 This table reports the composition of our sample of artists who died between 1958 and
2014. Based on the cited cause of death in obituaries, biographical memoirs, newspaper
articles, magazine articles, and Google searches (including Wikipedia articles), Panel A
classifies the cause of deaths into Cancer; AIDS; Heart disease; Tuberculosis; Alcohol
and drug-related disease; Other disease; Unspecified illness (for cases in which the precise
disease is not reported); Unknown; Sudden death.  This observation corresponds to
Keith Vaughan. Vaughan died of suicide, but we classify his death as predictable since
he had been diagnosed cancer two years prior to his death. Panel B reports the cause of
death for the subsample of sudden deaths from Panel A.




                                            32
                                  Table II: Matched sample

 Variable                                Sample                   Mean       SD       Min        Max
Year of birth                            Deceased  65 years       1924.4     16.2     1894.0     1966.0
                                         Control group            1924.7     16.3     1892.0     1966.0

Year of death                            Deceased  65 years       1978.7     14.1     1958.0     2013.0
                                         Control groupa           1993.8     12.9     1970.0     2018.0

Age at death                             Deceased  65 years        54.3       9.3      23.0       65.0
                                         Control groupa            77.0       7.8      66.0      101.0

Av. price at treatment (thousands)b      Deceased  65 years         9.8      11.8      1.0        82.9
                                         Control group             10.4      11.6      1.1        80.2

Av. yearly volume at treatment           Deceased  65 years         0.9       3.4      0.0        36.7
                                         Control group              0.8       3.0      0.0        25.7

Fame at treatmentc                       Deceased  65 years         -0.0      0.9      -0.5       3.6
                                         Control group              -0.1      0.9      -0.5       3.6

No. of artists                           Deceased  65 years        242.0
                                         Control group             242.0
 This table reports summary statistics for the group of treated and control artists defined in Section
II.C. The statistics are computed using data prior to the year of death of the treated artist. Prices
are reported in 2015 dollars. Volume is defined as the total number of transactions per year. Fame is
the standardized percentage of mentions of each artist name in the English-language books digitized by
Google Books. a For the 165 control artists who die in our sample. b For the 73 treated and control
artists who are `active' with at least one transaction prior to the treated artist's death. c For the 242
artists (and their controls) who pass away before 2009 (when Google nGram data is available).




                                                   33
 Table III: Impact of artist death on prices and volume ­ Matched sample

                                                With control group   Without control group
Panel A: Death and auction prices
Deceased 65 years                                      0.436                 0.277
t-stat                                                (3.88)                 (2.11)
Year and age fixed effects and hed. controls             Y                     Y
Artist fixed effects                                     Y                     Y
No. of observations                                   57,997                 37,178
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)           72+72                    72

Panel B: Death and volume
Deceased 65 years                                    0.490                   0.437
t-stat                                               (3.34)                  (2.99)
Year and age fixed effects                             Y                       Y
Artist fixed effects                                   Y                       Y
No. of observations                                  26,865                  13,449
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)         242+242                   242
 This table shows the 1 -coefficients in Equations (1)-(2). The sample consists of artists
who passed away at the age of 65 or earlier together with their matched controls (left
column). We also report estimates with treated artists only in the right column. Panel
A gives OLS estimates of a regression of log real auction prices on the treatment dummy,
while controlling for year, age and individual fixed effects, two dummies proxying for
notoriety (a dummy equal to one when the artist had exhibited at the Documenta and
another one when the artist has sold at least once at Sotheby's or Christie's in London or
New York), and the full set of controls to address artwork heterogeneity (medium, auction
house, a dummy equal to one if the artwork is signed, a dummy equal to one if the artwork
is dated, artwork height and width). Panel B gives conditional quasi-maximum likelihood
Poisson estimates of a regression of annual trading volume on the same set of controls
(minus artwork-specific controls). Note the smaller number of artists in Panel A than
in Panel B; measuring the death effect on art price requires that artists are active on
the auction market before their death, hence the smaller sample. Standard errors are
clustered at the artist level.




                                           34
                            Table IV: Turnover elasticity of price

Elasticity                                                              Source

Panel A: Art Sample
Average float change of early death     f                       -0.50   Authors's calculation
Average log price change                p                        0.46   Table III
Average log volume change               v                        0.49   Table III
                                                  p
Float elasticity of price               f p =     f
                                                                -0.92
                                                  v
Float elasticity of volume              f v =     f
                                                                -0.98
Float elasticity of turnover            f t = f v - 1           -1.98
                                                p         f p
Turnover elasticity of price            tp =    t
                                                      =   f t
                                                                 0.46


Panel B: Related Studies
Turnover elasticity of price            tp                       0.38   Cochrane (2003) (Table 3)
Turnover elasticity of price            tp                       0.24   Xiong and Yu (2011) and
                                                                        authors's calculation.




                                             35
     Table V: Impact of artist death on prices and volume ­ Full sample

                                                        Unmatched               Without
                                                       control group          control group
Panel A: Death and auction prices
Deceased 65 years                                          0.415                   0.246
t-stat                                                     (3.98)                 (1.86)
Year and age fixed effects and hed. controls                 Y                       Y
Artist fixed effects                                         Y                       Y
No. of observations                                       694,071                 41,576
No. of artists (treated + all controls)                  76+2160                     76

Panel B: Death and volume
Deceased 65 years                                          0.479                   0.460
t-stat                                                     (3.05)                 (3.20)
Year and age fixed effects                                   Y                       Y
Artist fixed effects                                         Y                       Y
No. of observations                                       124,273                 13,657
No. of artists (treated + all controls)                  246+1990                   246
 This table shows the 1 -coefficients in Equations (1)-(2). The sample consists of all artists
alive at the beginning of the sample period (1957) or later. We also report estimates with
treated artists only in the right column. Panel A gives OLS estimates of a regression of log
real auction prices on the treatment dummy, while controlling for year, age and individual
fixed effects, two dummies proxying for notoriety (a dummy equal to one when the artist
had exhibited at the Documenta and another one when the artist has sold at least once
at Sotheby's or Christie's in London or New York), and the full set of controls to address
artwork heterogeneity (medium, auction house, a dummy equal to one if the artwork is
signed, a dummy equal to one if the artwork is dated, artwork height and width). Panel
B gives conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson estimates of a regression of annual
trading volume on the same set of controls (minus artwork-specific controls). Standard
errors are clustered at the artist level.




                                             36
Table VI: Impact of artist death on prices and volume ­ Alternative control
for notioriety (1957-2008)

                                                With control group   Without control group
Panel A: Death and auction prices
Deceased 65 years                                      0.360                 0.248
t-stat                                                (3.16)                 (2.11)
Year and age fixed effects and hed. controls             Y                     Y
Artist fixed effects                                     Y                     Y
No. of observations                                   31,653                 18,643
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)           72+72                    72

Panel B: Death and volume
Deceased 65 years                                    0.406                   0.409
t-stat                                               (2.98)                  (3.33)
Year and age fixed effects                             Y                       Y
Artist fixed effects                                   Y                       Y
No. of observations                                  22,651                  11,329
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)         242+242                   242
 This table shows the 1 -coefficients in Equations (1)-(2). Similarly to Table III, the
sample consists of artists who passed away at the age of 65 or earlier together with their
matched controls (left column). The sample stops in 2008 because our Fame control is
only available through 2008. We also report estimates with treated artists only in the
right column. Panel A gives OLS estimates of a regression of log real auction prices
on the treatment dummy, with a similar set of controls as in Table III, to which we
add an alternative definition of notioriety (as measured by the percentage of mentions
of each artist name in the English-language books digitized by Google Books). Panel B
gives conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson estimates of a regression of annual
trading volume on the same set of controls (minus artwork-specific controls). Standard
errors are clustered at the artist level.




                                           37
 Table VII: Impact of artist death on prices and volume ­ Placebo sample

                                                 With control group   Without control group
Panel A: Death and auction prices
Deceased 65 years                                     -0.058                   0.106
t-stat                                                (-0.49)                 (1.16)
Year and age fixed effects and hed. controls             Y                       Y
Artist fixed effects                                     Y                       Y
No. of observations                                   42,212                  18,876
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)           69+69                     69

Panel B: Death and volume
Deceased 65 years                                     -0.180                  -0.067
t-stat                                                (-1.14)                 (-0.41)
Year and age fixed effects                               Y                       Y
Artist fixed effects                                     Y                       Y
No. of observations                                   25,323                  12,648
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)          235+235                    235
 This table shows the 1 -coefficients in Equations (1)-(2). The sample consists of a placebo
sample consisting of the matched artists in the baseline regression (Table III). We drop
artists who passed away at 65 or earlier and use this placebo group as treated sample. We
assign a placebo date of death to each placebo-treated artist, corresponding to the date
of the premature death of the matched artists who actually passed away prematurely. We
then match these these artists, who are assigned a placebo premature death date, with a
new group of control artists. We also report estimates with placebo-treated artists only
in the right column. Panel A gives OLS estimates of a regression of log real auction prices
on the treatment dummy, while controlling for year, age and individual fixed effects, two
dummies proxying for notoriety (a dummy equal to one when the artist had exhibited
at the Documenta and another one when the artist has sold at least once at Sotheby's
or Christie's in London or New York), and the full set of controls to address artwork
heterogeneity (medium, auction house, a dummy equal to one if the artwork is signed, a
dummy equal to one if the artwork is dated, artwork height and width). Panel B gives
conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson estimates of a regression of annual trading
volume on the same set of controls (minus artwork-specific controls). Standard errors are
clustered at the artist level.




                                            38
 Table VIII: Impact of artist death on prices and volume ­ Sudden deaths

                                                With control group   Without control group
Panel A: Death and auction prices
Deceased 65 years                                      0.588                 0.307
t-stat                                                (3.23)                 (1.77)
Year and age fixed effects and hed. controls             Y                     Y
Artist fixed effects                                     Y                     Y
No. of observations                                   24,071                 18,607
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)           19+19                    19

Panel B: Death and volume
Deceased 65 years                                      0.610                 0.690
t-stat                                                (2.40)                 (4.16)
Year and age fixed effects                               Y                     Y
Artist fixed effects                                     Y                     Y
No. of observations                                    6,766                 3,135
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)           65+65                    65
 This table shows the 1 -coefficients in Equations (1)-(2). The sample consists of artists
who suddenly passed away at the age of 65 or earlier together with their matched con-
trols (left column). We report characteristics of the sudden death sample in Table I.
We also report estimates with treated artists only in the right column. Panel A gives
OLS estimates of a regression of log real auction prices on the treatment dummy, while
controlling for year, age and individual fixed effects, two dummies proxying for notoriety
(a dummy equal to one when the artist had exhibited at the Documenta and another one
when the artist has sold at least once at Sotheby's or Christie's in London or New York),
and the full set of controls to address artwork heterogeneity (medium, auction house, a
dummy equal to one if the artwork is signed, a dummy equal to one if the artwork is
dated, artwork height and width). Panel B gives conditional quasi-maximum likelihood
Poisson estimates of a regression of annual trading volume on the same set of controls
(minus artwork-specific controls). Standard errors are clustered at the artist level.




                                           39
Table IX: Impact of artist death on prices and volume ­ Conditioning on Fame
at Death (1957-2008)

                                                      High Fame             Low Fame
Panel A: Death and auction prices
Deceased 65 years                                        0.599                -0.224
t-stat                                                  (4.57)                (-1.42)
Year and age fixed effects and hed. controls               Y                     Y
Artist fixed effects                                       Y                     Y
No. of observations                                     45,385                 2,480
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)             24+24                 24+24

Panel B: Death and volume
Deceased 65 years                                        0.586                0.029
t-stat                                                  (2.87)                (0.12)
Year and age fixed effects                                 Y                     Y
Artist fixed effects                                       Y                     Y
No. of observations                                      8,815                 7,629
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)             81+81                 81+81
 This table shows the 1 -coefficients in Equations (1)-(2). Similarly to Table III, the
sample consists of artists who passed away at the age of 65 or earlier together with
their matched controls. The left/right column shows results for artist which Fame (as
measured by the percentage of mentions of each artist name in the English-language
books digitized by Google Books) is within the top/bottom tercile at the year of their
death. The sample stops in 2008 because our Fame data is only available through 2008.
Panel A gives OLS estimates of a regression of log real auction prices on the treatment
dummy, with a similar set of controls as in Table III. Panel B gives conditional quasi-
maximum likelihood Poisson estimates of a regression of annual trading volume on the
same set of controls (minus artwork-specific controls). Standard errors are clustered at
the artist level.




                                           40
  Table X: Impact of artist death on volume ­ Controlling for artist prices

                                                          High Fame             Low Fame
i,t                                                         0.168                  0.138
t-stat                                                      (3.59)                 (1.99)
Deceased 65 years                                            0.458                 0.420
t-stat                                                      (3.48)                 (3.14)
Year and age fixed effects                                     Y                     Y
Artist fixed effects                                           Y                     Y
No. of observations                                          4,993                 2,467
No. of artists (treated + matched controls)                 72+72                    72
 This table shows the 1 -coefficients in Equation (2), while controlling for the average
price of items sold for each artist-year. The sample consists of active artists who passed
away at the age of 65 or earlier together with their matched controls (left column). We
also report estimates with treated artists only in the right column. The log artist price
index i , t is constructed according to Eq. (3) and is linearly interpolated in the absence
of trading volume for a given artist-year. Standard errors are clustered at the artist level.




             Table XI: Impact of artist death on round-trip returns

                                                  With control group   Without control group
Died  65 during round-trip                               0.477                  0.392
t-stat                                                  (2.15)                  (1.71)
Deceased  65 at purchase                                 0.028                  0.007
t-stat                                                  (0.49)                  (0.05)
Year and age fixed effects and hed. controls               Y                      Y
Individual fixed effects                                   Y                      Y
No. of observations                                       764                    442
No. of artists (treated + controls)                     70+72                     70
 This table shows the 1 - and 2 - coefficients in Equation (4). The first coefficient
measures the death effect, similarly to our hedonic specification (1). The 2 coefficient
tests whether treated artists earn different returns after their death. The sample consists
of repeat-sales for artists who passed away at the age of 65 or earlier, as well as their
matched controls (left column). We also report estimates with treated artists only in the
right column. Standard errors are clustered at the artist level.



                                             41
Figure 1: Distribution of premature death events
This figure depicts the number of artists who died a the age of 65 or earlier in a specific
year over our time span 1958-2014. The total sample of artists who died prematurely
over our sample window (1957-2016) amounts to 258. In order to analyze the impact of
death on prices and returns, we require at least one year of price data before an after the
death in our sample window.




                                            42
                                        (a) Prices




                                       (b) Volume

            Figure 2: The death effect declines with the age at death
Panels (a) and (b) present the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the causal
impact of death interacted with the age at death. The sample includes all artists who
are alive at the beginning of our sample period (1957). Panel (a) gives OLS estimates
(based on Equation (1)); Panel (b) gives QML Poisson estimates (based on Equation
(2)). Standard errors are clustered at the artist level.



                                           43
                                        (a) Prices




                                       (b) Volume

           Figure 3: Prices and trading volume around year of death
Panels (a) and (b) present the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the causal
impact of death in a given year relative to the artist's death. The sample includes all
treated artists who are active prior to their death. Panel (a) gives OLS estimates (based
on Equation (1)); Panel (b) gives QML Poisson estimates (based on Equation (2)), similar
to Column 1 of Table III. Observations more than 5 (10) years before (after) the death
are grouped together. Standard errors are clustered at the artist level.


                                           44
             Appendix ­ For Online Publication
                                  Matched Sample

                Treated artists                                     Controls
Artist                    Birth   Death   Active   Artist                       Birth   Death
Aagaard Andersen, Gunnar   1919   1982             Lassnig, Maria               1919    2014
Abedin, Zainul             1914   1976             Hogan, Joao                  1914    1988
Afro                       1912   1976      Y      Soulages, Pierre             1919      ­
Ali, Shakir                1916   1975             Heyboer, Anton               1924    2005
Altenbourg, Gerhard        1926   1989      Y      Trujillo, Guillermo          1927      ­
Angus, Rita                1908   1970             Korniss, Dezso               1908    1984
Apap, William              1918   1970             Quiros, Antonio              1918    1984
Arbus, Diane               1923   1971             Bury, Pol                    1922    2005
Arkley, Howard             1951   1999      Y      Oulton, Therese              1953      ­
Atlan, Jean-Michel         1913   1960             Butler, Reg                  1913    1981
Ayrton, Michael            1921   1975      Y      Johnson, Ray                 1927    1995
Baldessin, George          1939   1978      Y      Attersee, Christian Ludwig   1940      ­
Bandeira, Antonio          1922   1967             Cruz-Diez, Carlos            1923      ­
Batlle Planas, Juan        1911   1966             Paniker, K. C. S.            1911    1977
Bazile, Castera            1923   1966             Palacios, Luisa              1923    1990
Baziotes, William          1912   1963             Burri, Alberto               1915    1995
Bela                       1917   1968             Hare, David                  1917    1992
Belkin, Arnold             1930   1992      Y      Felguerez, Manuel            1928      ­
Beuys, Joseph              1921   1986      Y      Pearlstein, Philip           1924      ­
Binyinyiwuy                1928   1982             Imai, Toshimitsu             1928    2002
Birolli, Renato            1905   1959             Porter, Fairfield            1907    1975
Boetti, Alighiero          1940   1994             Onobrakpeya, Bruce           1932      ­
Bogusz, Marian             1920   1980             Castro, Amilcar de           1920    2002
Bonevardi, Marcelo         1929   1994      Y      Saul, Peter                  1934      ­
Borduas, Paul-Emile        1905   1960             Cremer, Fritz                1906    1993
Brauner, Victor            1903   1966             Krasner, Lee                 1908    1984
Bredow, Rudolf             1909   1973             Bergman, Anna-Eva            1909    1987
Brittain, Miller           1912   1968             Spyropoulos, Yannis          1912    1990
Broodthaers, Marcel        1924   1976             Neri, Manuel                 1930      ­
Brown, Joan                1938   1990             Weiner, Lawrence             1942      ­
Brown, Mike                1938   1997      Y      Jaray, Tess                  1937      ­
Bruning, Peter             1929   1970             Larter, Richard              1929    2014
Buthe, Michael             1944   1994      Y      McLean, Bruce                1944      ­
Caballero, Luis            1943   1995      Y      Mosset, Olivier              1944      ­
Campbell, George           1917   1979      Y      Rodhe, Lennart               1916    2005
Carrillo, Lilia            1930   1974             Claus, Carlfriedrich         1930    1998
Castagnino, Juan Carlos    1908   1972             Stematsky, Avigdor           1908    1989
Chaissac, Gaston           1910   1964             Lamba, Jacqueline            1910    1993
Chambers, Jack             1931   1978             Comtois, Ulysse              1931    1999
Cherkaoui, Ahmed           1934   1967             Gaucher, Yves                1934    2000
Chighine, Alfredo          1914   1974      Y      Messagier, Jean              1920    1999
Christensen, Dan           1942   2007      Y      Self, Colin                  1941      ­
Chukwuogo-Roy, Chinwe      1952   2012             Von Hausswolff, C. M.        1956      ­
Colquhoun, Robert          1914   1962             Schumacher, Emil             1912    1999
Corbett, Edward            1919   1971             Abreu, Mario                 1919    1993


                                           A1
Coronel, Pedro                1923   1985   Y    Colville, Alex               1920   2013
Corzas, Francisco             1936   1983   Y    Chavez, Gerardo              1937     ­
Crippa, Roberto               1921   1972   Y    Sugai, Kumi                  1919   1996
Curnoe, Greg                  1936   1992        Gershuni, Moshe              1936   2017
Cutrone, Ronnie               1948   2013   Y    Cahn, Miriam                 1949     ­
Dallaire, Jean                1916   1965        Badii, Libero                1916   2001
Daraniyagala, Justin Pieris   1903   1967        Wang Xuetao                  1903   1982
Davies, John                  1936   1999   Y    Goode, Joe                   1937     ­
Davis, Gene                   1920   1985   Y    Carrington, Leonora          1917   2011
Defeo, Jay                    1929   1989        Beksinski, Zdzislaw          1929   2005
Deira, Ernesto                1928   1986   Y    Makowski, Zbigniew           1930     ­
Dekkers, Ad                   1938   1974        Lancaster, Mark              1938     ­
Deyrolle, Jean                1911   1967        Orlando, Felipe              1911   2001
Diller, Burgoyne              1906   1965        Aeschbacher, Hans            1906   1980
Disney, Walt                  1901   1966        Turner, Helen Monro          1901   1977
Djanira                       1914   1979        Guerrero, Jose               1914   1991
Dotremont, Christian          1922   1979        Day, Melvin                  1923   2016
Downey, Juan                  1940   1993        Attersee, Christian Ludwig   1940     ­
Dumouchel, Albert             1916   1971        Gysin, Brion                 1916   1986
Duwe, Harald                  1926   1984        Johnson, George Henry        1926   2007
Eardley, Joan                 1921   1963        Raza, Sayed Haider           1922     ­
Echeverria, Enrique           1923   1972        Hlito, Alfredo               1923   1994
Endara Crow, Gonzalo          1936   1996   Y    Amaral, Antonio Henrique     1935   2015
Engilberts, Jon               1908   1972        Marczynski, Adam             1908   1985
Espaliu, Pepe                 1955   1993        Nel, Karel Anthony           1955     ­
Evans, Merlyn                 1910   1973   Y    Lancaster, Osbert            1908   1986
Eyuboglu, Bedri Rahmi         1911   1975        Lardera, Berto               1911   1989
Fahlstrom, Oyvind             1928   1976        Scott, Patrick               1921   2014
Fairhurst, Angus              1966   2008   Y    Paine, Roxy                  1966     ­
Farrell, Micheal              1940   2000   Y    Wilson, Robert               1941     ­
Feeley, Paul                  1910   1966        Mortensen, Richard           1910   1993
Feni, Dumile                  1942   1991        Bruggen, Coosje van          1942   2009
Fernhout, Edgar               1912   1974        Cage, John                   1912   1992
Ferren, John                  1905   1970        Cadmus, Paul                 1904   1999
Fisher, Sandra                1947   1994   Y    Lavier, Bertrand             1949     ­
Flavin, Dan                   1933   1996   Y    Buren, Daniel                1938     ­
Fomison, Tony                 1939   1990   Y    Polesello, Rogelio           1939   2014
Forg, Gunther                 1952   2013   Y    Scharf, Kenny                1958     ­
Fraile, Alfonso               1930   1988   Y    Brizzi, Ary                  1930   2014
Freedman, Barnett             1901   1958        Johnson, William H.          1901   1970
Frink,Elisabeth               1930   1993   Y    Cuevas, Jose Luis            1934     ­
Fruhtrunk, Gunter             1923   1982   Y    Kupferman, Moshe             1926   2003
Fu Baoshi                     1904   1965        Messel, Oliver               1904   1978
Gadanyi, Jeno                 1896   1960        Adalid, Agustin Lazo         1896   1971
Galan, Julio                  1958   2006   Y    Currie, Ken                  1960     ­
Garcia Ponce, Fernando        1933   1987        Molinari, Guido              1933   2004
Gnoli, Domenico (ii)          1933   1970        Ferrer, Rafael               1933     ­
Goldstein, Jack               1945   2003   Y    Nerdrum, Odd                 1944     ­
Gonzales-Torres, Felix        1957   1996        Sitthiket, Vasan             1957     ­
Gonzalez, Juan                1945   1993        Piper, Adrian                1948     ­
Graves, Nancy                 1939   1995        Hiller, Susan                1940     ­
Greco, Alberto                1931   1965        Baya                         1931   1998


                                            A2
Grundig, Hans             1901   1958        Evergood, Philip           1901   1973
Grunwald, Henryk          1904   1958        Mason, Alice Trumbull      1904   1971
Guerrero Galvan, Jesus    1910   1973        Sterne, Hedda              1910   2011
Gundersen, Gunnar S.      1921   1983        Garcia Guerrero, Luis      1921   1996
Hardin, Helen             1943   1984        Rosler, Martha             1943     ­
Haring, Keith             1958   1990   Y    Paladino, Mimmo            1948     ­
Hennessy, Patrick         1915   1980        Dzubas, Friedel            1915   1994
Hesse, Eva                1936   1970        Ono, Yoko                  1933     ­
Hester, Joy               1920   1960        Gonzalez Bogen, Carlos     1920   1992
Hilton, Roger             1911   1975   Y    Schultze, Bernard          1915   2005
Hockelmann, Antonius      1937   2000   Y    Max, Peter                 1937     ­
Hung, Francisco           1937   2001   Y    Senbergs, Jan              1939     ­
Immendorff, Jorg          1945   2007   Y    Fetting, Rainer            1949     ­
Jacoulet, Paul            1896   1960        Rodriguez Lozano, Manuel   1896   1971
Jarema, Maria             1908   1958        Aroch, Arie                1908   1974
Jarman, Derek             1942   1994   Y    Petrick, Wolfgang          1939     ­
John, Jiri                1923   1972        Kemble, Kenneth            1923   1998
Jones, Joe                1909   1963        Stromme, Olav              1909   1978
Jorn, Asger               1914   1973   Y    Friend, Donald             1914   1989
Kazuki, Yasuo             1911   1974        Benoit, Rigaud             1911   1986
Kelley, Mike              1954   2012   Y    Sherman, Cindy             1954     ­
Kemeny, Zoltan            1907   1965        Kotin, Albert              1907   1980
Kenny, Michael            1941   1999   Y    Pacheco, Ana-Maria         1943     ­
Kim Hwan-gi               1913   1974        Oppenheim, Meret           1913   1985
King, Cecil               1921   1986        Espinola Gomez, Manuel     1921   2003
Kinley, Peter             1926   1988   Y    Skotnes, Cecil             1926   2009
Kippenberger, Martin      1953   1997   Y    Schutte, Thomas            1954     ­
Klein, Yves               1928   1962        Leslie, Alfred             1927     ­
Kline, Franz              1910   1962        Graves, Morris             1910   2001
Kobzdej, Aleksander       1920   1972        Barcala, Washington        1920   1993
Kondor, Bela              1931   1972        Coughtry, Graham           1931   1999
Kudo, Tetsumi             1935   1990   Y    Rodriguez, Alirio          1934   2018
Kurelek, William          1927   1977   Y    Rainer, Arnulf             1929     ­
Lanyon, Peter             1918   1964        Johnson, Lester            1919   2010
Lasekan, Akinola          1916   1972        Thieler, Fred              1916   1999
Lavonen, Ahti             1928   1970        Swaminathan, Jagdish       1928   1994
Ledy, Cheik               1962   1997        Yuskavage, Lisa            1962     ­
Leura Tjapaltjarri, Tim   1929   1984        Metzkes, Harald            1929     ­
Licini, Osvaldo           1894   1958        Reggiani, Mauro            1897   1980
Lo Savio, Francesco       1935   1963        Sihlali, Durant            1935   2004
Louis, Morris             1912   1962        Guttuso, Renato            1911   1987
Lueg, Konrad              1939   1996   Y    Donaldson, Anthony         1939     ­
Lui Shou-kwan             1919   1975        Walters, Gordon            1919   1995
Lunar, Emerio             1940   1990        Coen, Arnaldo              1940     ­
MacBryde, Robert          1913   1966        Gopas, Rudolf              1913   1983
Macdonald, Jock           1897   1960        Yirawala                   1897   1976
Mafai, Mario              1902   1965        Sternberg, Harry           1904   2001
Magani, Mick              1920   1984        Muller, Robert             1920   2003
Malaval, Robert           1937   1980        Suarez, Pablo              1937   2006
Manzoni, Piero            1933   1963        Katz, Alex                 1927     ­
Mapplethorpe, Robert      1946   1989        Anderson, Laurie           1947     ­
Marika, Mawalan           1908   1967        Camarena, Jorge Gonzalez   1908   1980


                                        A3
Marika, Wandjuk          1927   1987        Malangi, David              1927   1999
Martin, Mary             1907   1969        Bill, Max                   1908   1994
Matta-Clark, Gordon      1943   1978        Turrell, James              1943     ­
Maymurru, Narritjin      1916   1981        Palazuelo, Pablo            1916   2007
McHale, John             1922   1978        Niro, Robert de, Sr.        1922   1993
Medek, Mikulas           1926   1974        Capdevila, F. M.            1926   1995
Mendieta, Ana            1948   1985        Abramovic, Marina           1946     ­
Messil, Gabriel          1934   1986        Khakhar, Bhupen             1934   2003
Millares, Manolo         1926   1972        Aitchison, Craigie          1926   2009
Milpurrurru, George      1934   1998   Y    Cohen, Bernard              1933     ­
Minaux, Andre            1923   1986   Y    Renqvist, Torsten           1924   2007
Mithinari                1929   1976        Gironella, Alberto          1929   1999
Moke                     1950   2001   Y    Coe, Sue                    1951     ­
Molvig, Jon              1923   1970        Alonso, Raul                1923   1993
Morton, Ree              1936   1977        Wakabayashi, Isamu          1936   2003
Mualla, Fikret           1903   1967        Rimsa, Juan                 1903   1978
Munoz, Juan              1953   2001   Y    Leirner, Jac                1961     ­
Namatjira, Albert        1902   1959        Carter, Clarence Holbrook   1904   2000
Nanninga, Jaap           1904   1962        Burra, Edward               1905   1976
Newman, Barnett          1905   1970        Motherwell, Robert          1915   1991
Nickolls, Trevor         1949   2012   Y    Koningsbruggen, Rob van     1948     ­
Oiticica, Helio          1937   1980        Brawley, Robert J           1937   2006
Ojeda, Gustavo           1958   1989   Y    Favier, Phillipe            1957     ­
Onus, Lin                1948   1996        Woodrow, Bill               1948     ­
Orszag, Lili             1926   1978        Thomas, Rover               1926   1998
Paalen, Wolfgang         1905   1959        Tworkov, Jack               1900   1982
Pacheco, Maria Luisa     1919   1982   Y    Lataster, Ger               1920   2012
Palermo, Blinky          1943   1977        Marioni, Joseph             1943   2009
Pancetti, Jose Gianini   1902   1958        Stokes, Adrian              1902   1972
Pane, Gina               1939   1990        Alviani, Getulio            1939   2018
Park, David              1911   1960        Mariano                     1912   1980
Parvez, Ahmed            1926   1979        Ronald, William             1926   1998
Paschke, Ed              1939   2004   Y    Knoebel, Imi                1940     ­
Pedro, Antonio           1909   1966        Lewis, Norman               1909   1979
Peeters, Jozef           1895   1960        Maxy, Max Herman            1895   1971
Pike, Jimmy              1940   2002   Y    Revilla, Carlos             1940    ­
Poliakoff, Serge         1906   1969   Y    Manessier, Alfred           1911   1993
Ponc, Joan               1927   1984        Rivera, Manuel              1927   1995
Popkov, Viktor           1932   1974        Uglow, Euan                 1932   2000
Portinari, Candido       1903   1962        Clifton, Marshall           1903   1975
Potworowski, Piotr       1898   1962   Y    Zack, Leon                  1892   1980
Preller, Alexis          1911   1975   Y    Meistermann, Georg          1911   1990
Reinhardt, Ad            1913   1967        Smith, Tony                 1912   1980
Requichot, Bernard       1929   1961        Munoz, Lucio                1929   1998
Rhoades, Jason           1965   2006        Bulloch, Angela             1966     ­
Richier, Germaine        1902   1959        Herrera, Velino             1902   1973
Sadequain                1930   1987        Pomodoro, Gio               1930   2002
Sage, Kay                1898   1963        Feng Zikai                  1898   1975
Schwalbe, Ole            1929   1990   Y    Hrdlicka, Alfred            1928   2009
Seitz, Gustav            1906   1969        Baij, Ramkinker             1906   1980
Seligmann, Kurt          1900   1962        Woodruff, Hale              1900   1980
Sempere, Eusebio         1923   1985        Cesariny, Mario             1923   2006


                                       A4
Serpa, Ivan                 1923   1973        Jess (Collins, Burgess)    1923   2004
Shi Lu                      1919   1982        Yamamoto, Taro             1919   1994
Silva, Carlos               1930   1987        Eggenschwiler, Franz       1930   2000
Skold, Otte                 1894   1958        Bernath, Aurel             1895   1982
Smith, David                1906   1965        Brooks, James              1906   1992
Smithson, Robert            1938   1973        Bell, Larry                1939     ­
Sokolov-Skalya, Pavel       1899   1961        Glarner, Fritz             1899   1972
Stajuda, Jerzy              1936   1992        Golden, Daan van           1936   2017
Stankiewicz, Richard        1922   1983        Velarde, Pablita           1918   2006
Stepanova, Varvara          1894   1958        Centurion, Emilio          1894   1970
Stohrer, Walter             1937   2000   Y    Iseli, Rolf                1934     ­
Swift, Patrick              1927   1983        Daws, Lawrence             1927     ­
Takamatsu, Jiro             1936   1998   Y    Schonebeck, Eugen          1936     ­
Taylor, E. Mervyn           1906   1964        Grundig, Lea               1906   1977
Thek, Paul                  1933   1988        Tousignant, Claude         1932     ­
Thomkins, Andre             1930   1985   Y    Tubke, Werner              1929   2004
Thompson, Bob               1937   1966        Scholder, Fritz            1937   2005
Tschusiya, Tilsa            1928   1984        Fernandez, Agustin         1928   2006
Tsingos, Thanos             1914   1965        Balint, Endre              1914   1986
Tuckson, Tony               1921   1973        Iskowitz, Gershon          1921   1988
Valcin, Gerard              1927   1988   Y    Guinovart, Josep           1927   2007
Varo, Remedios              1908   1963        Lewers, Margo              1908   1978
Vassilieff, Danila          1897   1958        Pan Tianshou               1897   1971
Vaughan, Keith              1912   1977   Y    Turcato, Giulio            1912   1995
Vega, Jorge de la           1930   1971        D'Arcangelo, Allan         1930   1998
Vordemberge-Gildewart, F.   1899   1962        Carvalho, Flavio de        1899   1973
Warhol, Andy                1928   1987   Y    Riopelle, Jean-Paul        1923   2002
West, Franz                 1947   2012   Y    Neshat, Shirin             1957     ­
White, Charles Wilbert      1918   1979        Solari, Luis               1918   1993
Whiteley, Brett             1939   1992   Y    Kirkeby, Per               1938     ­
Wiedemann, Guillermo        1905   1969        Narvaez, Francisco         1905   1982
Wilke, Hannah               1940   1993        Armajani, Siah             1939     ­
Wilkerson, Jerry            1943   2007   Y    Buraimoh, Jimoh            1943     ­
Williams, Fred              1927   1982   Y    Fuchs, Ernst               1930     ­
Wlodarski, Marek            1903   1960        Bodmer, Walter             1903   1973
Wojnarowicz, David          1954   1992   Y    Frize, Bernard             1954     ­
Woodman, Francesca          1958   1981        Wiszniewski, Adrian        1958     ­
Wunuwun, Jack               1930   1990        Jaimes Sanchez, Humberto   1930   2003
Zabaleta, Rafael            1907   1960        Yunapingu, Munggurrawuy    1907   1979
Zobel, Fernando             1924   1984        Morellet, Francois         1926   2016
Zverev, Anatoly             1931   1986        Opalka, Roman              1931   2011




                                          A5
