                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MANDATED SICK PAY:
                 COVERAGE, UTILIZATION, AND WELFARE EFFECTS

                                Johanna Catherine Maclean
                                      Stefan Pichler
                                    Nicolas R. Ziebarth

                                    Working Paper 26832
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w26832

                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 2020



We thank Ronald Bachmann, Sonia Bhalotra, Nicholas Bloom, Chris Bollinger, David Bradford,
Michael Burda, Colleen Carey, Eric Chyn, Michael Darden, Emilia deBono, Marcus Dillender,
Gary Engelhardt, Itzik Fadlon, Jonas Feld, Laszko Goerke, Enda Hargaden, Sarah Hamersma,
Sven Hartman, Matt Harris, Nathan Hendren, Martin Karlsson, Jing Li, Domenico Lisi, Norman
Lorenz, Rick Mansfield, Fabrizio Mazzonna, Kathy Michelmore, Sean Murphy, Kathleen
Mullen, Robert Nuscheler, Reto Odermatt, Alberto Palermo, Nico Pestel, Giovanni Pica, Joe
Sabia, Kjell Salvanes, Seth Sanders, Brenda Samaniego de la Parra, Bruce Schackman, Georg
Schaur, Bernhard Schmidpeter, Seth Seabury, Kathryn Shaw, Siggi Siegloch, Perry Singleton,
Stefan Staubli, Holger Stichnoth, Alois Stutzer, Joanna Tyrowicz, Mark Unruh, Christian
Vossler, Bruce Weinberg, Ansgar Wübker, V´era Zabrodina, and Maria Zhu for helpful
comments and suggestions. In particular, we thank our discussants Priyanka Anand, Pascale
Lengagne and Simona Gamba as well as Katherine Wen for excellent research assistance.
Moreover, we thank participants at the American-European Health Economics Study Group
meeting in Vienna, the Annual MaTax Conference at ZEW Mannheim, the Annual Conference
of the American Society of Health Economists (ASHEcon) in Atlanta, the Annual Conference of
the European Society for Population Economics (ESPE) in Antwerp, the Annual Meetings of the
Southern Economic Association (SEA), the APPAM Fall Research Conference in Denver, the
European Conference on Health Economics (Eu- HEA) in Maastricht, the 2018 and 2019 Annual
Meetings of the Society of Labor Economists (SOLE), the International Health Economics
Association (iHEA) in Basel, the 2019 IRDES-DAUPHINE Workshop on Applied Health
Economics and Policy Evaluation, the 2018 IZA World Labor Conference, the 2019 NBER
Workshop on Labor Demand and Older Workers in Cambridge, the 2019 SKILS seminar in
Engelberg as well as in research seminars at the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
(CHEPS) at San Diego State University, Cornell University, the Düsseldorf Institute for
Competition Economics (DICE), HEC Montreal, IAAEU at the University of Trier, the Institute
of Economics at the Università della Svizzera Italiana, ISER at the University of Essex, the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF), Syracuse University, RWI Essen, the University of
Augsburg, the University of Basel, the University of Ottawa, the University of Southern Florida,
the University of Tennessee, and Weill Cornell Medicine for their helpful comments and
suggestions. Last but not least we thank Maury Gittleman at the Bureau of Labor Statistics for
helping us with numerous data questions. This research was conducted with restricted access to
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data. The views expressed here do not necessarily reflect the
views of the BLS. Generous funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's Policies for
Action Program (#74921), the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research's Early Career
Research Awards (ECRA) program #17-155-15 are gratefully acknowledged. Neither we nor our
employers have relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this
paper. We take responsibility for all remaining errors in and shortcomings of the paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Johanna Catherine Maclean, Stefan Pichler, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mandated Sick Pay: Coverage, Utilization, and Welfare Effects
Johanna Catherine Maclean, Stefan Pichler, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth
NBER Working Paper No. 26832
March 2020
JEL No. I12,I13,I18,J22,J28,J32

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the labor market effects of sick pay mandates in the United States. Using the
National Compensation Survey and difference-in-differences models, we estimate their impact on
coverage rates, sick leave use, labor costs, and non-mandated fringe benefits. Sick pay mandates
increase coverage significantly by 13 percentage points from a baseline level of 66%. Newly
covered employees take two additional sick days per year. We find little evidence that mandating
sick pay crowds-out other non-mandated fringe benefits. We then develop a model of optimal
sick pay provision along with a welfare analysis. Mandating sick pay likely increases welfare.


Johanna Catherine Maclean                       Nicolas R. Ziebarth
Department of Economics                         Cornell University
Temple University                               Department of Policy Analysis
Ritter Annex 869                                and Management (PAM)
Philadelphia, PA 19122                          426 Kennedy Hall
and NBER                                        Ithaca, NY 14853
catherine.maclean@temple.edu                    nrz2@cornell.edu

Stefan Pichler
ETH Zurich
KOF Swiss Economic Institute
Leonhardstrasse 21
Zurich 8092
Switzerland
pichler@kof.ethz.ch
1   Introduction

Of all countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), only

three do not provide universal access to paid sick leave for employees: Canada, the United

States, and Japan. Traditionally, in the U.S., employers voluntarily provide paid leave, which

results in substantial inequality in coverage across jobs. For instance, 97% of private sector

employees in the finance and insurance industry have access to paid sick leave while only 41%

of employees in the accommodation and food services industry have access to this benefit in

the U.S. (Susser and Ziebarth, 2016; Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2018b). Among low-income

and part-time employees, coverage rates lie below 50% (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2018b). Put

differently, the majority of low-income employees cannot take a paid sick day to recuperate

when they (or their children) become sick. Many employees are not even eligible to take an

unpaid sick day as the only existing federal law, the The Family and Medical Leave Act of

1993 (FMLA), exempts part-time employees and employees in small employers. As of 2012, an

estimated 44% (or 49 million) private sector employees were not covered by FMLA (Jorgensen

and Appelbaum, 2014). In sum, the lack of federal regulation leads to a patchwork sick leave

landscape with high degrees of inequality within the U.S. labor market.

    A legislative initiative for a federal sick pay mandate--the Healthy Families Act--was

spearheaded by Ted Kennedy. First introduced to the U.S. Congress in 2005, it was reintro-

duced in 2019 after several failed attempts to pass it (Senate Bill 840 - Healthy Families Act,

2019). In the meantime, numerous U.S. cities and states have passed similar sick pay man-

dates. San Francisco was the first locality to implement a sick pay mandate in 2007, increasing

coverage rates above 90% among employees (Colla et al., 2014). Contrary to predictions of

mandate opponents, San Francisco did not experience reduced labor demand or wage growth

following adoption of this law (Boots et al., 2009; Drum Major Institute for Public Policy, 2010;

Pichler and Ziebarth, 2020). Based on the San Francisco experience and widespread voter

support--opinion pools suggest that 75% of Americans support sick pay mandates (National

Paid Sick Days Study, 2010)--a wave of cities and states enacted sick leave legislation in the

following years. As of writing, twelve states (including Arizona, California, Connecticut, Mas-

sachusetts, and Oregon), and twice as many cities and counties (including Chicago, New York

City, Philadelphia, Portland, Seattle, and Washington D.C.) have passed sick pay mandates (see




                                               1
A Better Balance, 2020 for an overview). More localities will likely adopt sick pay mandates in

the coming years.

   The canonical economic model of mandated job benefits predicts that employer mandates

could be more efficient than direct government provision funded through taxation, if employ-

ees value the mandated benefit and accept lower wages from their employers in return (Sum-

mers, 1989). Gruber (1994), however, argues that anti-discrimination and minimum wage laws,

as well as social norms, may prevent such wage reductions. In line with Gruber (1994), Pichler

and Ziebarth (2020) find no evidence that U.S. sick pay mandates significantly and systemati-

cally reduced employment or wage growth. Because more widespread access to sick pay plau-

sibly reduces presenteeism behavior (`working sick') as well as the spread of diseases within

the workplace, sick leave mandates could even potentially increase work attendance and pro-

ductivity (and thus wages) (Pichler and Ziebarth, 2017; Stearns and White, 2018). Besides pro-

ductivity effects, laws and social norms, another reason for the absence of wage effects could

be that the U.S. sick pay mandates are relatively mild government interventions, particularly

relative to parental leave mandates.

   Specifically, the mandates stipulate that employees have the right to earn one hour of paid

sick leave per 30 to 40 hours worked for the employer. Such individualized sick leave accounts

resemble medical savings accounts for health insurance, which intend to minimize moral haz-

ard (Pauly et al., 1995; Keeler et al., 1996). This paper is the first to study the first order and

welfare effects of mandating sick pay in the U.S. To do so, it builds on several important litera-

tures: the existing research on inequalities in the labor market (cf. Autor et al., 2008; Song et al.,

2019; Katz and Krueger, 2019) and parental leave (cf. Ruhm, 1998; Bartel et al., 2018; Campbell

et al., 2019; Bailey et al., 2019) as well as the research on optimal social insurance (cf. Chetty

and Finkelstein, 2013; Hendren, 2017) and employer mandates (Summers, 1989; Gruber, 1994).

   Using official government data, this paper comprehensively evaluates the effects of state-

level sick pay mandates in the U.S. We use variation produced by the staggered implemen-

tation of sick pay mandates across states and over time to evaluate their impact on coverage

rates, sick leave utilization, and employer costs. These first order effects are of crucial rele-

vance for academics and practitioners to assess the effectiveness and functioning of these man-

dates. Existing empirical evidence is scant and based on relatively noisy survey data (cf. Ahn

and Yelowitz, 2016; Callison and Pesko, 2017). Further, this paper studies whether sick pay

mandates have unintended consequences for employees. For instance, in response to the man-

                                                  2
dates, employers could reduce non-mandated fringe benefits such as paid vacation days or

paid parental leave, all of which are potentially valuable to employees. To this end, we use

restricted-access data from the National Compensation Survey (NCS) over the period 2009 to

2017 coupled with difference-in-differences (DD) models and event studies. These rich gov-

ernment data are specifically designed to measure full employee compensation and employer

costs--indeed they are used to adjust federal employee compensation.

   Our findings document that state-level mandates are effective in increasing coverage rates

among U.S. employees. Within the first two years following mandate adoption, the probability

that an employee has access to paid sick leave increases by 18 percentage points from a base

coverage rate of 66%. The increase in coverage persists for at least four years without rising

further. Over all post-mandate periods covered by this paper, we find a 13 percentage point

higher coverage rate attributable to state mandates. As a result of the increased access to paid

sick leave, employees take more sick days: we find an average increase in paid sick leave use

by almost two hours per year. Scaling this two-hour increase by the 13 percentage points in-

crease in coverage implies that newly covered employees take two additional sick days per

year. Employer sick leave costs also increase, but effect sizes are modest. On average, the in-

crease amounts to 2.7 cents per hour worked, which translates to an increase in 21 cents per

hour worked for a marginal employer. Further, we find little evidence that sick pay mandates

crowd-out non-mandated benefits such as paid vacation or holidays. Likewise, we find no evi-

dence that employers curtail the provision of group policies such as health, dental, or disability

insurance.

   After empirically assessing mandate effects, we extend the standard Baily-Chetty frame-

work of optimal social insurance benefits and develop an optimal sick pay model (see Baily,

1978; Chetty, 2006; Chetty and Finkelstein, 2013). In our model, when sick pay becomes more

generous, the social planner weighs the marginally higher consumption utility of employees

against the higher employer costs of providing more sick pay. As work productivity decreases

in the sickness level, a profit maximizing employer will provide some level of sick pay volun-

tarily, even in the absence of a social planner. Otherwise, employees will work while sick and

earn their regular salary, but their lower work productivity leaves them unprofitable for the

employer. Sick pay incentivizes sick employees to call in sick and receive sick pay, w, instead

of the full salary w (with w < w). However, because employers solely maximize their prof-

its while the social planner also considers employee utility, the optimal sick pay level set by


                                                3
the employer will be lower than the welfare maximizing level. Whether mandating sick pay

increases welfare depends on the derived optimality condition. Accordingly, the marginal em-

ployee utility of more generous sick pay (1) must exceed marginal employer costs, and (2) this

differential must equal the impact of more generous sick pay on employer production, specifi-

cally the changes in productivity and wage payments, weighted by the labor supply elasticity

of more generous sick pay. When we feed the empirically identified parameter values into

our derived optimality condition, we find that, for the most plausible and identified parameter

values, sick pay mandates increase overall welfare.

     The previous economic literature on U.S. sick leave is scarce. Gilleskie (1998, 2010) represent

notable exceptions but these two important studies pre-date the current debate on sick leave

mandates. Few studies empirically evaluate the recent U.S. sick pay mandates primarily due

to a lack of data.1 In an early but related study, Waldfogel (1999) shows that FMLA increased

coverage rates and leave usage, in particular usage of parental leave. Note, however, that paid

sick leave differs from parental leave in both aim and scope (Rossin-Slater et al., 2013; Lalive

et al., 2014; Baum and Ruhm, 2016). Whereas sick leave coverage is an insurance against wage

losses due to sickness, parental leave is mandated with the objective of balancing family and

work responsibilities for employees, and addressing gender inequality in the workplace.

     The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the U.S. sick pay mandates in detail and

Section 3 explains the data. The empirical approach and identifying assumptions are reported

in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the empirical findings. Section 6 measures welfare effects by

developing an optimal sick pay model. Section 7 concludes.



2     U.S. Sick Pay Mandates

Paid sick leave was an integral component of the first social insurance system in the world. The

Sickness Insurance Law of 1883 implemented federally mandated employer-provided health

insurance in Germany, which covered up to 13 weeks of paid sick leave along with health-
    1 The European literature on paid sick leave is much richer.Several studies find that employees adjust their inten-
sive labor supply in response to changes in sick pay generosity (Johansson and Palme, 2005; Ziebarth and Karlsson,
2010, 2014; De Paola et al., 2014; Fevang et al., 2014). Other papers investigate interaction effects with other social
insurance programs (Fevang et al., 2017), the role of probation periods (Ichino and Riphahn, 2005), culture (Ichino
and Maggi, 2000), social norms (Bauernschuster et al., 2010), gender (Ichino and Moretti, 2009; Herrmann and Rock-
off, 2012), income taxes (Dale-Olsen, 2013), union membership (Goerke and Pannenberg, 2015), and unemployment
(Nordberg and Røed, 2009; Pichler, 2015). There is also research on the impact of paid sick leave on earnings (Sandy
and Elliott, 2005; Markussen, 2012).




                                                           4
care. Insurance against wage losses due to health shocks was a crucial element of health in-

surance at that time, and valued by employees and unions alike. Given the limited availability

of expensive healthcare treatments in the 19th century, expenditures for paid sick leave ini-

                                                                                      ¨
tially accounted for more than half of all health insurance expenditures (Busse and Blumel,

2014). Subsequently, other European countries followed Germany's action and implemented

paid sick leave coverage for employees. Today, every European country provides universal

access to paid sick leave.

   The U.S. is one of only three OECD countries without universal access to paid sick leave.

As a result, in 2011, approximately half of U.S. employees did not have access to paid sick

leave (Susser and Ziebarth, 2016). Since then, this share has decreased to below 30% (Bureau

of Labor Statistics, 2018b). The only existing federal law is the Family and Medical Leave

Act of 1993 (FMLA). This Act provides unpaid leave to employees in case of pregnancy, own

sickness, or sickness of a family member to employees who work at least 1,250 hours annually

for an employer with 50 or more employees (cf. Waldfogel, 1999). Given the exemptions to

this law, Jorgensen and Appelbaum (2014) estimate that only 44% of private sector employees

are eligible for FMLA. Susser and Ziebarth (2016) also document that many low-wage and

service sector employees are either not covered by FMLA or not aware of their rights to the

federally mandated benefit. Given this legislative landscape, although some exemptions exist

especially for smaller employers, the sick pay mandates that we analyze in this paper allow

many employees to take paid or unpaid sick leave for the first time.

   Table A1 (Appendix) provides a detailed summary of most U.S. city- and state-level man-

dates passed at the time of writing. This paper evaluates all listed state-level mandates adopted

between March 2009 and March 2017. While the details of the mandates differ from state to

state, all existing mandates are employer mandates. Several mandates exclude small employ-

ers or allow for other exemptions. Under these mandates, employees `earn' a paid sick leave

credit; typically one hour per 30 to 40 hours worked with a maximum of seven days per year.

If unused, the sick leave credit rolls over to the next calendar year. Because employees must

accrue the paid sick leave credit, most mandates explicitly state a 90 day accrual period in ad-

dition to waiting periods for new employees. However, several mandates that exempt small

employers compel such employers to provide unpaid sick days (Massachusetts Attorney Gen-

eral's Office, 2016).




                                               5
   San Francisco was the first locality to mandate paid sick leave in the U.S. The law became

effective February 5th , 2007. Washington D.C. enacted a mandate effective November 13th , 2008,

and expanded the scope of this mandate on Feb 22nd , 2014 to include temporary and tipped

employees. Other cities that have adopted sick pay mandates include Seattle (September 1st ,

2012), Portland (January 1st , 2014), New York City (April 1st , 2014), and Philadelphia (May 13th ,

2015).

   Connecticut was the first U.S. state to mandate paid sick leave; the adoption date was Jan-

uary 1st , 2012. The mandate only applies to service sector employees who work for large em-

ployers and, as a result, covers just 20% of the workforce. Over our study period, more states

adopted sick pay mandates: California (July 1st , 2015), Massachusetts (July 1st , 2015), Oregon

(January 1st , 2016), and Vermont (January 1st , 2017). Note that, in our empirical analysis, we

treat Washington D.C. as a state. Additional states adopted mandates after the close of our

study period: Arizona (July 1st , 2017), Washington (January 1st , 2018), Maryland (February

11th , 2018), New Jersey (October 29th , 2018), and Michigan (March 29th , 2019).

   Note that employers are generally required to post employee rights related to minimum

wages, harassment, and discrimination protection as well as sick pay at the workplace. Figure

A1 depicts two examples of such notices. Figure A1a shows an earned sick time notice for

Massachusetts that employers could post to comply with that state's workplace poster require-

ments (Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 2019). Alternatively, employers can also post notices

as in Figure A1b (here for Arizona) that include all employee right provisions that employers

must comply with (Industrial Commission of Arizona, 2019).

   Whenever state and city mandates coexist, legal complexities arise. When states pass man-

dates, existing city laws are typically preempted, as in the case of the 13 existing New Jersey

city laws that existed prior to the state law (Title 34. Chapter 11D. (New) Sick Leave §§ 1-11).2

However, preemption is not always the case, especially not when city laws are passed after

the state law and are more comprehensive. Fortunately, the complexity of this city-state legal

interplay is reduced in our setting because most state laws are very recent. Nevertheless, to

facilitate the analysis, we disregard all sub-state mandates in our analyses. In particular, we

drop the sub-state localities that have adopted sick leave mandates and evaluate only the state-
  2 Seefor the detailed bill https://www.njleg.state.nj.us/2018/Bills/AL18/10_.HTM, last accessed
February 7th , 2020.




                                                 6
level mandates.3 To our knowledge, in California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Oregon, and

Vermont (states that offer policy variation in this paper), no sub-state laws have been passed

after the state mandates became effective.

    A final institutional point is worth mentioning. In several cases, sick pay mandates have

been challenged through the court system, mostly by business groups seeking to have the laws

overturned. For example, Airlines for America has sued the states of Massachusetts and Wash-

ington to seek an exemption from the law, arguing that the law would adversely affect their

carrier prices, routes, and services (Bloomberg BNA - Workplace Law Report, 2018).4 As an-

other example of pending legal questions, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruled that

sick pay does not constitute wages, which implies that employers are not liable if they do not

pay out unused sick days (Kaczmarek, 2018). In the empirical specifications, we do not differ-

entiate by whether a lawsuit is pending anywhere at a given time for a specific jurisdiction.



3    National Compensation Survey (NCS)

We use the restricted access version of the NCS which is collected and maintained by the Bureau

of Labor Statistics (BLS). These data include detailed information on geographic location of

establishments, which allows us to accurately match state-level paid sick leave mandates to the

data.5

    The NCS is particularly well-suited to our research as it produces official government statis-

tics on a wide range of compensation and labor cost items. The data are also used to officially

adjust wages for federal employees. Further, the NCS includes information on access to paid

sick leave, paid and unpaid sick leave utilization, and sick leave costs to employers. Moreover,

the data allow us to explore potential spillovers from sick pay mandates to non-mandated ben-

efits that employers could reduce to offset paid sick leave costs; for instance, paid vacation or

parental leave.
   3 Our findings are broadly robust to including fully or partially treated sub-state localities. We note that these

results are less precise and attribute it to sub-state mandates having less bite, as has been documented in other
contexts. One reason could be pending lawsuits, see footnote 4. These results are available upon request. As noted,
we treat Washington D.C. as a state and retain this locality in our empirical analysis.
   4 As an example at the city level, Pittsburgh approved a paid sick leave ordinance on August 3rd , 2015. However,

shortly after, business groups sued and lower courts ruled against the law (due to unique language in the state's
home rule charter). The city has appealed the decision to Pennsylvania's Supreme Court, where the case is currently
pending (Moore, 2018). In case of Pittsburgh, enforcement of the law has been explicitly put on hold until a final
decision is rendered.
   5 The restricted access version of the NCS that we use in this study is only accessible in a BLS data research center

located in Washington D.C.


                                                           7
      The NCS is nationally representative at the establishment-job level. In the NCS, random

sampling is first carried out at the establishment level. The BLS defines establishments as `a

single economic unit that engages in one, or predominantly one, type of economic activity'

(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020a). Second, within establishments, and depending on estab-

lishment size and number of different jobs within the establishment, the NCS collects informa-

tion on compensation and benefits at the establishment-job level (Bureau of Labor Statistics,

2020a).6

      The NCS is a quarterly survey, where human resource administrators of each establish-

ment provide detailed information to the BLS surveyors on a range of offered benefits (includ-

ing paid sick leave). Because the information is based on establishment-level administrative

records, response error due to, for example, employees being unaware of their benefits is mini-

mized. In our main analysis, we leave the microdata at the establishment-job level and restrict

the sample to private sector establishments where the mandates apply. Moreover, we focus

on the March responses of the first quarter interview because the BLS only provides informa-

tion from this interview for many benefits (including access to paid sick leave). Basically, one

can distinguish between stock and flow measures. The stock measures (such as access to paid

sick leave) refer to the status quo at the time of the first quarter interview which takes place in

March. The flow measures (such as sick leave utilization) generally refer to the past 12 months;

that is, from April of the previous year to March of the survey year. Throughout our analysis,

we use the survey weights provided by the BLS to provide nationally representative estimates.

Henceforth, we refer to establishments as `employers' in the manuscript.


                                          [Insert Table 1 about here]


      Table 1 reports the summary statistics. In our main sample, we have 399,586 observations at

the employer-job level for the years 2009 to 2017. Using the Consumer Price Index, we convert

all dollar values to 2017 U.S. dollars.


3.1     Main Variables

The main objective of our study is to comprehensively assess how sick pay mandates affect

employer propensities to offer mandated and non-mandated benefits, employee utilization of
   6 Obviously, in our context, an ideal dataset would also be representative at the state-level, not just the federal
level. To the best of our knowledge, no such dataset exists. To the extent that our identification assumptions hold,
non-representativeness at the state level is no threat to the internal validity of our estimates.


                                                          8
paid and unpaid sick leave, and employer costs related to sick leave. Our first outcome variable

measures employees' access to paid sick leave through her employer as of March in a given cal-

endar year. Sick leave offered is coded one if a job provides paid sick leave and zero otherwise.

Over all employers and years, the average coverage rate is 63% in our sample.

      Our second outcome variable measures employees' use of paid sick leave. Paid sick hours

taken indicates the average number of hours of paid sick leave taken by employees in this

specific job in the previous 12 months (generally from April in the previous calendar year until

the interview in March). The average is 15.8 hours, which corresponds to just under two days

of paid sick leave.

      Our third outcome variable measures employees' use of unpaid sick leave. Unpaid sick

hours taken also generally refers to utilization over the past 12 months before the March inter-

view. It may be a substitute to paid sick leave. The average is 0.65 per employee and year.

      The final two main outcome variables measure employer sick leave costs. Sick leave costs

total is the total hours of paid sick leave taken, multiplied by the hourly wage, inclusive of

fringe benefits.7 Again, following the flow measure concept of sick leave utilization, this mea-

sures refers to the past 12 months before the first quarter interview. Dividing the reported

$448.50 sick leave costs by the 15.8 paid sick hours taken yields a total hourly wage of $28.35

for our sample. This number includes employer benefits; the gross wage paid to employees is

$21.69, see second panel of Table 1. Sick leave costs per hour worked divides sick leave total

costs by the number of hours worked. The average is 25.1 cents per hour worked.


3.2     Additional Variables

We also assess whether mandated sick pay crowds-out non-mandated benefits. To meet this

objective, we examine how sick pay mandates affect a range of fringe benefits and other forms

of non-wage compensation. Table 1 lists such additional benefits. For example, on average jobs

offer around 70 paid vacation hours and 44 national holiday hours per year.8 Moreover, 69% of

all jobs offer health insurance9 and 57% offer life insurance coverage.
   7 The BLS NCS survey administrators generate this variable and use the employee's own wage in the calculation.

The variable assumes that sick hours represent 100% lost labor and does not consider changes in employee on-the-
job productivity because of sick pay, or compensatory behavior by employees after returning to work. Moreover,
our data do not allow us to calculate the potential employer costs of finding a replacement for employees on sick
leave.
   8 For vacation and national holiday hours, the BLS assumes that all offered hours are fully used.
   9 To be precise, here we use what the BLS labels `medical insurance.' This variable does not necessarily cover

prescription medications.


                                                       9
      The remaining panels in Table 1 list control variables, or variables that we use to stratify

the sample on to investigate effect heterogeneity. In particular, these are measures for full-time

work, unionization, occupation, and industry. Approximately three quarters of the jobs in our

sample are full-time jobs and just under 10% of jobs are unionized. The three most common

occupations are `office and administrative,' `sales,' and `food preparation and serving.' The

three most common industries are `healthcare and social assistance,' `retail and trade,' and

`manufacturing.'



4       Empirical Approach

4.1     Difference-in-Differences

We use the staggered implementation of the sick pay mandates in different states at different

points in time to estimate difference-in-differences (DD) models:




                                ye, j,t = e, j + t +  Ds × Tt +  Xe, j,t + µe, j,t                               (1)


      where ye, j,t is one of the outcome variables (e.g., paid sick leave offered ) at employer e in

job j and year t. e, j are employer-job fixed effects (which incorporate state fixed effects) and t

are year fixed effects from 2009 to 2017.

      Ds is a treatment indicator, which is coded one for employers located within states that

implemented a sick pay mandate between 2009 and 2017.10 The interaction of Ds with the

vector Tt yields the binary DD variable of interest. The interaction term is one for employers in

states and time periods in which a paid sick leave mandate was in effect (see Table A1, column

(3)).

      Xe, j,t is a vector of control variables that we include in the saturated specifications, e.g.,

to control for full or part-time jobs. The standard errors µe, j,t are clustered at the state-level

(Bertrand et al., 2004).
  10 As mentioned, in the main specification we drop all counties with cities which passed city-level or county-level

mandates but our findings are robust to keeping those treated counties. As mentioned in Section 2, one complication
with the city-level mandates is that the city boundaries where the mandate applied rarely coincide with the county
boundaries, which is why we elect to drop the entire county from the analysis.




                                                         10
      Given the identification assumptions hold, Equation (1) estimates --the causal effect of

mandated state sick pay on coverage, utilization, labor costs, and non-mandated benefits.


4.2     Event Study

We also estimate and visually illustrate event study models. To this end, we decompose the

binary Tt time indicator in Equation (1) into a series of leads and lags around the effective date

of each mandate (Schmidheiny and Siegloch, 2019). To do this, we construct indicators for five

or more years through one year in advance of the state-level mandates (`leads', - 2
                                                                                j=-5 Leads, j ),

the effective year of the mandate, and one through five or more years following the mandate

(`lags', 5
         k =0 Lags,k ).
                        11 Doing so, we center the data around the mandate passage, with the


March prior to passage as the reference year. We assign all localities without a mandate a zero

for all lead and lag variables. Our event study equation is as follows:



                                                 -2                      5
                      ye, j,t = e, j + t +  j            Leads, j + k    Lags,k + Xe,j,t +      e, j,t                (2)
                                                j = -5                  k =0



      The event study model offers to important extensions to the basic DD model. First, visual

examination of the normalized pre-mandate trends (that is, the coefficient estimates on the lead

indicator variables) allows us to test for and assess the plausibility of the common time trends

assumption necessary for DD models to recover estimates of causal effects. Second, inclusion of

the lag variables allow treatment effects to vary over time in the post-mandate years. Dynamics

seem plausible in our context. For example, if employers are slow to comply with the mandated

benefits or if employees require time to learn about their new benefits, allowing for dynamic

treatment effects and differentiating between short- and medium-term effects may be crucial.


4.3     Identification

Because we rely on variation over one decade and across half a dozen U.S. states, as com-

pared to the canonical DD setting with just one treatment and one comparison group, other

policies contemporaneous to the treatments in all states inflicting a bias are much less likely

to occur. Overall, we evaluate the average impact of the mandates for California, Connecticut,
  11 More specifically, the -5 indicator includes all years five or more years (in event-time) in advance of the effective

date and the +5 indicator includes all years (in event-time) five or more years after the effective date.


                                                             11
Massachusetts, Oregon, and Vermont; that is, the mandates that were adopted at the state-level

between March 2009 and March 2017. Washington D.C. adopted its mandate in the year prior

to our study period (2008).

    If mandates were a reaction to pre-existing trends in the outcome variables in the treated

regions, we would identify such an endogenous implementation via our event study (that is,

mandate leads that are statistically different from zero). Similarly, event studies have the power

to provide evidence for anticipation effects.

    The main remaining, and relatively weak, identification assumption is the absence of other

confounding effects that are correlated with the staggered implementation of the sick pay man-

dates in all states over an entire decade. Specifically, the implementation of the mandates and

the outcome variables must not be correlated with a systematic, third, unobservable driving

force. Note that the mandates were implemented at different times of the year, in January as

well July (Table A1), which adds to the credibility of the identifying assumption.

    If the identification assumptions hold, Equations (1) and (2) identify internally valid causal

mandate effects. The extent to which these estimates are externally valid for other U.S. states

is difficult to assess. For such predictions, using estimates of regions whose labor markets are

most similar to those in the state of interest is a promising approach. Our detailed heterogeneity

analysis by industries, occupation, and type of employer will provide additional guidance.



5   Results

We begin this section by estimating Equation (1). That is, we estimate DD models to elicit

intent-to-treat (ITT) effects of the state-level mandates on a range of outcomes. We then supple-

ment these average post-reform estimates with event studies. Event studies visualize how the

effects have evolved over time and allow us to test for conditional parallel trends between the

treatment and comparison groups. Next, we assess effect heterogeneity by stratifying the mean

effects by type of job, occupation, and industry. Finally, we provide evidence for possible com-

pensatory behavior by employers by estimating the impact of the mandates on non-mandated

benefits such as paid vacation days.




                                                12
5.1     Impact of the Mandates on Coverage Rates, Utilization and Labor Costs

DD Regression Models

Table 2 reports the results generated by Equation (1) for our main outcome variables. Each

panel reports results from separate DD models that control for an increasingly larger set of

covariates. Panel A includes year and employer fixed effects, whereas Panel B adds employee

controls, Panel C adds employer-job fixed effects, and Panel D adds state-specific linear time

trends. Overall, our results are highly robust across the various specifications.


                                        [Insert Table 2 about here]


Coverage Rates. The four DD models in Column (1) of Table 2 show that, on average, state-

level sick pay mandates increase coverage rates by 13 percentage points. Relative to the base-

line coverage rate of 66%, the effects translate into an increase of 20%. Across all three specifi-

cations, the coefficient estimates are statistically significant at the 5% significance level.12

      A reasonable question to ask is why coverage rates `only' increased by 13 percentage points

to 79% as opposed to 100%? Our sample includes only private sector employers for whom the

mandates should be binding. In the following, we offer some explanations for this finding.

      First, employers may not comply with the mandates. Moreover, Human Resources (HR)

administrators (who provide the NCS benefit information) may be unaware of recently added

benefits. While HR administrators should respond to the NCS survey, we cannot rule out the

possibility that instead, at some employers, employees may complete the survey and may not

be aware of the recently passed mandate and, in turn, their newly acquired benefits. Such

unawareness has been documented in other related settings. For instance, Hall et al. (2018)

find that 30% of all employees were unaware of the sick leave mandate in the first year in NYC.

      Second, similar to non-compliance in case of minimum wage laws (Basu et al., 2010), delib-

erate non-compliance could limit benefit provision. On the other hand, employers respond to

a government agency and could face penalties, e.g., administrative fines up to $4,000 in Cal-

ifornia, see for example Lexis Practice Advisor, 2017. However, as discussed in Section 2, in

several states lawsuits are pending and it is likely that these mandate is not strictly enforced
  12 The BLS imputed values for sick pay coverage for roughly 30,000 observations. After dropping imputed ob-
servations the treatment effect on coverage increases by roughly two percentage points. Results are available upon
request.



                                                       13
by the authorities. This unclear legal situation benefits non-compliant employers or those who

are willfully ignorant.

   Third, our classification of employers and mandates may include unavoidable errors. The

NCS survey question is not specifically designed to evaluate sick pay mandates and hence does

not perfectly mirror the details of the law in place in that state. That is, the survey question

simply refers to paid sick leave coverage, but does not elicit additional details that would be

relevant for whether the mandate is truly binding for the specific employer and employee.

As an example, in Connecticut, the amendment provides relief to employers that experience

seasonal or transitional fluctuations in their workforce. Consequently, because questionnaires

are filled out at the employer-job level, even though employees in a non-small employer should

be covered, an actual employee may not covered at the time of the survey.

   Finally, although our study period extends to 2017 with only a few post-reform years for

most laws, coverage rates may further increase over time. For example, in California, Mas-

sachusetts, and Oregon our data include just two post-reform years. In any case, we consider it

precisely one contribution of this research to inform policymakers and researchers about the de

facto increase in coverage as a result of government mandates, as measured by the best available

data.


Utilization.   Columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 show the estimated effects on paid and unpaid

sick leave hours taken in the last 12 months (recall that we use the March responses of the NCS,

so this refers to April of the year before until March of the survey year). As seen in column

(2), there is robust evidence that, on average, paid sick leave taken increases by approximately

two hours per year, which corresponds to an 11% increase relative to the baseline. Scaling this

average effect by the 13 percentage point increase in coverage rates (column (1)) yields 15.4

hours or approximately two additional sick days taken per year.

   Equivalently, the number of unpaid sick hours taken almost doubled to 0.9 (column (3)),

which yields a scaled effect of 3.5 hours or roughly half of an eight hour work day. Recall that

many employees also gain the right to take unpaid leave as a result of the mandates. Jorgensen

and Appelbaum (2014) report that in 2012, almost half the U.S. workforce has not been eligible

for FMLA (also see Section 2).




                                              14
Labor Costs.    Columns (4) and (5) of Table 2 show the estimated effects on associated em-

ployer labor costs. Labor costs are important to assess in this context because mandate critics

commonly cite rising labor costs and depressed labor demand as reasons against government

mandated sick pay (Kruth, 2018). However, using the Quarterly Census of Employment and

Wages, Pichler and Ziebarth (2020) do not find evidence that wages and employment decreased

by more than 2% as a result of the mandates at the county level. Columns (4) and (5) provide

a possible explanation for this null finding. In the NCS, we find that mandates increase total

sick leave costs by 10% (column (4), Panel D) to $610 per job and year; however, the costs per

hour worked only increase by 2.7 cents (column (5), Panel D). Scaling this hourly cost increase

by the 13 percentage point increase in coverage rates, costs increase by `only' 21 cents per hour

for the marginal employer.

   We note that this sick leave cost estimate is a static calculation. In particular, the calcula-

tion does not consider possible changes in work productivity attributable to the mandate. For

instance, overall work productivity could increase because employees can, post-mandate, re-

cover from their sickness, work moral among employees increases, or employees (over-) com-

pensate for lost labor after their sick leave. On the other hand, shirking and a lower work

morale among employees who are not on sick leave (and therefore must cover for their cowork-

ers who are out on leave) could reduce productivity. Moreover, we are not able to calculate

potential costs to the employer for replacing an employee who is on sick leave.

   While the labor cost estimate do not consider changes in productivity, it implicitly consid-

ers that reduced presenteeism behavior could reduce infections and thus sick leave taken by

coworkers (cf. Pichler and Ziebarth, 2017). That is because labor costs are the product of actual

sick leave taken and hourly wages (Section 3.1). If total sick hours taken decrease in some em-

ployers or occupations as a result of less presenteeism behavior and fewer infections, our labor

cost estimate implicitly considers such an effect.


Event Studies

Figure 1 a to d plot events studies for the same four outcome variables estimated by Equation
                                                                       -2                      5
(2). This specification replaces the post-mandate dummy Tt with  j             Leads, j + k    Lags,k .
                                                                      j = -5                  k =0
The March before the mandate's enactment is our reference period. The x-axis of Figure 1




                                               15
shows the normalized time dimension for all treatment states. The y-axis shows the treatment

effect in natural units.

   All four event studies confirm the findings in Table 2 and additionally illustrate how the

treatment effects evolve over time. Further, by examining the mandate leads, the event studies

allow us to asses the credibility of our main identification assumption. As seen, differential

trends between the treatment and control groups are largely absent; the pre-mandate coefficient

estimates are small in magnitude and the gray confidence bands surrounding these estimates

entirely cover the zero line on the y-axis.


                                        [Insert Figure 1 about here]


   Figure 1a documents a substantial increase in sick pay coverage rates in the year of the

mandate's adoption; for example, in Oregon, where the law became effective January 1st , 2016,

 = 0 refers to the survey as of March 2016. In the first post-mandate year,  = 1, coverage

rates further increase to roughly 18 percentage points and then remain at this level for the next
                                  5
four years, that is, through k    Lags,k . This dynamic pattern of mandate effects is important.
                                 k =0
In particular, this pattern suggests large increases in coverage during the first two years post-

mandate, but no further increases in the following years. Put differently, the medium-term

effects appear to equal the short-term effects.

   Figure 1b shows the dynamic effects on actual utilization of paid sick leave. As seen, there

appears to be a small downward trend in utilization in the years before the mandates are effec-

tive. However, when omitting state time trends, as seen in Figure B1b (Appendix), this minor

pre-mandate trend entirely vanishes. (This same pattern holds for the events studies on costs

per hour (Figures 1d vs. B1d).) After the mandates' implementation, sick leave utilization

increases from year one. In subsequent years, we observe further increases in sick leave utiliza-

tion although statistical power decreases due to few states being observed for more than two

post-mandate years (see Table A1). The increase in paid sick leave utilization over time is plau-

sible as employees earn and accumulate sick leave credit over time. As additional NCS data

become available, tracking the long-term utilization effects and assessing when the increase

fades out will be very important for understanding the long-term policy effects.

   Figure 1c (with state-specific linear time trends) and Figure B1c (without state-specific linear

time trends) show the event studies for unpaid sick leave hours taken. Again, we observe

nonlinear dynamic effects that are in line with our priors. First, in both figures, we do not

                                                    16
observe substantial evidence for pre-mandate trends. The pre-mandate coefficeint estimates

are close to zero in size and the 95% confidence intervals generally overlap with the zero line.

After employees working for employers with less than 50 employees gained the right to take

unpaid sick days,13 however, we observe increases in sick leave utilization in the first two

post-mandate years. Then, the likelihood to take unpaid sick hours start to decline again and

revert back to the zero line in the fourth post-mandate year. This nonlinear effect is plausibly

a function of how the sick pay mandates are designed--employees must first earn paid sick

leave credit by working for an employer. Hence, initially employees primarily take unpaid

sick hours. Once they accrue sufficient paid sick hours over time, employees increasingly take

paid sick time, and unpaid sick time taken decreases again. This nonlinear pattern suggests that

the medium-term effect of the mandates on unpaid sick leave utilization is likely not different

from zero.

   Finally, Figure 1d and Figure B1d (without state time trends) show the event studies for

sick leave costs per hour worked. In both cases, we do not observe substantial trending in pre-

treatment years. We observe increases in labor costs once employees begin to take paid sick

time. This pattern is again in line with our priors as sick leave costs are simply the product of

paid sick hours taken and the hourly wage.


Heterogeneity in Mandate Effects

We next explore effect heterogeneity in mandate effects by type of job and employer. Mir-

roring the large inequalities across employers and employees in the unregulated pre-mandate

era (Susser and Ziebarth, 2016), one would hypothesize that heterogeneity in treatment effects

should be large as well. In other words, we expect the mandates to have more bite in part-time

and low-wage employers where coverage was particularly low in pre-reform years.

   To this end, we re-estimate an augmented version of Equation (1) by estimating triple dif-

ference models. Specifically, we construct a triple interaction term Ds × Tt × covariate and

add this variable to Equation (1) along with the additional associated two-way interactions,

Tt × covariate and Ds × covariate. For readability, we report only the triple interaction terms;

all other terms are available upon request.


                                        [Insert Table 3 about here]
 13 Employees   in bigger firms have been covered by FMLA also prior to the mandates.


                                                      17
   Table 3 reports results from heterogeneity analyses. In particular, we test whether the treat-

ment effects differ by full-time vs. part-time jobs (Panel A), union vs. non-union jobs (Panel

B), and large (Panel C) vs. small (Panel D) employers. Focusing on the triple interaction term

in column (1), the increase in coverage is larger in part-time (vs. full-time) jobs, non-unionized

(vs. unionized) jobs, and small (vs. large) employers. The differential effects displayed are

generally in line with our priors above.

   The findings for use of paid and unpaid sick leave largely follow the pattern of the coverage

rates, although there are some notable exceptions. For example, not surprisingly, employees

working for employers with fewer than 50 employees experience a larger increase in utiliza-

tion as a result of the mandates (columns (2) and (3), Panel D). However, for full- vs. part-time

employees, we do not find statistically significant differences. We hypothesize that the larger

coverage increase for part-time employees is counteracted by fewer opportunities of these em-

ployees to take sick days due to, among other factors, fewer work hours.

   A similar countervailing force likely operates for the labor cost changes in columns (4) and

(5): Because wages in small employer jobs and non-unionized jobs are lower, we find no signif-

icant differences in labor cost effects between large and small employers as well as unionized

and non-unionized jobs--although the former job-types experience much larger coverage rate

increases. An alternative explanation is that employees working for small employers and in

non-unionized jobs are less likely to be aware of their rights (Hall et al., 2018), or are less likely

to take sick days out of concern that it may trigger negative job consequences (Shapiro and

Stiglitz, 1974; Ziebarth and Karlsson, 2014).


                                   [Insert Figure 2 about here]


   Figure 2 graphically illustrates effect heterogeneity for coverage effects by industry and

occupation. The dark dots report the baseline coverage rates, whereas the lighter diamonds

show the post-mandate coverage rates (baseline + treatment effect). Mirroring inequality in

the U.S. labor market, we find substantial job inequality in baseline coverage rates as well as

reform effect heterogeneity. For example, pre-mandate coverage rates are particularly low in

the accommodation and food services industry (27%, Table B1) as well as in the construction

industry (42%, Table B1). These industries also experience the largest increase in coverage

rates through the mandates and show post-mandate coverage rates of 45% (accommodation

and food) and 62% (construction) respectively.

                                                 18
   All exact effect heterogeneity coefficient estimates for all industries and all occupations and

all estimates for the other three outcome measures are in Table 4. They largely follow the

pattern just discussed , see also Table 3 and Figure 2. In conclusion, the state-level sick pay

mandates significantly and substantially decrease the widespread inequality in paid sick leave

access and use in the U.S. labor market.


Aggregating to the County and State Level and Further Robustness Checks

Finally, we aggregate our data (1) at the county-level (Table B2, Appendix) as well as (2) at the

state-level (Table B3, Appendix). Aggregating to a higher geographic unit allows us to implic-

itly test whether any systematic spillover effects exist. Aggregating in this manner also allows

us to test whether there are any spillover or general equilibrium effects that could influence

(either enhancing or muting) any of the mandate effects at the employer-job-level. If the results

across the micro and aggregated data are equal, such effects are unlikely to play a major role.

As observed for all five outcomes and all three model specifications in both tables, the results

with aggregate data are very similar to our earlier results.

   Further, in Tables B4 to B6, we conduction additional falsification tests. For example, while

we have coded employers below mandate thresholds as not treated in states that exempt small

employers, Table B4 now entirely drops these observations. Tables B5 and B6, by contrast,

replicates the effect heterogeneity tables without including state time trends.


Placebo Estimates.    Next, Figure 3 shows placebo regression estimates for our four main out-

come variables. The placebo estimates correspond to the model in Panel D of Table 2. Estimates

without state trends are in Figure B2 (Appendix). We produce these figures by first excluding

treatment states from our data and then randomly assigning pseudo treatment states and times

to the remaining data points. Then we re-estimate the model in Equation (1). We repeat this

process 200 times and plot the resulting treatment effects on our main outcome variables in

Figure 3a to 3d. The histograms show the results, with each treatment effect equal to one ob-

servation. The dashed lines represent the 5th and 95th percentile of the distribution of treatment

effects. Finally, we add the true estimated treatment effect for comparison as black line. As

seen, the true treatment effects are always clear outliers outside the 95% confidence interval,

providing further evidence that they are not driven by confounding trends.



                                               19
Decomposing Treatment Effects. Finally, we use insight from Goodman-Bacon (2018) in or-

der to learn more about the underlying variation of our main results. In his contribution,

Goodman-Bacon (2018) decomposes treatment effects in DD models with multiple treatments

at different times into multiple, weighted, two-by-two DD estimators.

      In order to perform the Goodman-Bacon decomposition using our data, we have to aggre-

gate them to the state level and adjust our treatment variable to make it binary (at the state

level).14 Next, we re-estimate our main results and decompose them using the estimation com-

mand provided by Goodman-Bacon et al. (2019).

      The results are in Table 5. We find that the estimated treatment effect is comparable but

slightly smaller than the results in Panel B of Table B3 in the Appendix, where we also aggre-

gate at state level. With regard to the decomposition, the two-by-two DD estimate compares

workers at employers in states that mandated benefits between 2009 and 2017 with workers

that were never treated (`Never v timing'). This element receives more than 96% of the total

weight. The resulting treatment effect is thus very similar to the overall treatment effect. Fur-

thermore, comparing workers in states that mandated sick pay earlier as compared to later

(`Timing groups') yields a slightly larger treatment effect--however, this element receives only

2% of the weight. Finally, the within variation has a very low weight of less than 1% implying

that our results are not driven by whether we include controls or not.


5.2     Impact on Non-Mandated Benefits, Hours Worked, and Type of Sick Plan

Tables 6 and 7 report DD estimates for different components of employee compensation. These

additional benefits are plausibly valuable to employees, but costly to employers and not man-

dated. Hence these benefits could be curtailed to offset increased sick leave costs attributable to

the mandates we study. In these auxiliary analyses, we thus test for unintended compensatory

and spillover effects of sick leave mandates.


Crowding-Out of Non-Mandated Benefits

Columns (1) to (7) of Table 6 test for substitution or crowding-out effects of non-mandated

benefits. In particular, the estimates capture the effect of the mandates on the provision of
  14 As some state mandates have firm size exemptions, aggregating to the state level leads to a non-binary treat-

ment (for more details on the laws see Table A1). In order to decompose our treatment effect, a binary treatment
variable in required.



                                                       20
(1) health insurance, (2) prescription drugs, (3) dental insurance, (4) life insurance, (5) short-

term disability insurance, (6) long-term disability insurance, and (7) parental leave benefits.

Broadly, we observe no evidence that sick leave mandates affect any of these outcomes. Indeed,

the coefficient estimates are small in magnitude (and imprecise); further, the estimates carry

alternating signs which do not imply any clear pattern in benefit provision post-mandate. An

exception to this pattern is health insurance: provision of this benefit may decline post-mandate

according to the point estimate, although the coefficients are quite small in size. Importantly,

however, the event study shows no systematic decrease health insurance provision as a result

of the sick pay mandates (Figures B3a and b, Appendix).

   Next, Columns (1) to (3) of Table 7 test whether annual vacation hours, national holiday

hours, and overtime hours are affected by the mandates. Again, all coefficient estimates are

small in size relative to the baseline mean. Moreover, none of the eight coefficient estimates

on vacation and overtime hours are statistically different from zero. Only the estimates for

annual national holiday hours are negative and statistically significant, although our preferred

estimated in Panel D, column (2) is only 1.4% of the mean. However, as above in the case of

health insurance, the event studies in Figures B3c and d (Appendix) let us conclude that there

is no evidence of a systematic crowd-out of holiday hours provided by employers.


                               [Insert Table 6 and 7 about here]


Annual Hours Worked and Paid

Columns (4) to (6) of Table 7 test for mandate-induced changes in (4) hours worked per year,

(5) hours of overall paid leave per year, and (6) hours paid per year. Hours of paid leave per

year includes all forms of paid leave such as paid sick days, parental leave, elder-care, paid

vacation, and paid national holidays.

   First, we find no statistically significant evidence that sick pay mandates affected hours

worked. The coefficient estimates in column (4) have alternating signs and are small, relative

to the mean. For example, in Panel C, the coefficient estimate is positive and equals 0.02% of

the mean but is not statistically distinguishable from zero. Likewise, column (5) provides little

evidence that the annual number of hours paid change substantially in post-mandate years.

However, the coefficient estimates for the annual number of hours on paid leave are marginally



                                               21
significant and 0.9% of the mean (column (6)). These positive increases are in line with, and

likely the result of, the increased utilization of sick days.


Wages and other benefits

Columns (7) to (9) of Table 7 test for changes in wages (7), employer costs for health insurance

(8), and non-production benefits (9). Our results suggest that while health insurance and non-

production benefits are unaffected by the mandates, wages may slightly increase with sick pay.

However, again and as above, the event studies (Figures B3e and f, Appendix) do not support

any systematic wage increase. Similar results are also found in Pichler and Ziebarth (2020).


Type of Sick Leave Plan

Finally, we investigate whether sick pay mandates alter the type of plan offered to employ-

ees. Columns (8) and (9) of Table 6 test for whether the mandates affect the propensity that

employers offer `fixed' sick leave plans (column (8)) or `consolidated' sick leave plans (column

(9)).

    Table 1 shows that 16% of all employer-job observations come with the benefit of a con-

solidated leave plan. These are also called consolidated `Paid-Time-Off' (PTO) plans and have

become increasingly popular in the U.S. Under a PTO plan, employers do not provide a separate

number of days for sick leave, vacation, or parental leave, but instead aggregate or `consolidate'

the total number of paid leave days per year, independent of reason (Lindemann and Miller,

2012). For instance, the BLS reports that the average consolidated PTO plan has accumulated

19 days of available paid leave after five years of service with the employer (Bureau of Labor

Statistics, 2018a). Paid sick leave mandates are in compliance with such PTO plans as long as

they are as least as generous as the sick leave accounts required by the law (ADP, 2016).

    However, as a result of the mandate, column (8) clearly shows an increase in the share of

jobs with separate sick leave plans. The increase is 14 percentage points and nearly identical

to the main coverage increase in column (1) of Table 2. The likelihood that employers offer a

PTO plan either decreases slightly by 1.7 percentage points (column (9), Panels A and B) or

does not appreciably change (column (7), Panel D). In conclusion, columns (8) and (9) imply

that sick pay mandates overwhelmingly induce employers to set up separate sick leave plans,




                                                 22
as intended, likely to avoid uncertainty whether their consolidated PTO plan would comply

with the law (Miller, 2015).



6     Optimal Sick Pay and Welfare Effects

This section develops a model of optimal sick pay to evaluate the welfare effects of mandating

sick pay. Our intention is not to explain why coverage rates are highly unequal across types

of jobs and why private insurance markets for short-term sick leave policies are very limited

in the U.S. (cf. Hendren, 2013, 2017, for similar analyses related to health insurance), despite

clear evidence that employees highly value sick pay (cf. National Paid Sick Days Study, 2010;

Maestas et al., 2018). Rather, as in the Baily-Chetty framework following Baily (1978), Chetty

(2006) and Chetty and Finkelstein (2013), we will use the model to derive sufficient statistics.

Unlike Baily-Chetty, however, we do not assess optimal unemployment benefits but instead

optimal sick pay leave. Without the need to estimate model parameters, this setup allows us to

use the estimated elasticities of the previous section to derive welfare implications, similar to

the case of unemployment insurance (cf. Chetty, 2008).

      Our ultimate goal is to assess whether increasing access to paid sick leave through gov-

ernment mandates is welfare improving or not. In other words, we will examine whether the

voluntary provision of sick pay by employers--as it is currently still the case in the majority of

U.S. states--leads to an underprovision of sick pay, and whether the optimal level of sick pay

would be higher.


6.1     Model Setup

Our model is a one period model. The model considers both employee utility and employer

profits. The social planner maximizes the sum of both and thus overall welfare.


Employees

Representative employees maximize their utility u, which is a function of their sickness level

, their consumption c, and their leisure time l . Hence their utility function is u(, c, l ).




                                                 23
    The sickness level  is continuous and bounded between zero and one.  is zero when

the employee is perfectly healthy and positive when the she is sick, the latter occurring with

probability p. Sickness has a density f () and a cumulative distribution F ().

    Employees consume their income earned from working, which is w when they work and

w (with         [0, 1]) when they are on sick leave. Note that we study the implementation of
U.S. sick pay mandates, which provide sick pay at a replacement rate of 100% for the amount

of sick hours accumulated. Although this case slightly differs from the standard social insurance

framework, one can normalize and rewrite the actual sick pay level as a standard                           [0, 1]
case.15

    With h representing contracted work hours and T total time, leisure time equals l = T - h

when employees work and l = T when they are on sick leave. Moreover, utility decreases in

sickness, but increases in consumption and leisure over the whole domain. Finally, we assume
                                                u       2
that leisure time is more valuable when sick (   l > 0), whereas consumption is less valuable
              2 u
when sick (   c      0), see Finkelstein et al. (2013) for empirical evidence on the latter.

    Given these model parameters, we define the utility differential between work and sick

leave as      = u(, w, T - h) - u(, w, T ). If              is positive, employees will work; otherwise,

they will call in sick and take sick leave. Setting                 = 0 gives a unique indifference level of
sickness  for a given replacement rate .


    Summing up, at the population-level, total employee utility is:



                                                                 
                       U = (1 - p)u(0, w, T - h) + p                f (  ) u (  , w, T - h ) d 
                                                             0
                                                                     1
                                                            +p           f (  ) u (  ,  w, T ) d  .          (3)
                                                                    



    The first term represents utility for healthy employees who work with  = 0. The sec-

ond term represents utility for sick employees who work (`presenteeism'); and the last term

represents utility for sick employees on sick leave.

    Next, Equation (4) shows how a change in sick pay  affects total employee utility:
  15 For newly covered employees who have accumulated sufficient sick pay credit, mandates imply an increase in
 from zero to one. For newly covered employees who cannot cover their sick leave needs with the available credit,
mandates imply an increase in  from zero to (sick hours accumulated/sick hours needed). At the population
level, the mandates imply an increase in the weighted average  of employees who had sick pay before the reform,
and employees who gained access through the reform. In the welfare analysis, we will use this population-level
interpretation and causal changes in population coverage rates as empirical inputs for .


                                                       24
                                   dU             1
                                      = pw            f ()uc (, w, T )d > 0.                                      (4)
                                   d             



    Because of the envelope theorem, all other behavioral adjustments have no effect on total

employee utility. For instance, the labor supply reaction (`moral hazard') does not impact to-

tal employee utility. Put differently, employees will call in sick more often because of more
                       
generous sick pay,          < 0.


Employers

Representative employers cannot observe employee sickness .16 Moreover, employees with

sickness level  have work productivity  () with  () < 0, which is also unobservable. In

other words, sickness causes employees to be less productive. Given  and normalizing the


workforce to unity, total employer profits are then:



                                                                                          1
                = (1 - p)( (0) - w) + p                      f ()( () - w)d - pw              f (  ) d .          (5)
                                                      0                                  



    The first term represents profits generated by healthy employees who work. The second

term represents profits generated by sick employees who work. Because of their sickness, sick

employees have lower productivity than healthy employees, but still earn wage w. The last
                                                                                                           1
term represents profits--or rather losses--generated by employees on sick leave, p                             f ()d

who obtain sick pay w, while not participating in production.

    Following Chetty (2006), we assume that wages are exogenously given, in the sense that

employers pay market wages w. That is, approximating reality, we assume rigid wages and

only partially observable productivity. Otherwise, the employer's optimization problem would

be trivial: they would simply pay employees according to their daily productivity. In our

model, employers can only optimize over sick pay generosity w. Equation (6) shows how a

change in  affects employer profits:
  16 We note that in reality sickness is partially observable at best. First, sickness may not result in physical and

observable symptoms. Second, over-the-counter medications that suppress sickness symptoms, e.g. coughing and
nasal congestion, are widely available (Earn et al., 2014).




                                                             25
                                               
                                                                                  1
                  = p  f ( )( ( ) - w) + p  f ( )w - pw                                f (  ) d .   (6)
                                                                                 



   When the employer provides more generous sick pay, several changes occur. First, fewer

employees work when sick. As seen in the first term of Equation (6), depending on the prof-

itability of the marginal employee, the effect on profits might be positive or negative. Second,

more employees are on sick leave and the employer provides sick pay to more employees (see

the second term of Equation (6)). Third, total employer sick pay costs rise because of the in-

crease in generosity  (see the third term of Equation (6)).

   For the employer, sick pay is optimal when it incentivizes unproductive employees to call

in sick and receive w instead of w; that is, employees with  (~ ) < w. Or, mathematically, the

second term and the third term of Equation (6) will always be negative.17 Hence the employer

will only increase sick pay if the first term is positive and sufficiently large.

   The employer will provide more sick pay if, under current sick pay levels, too many sick

employees work and have productivity less than their wage. More generous sick pay will then

incentivize those unprofitable employees to call in sick, but require the employer to provide

more generous sick pay, and more generous sick pay to more employees. Under optimal sick

pay for the employer, all three factors in Equation (6) will sum to zero.

   Rearranging Equation (6) yields:




                                    
                                                                          1
                       = p  f ( )( ( ) - (1 -  ) w ) - p                      f ()wd.               (7)
                                                                         



Social Planner and Optimal Sick Pay

The social planner maximizes total welfare. We assume that total welfare is simply the sum of

total employee utility (Equation (1)) and total employer profits (Equation (5)):18
 17 The                                  
        second term is negative because of  
                                             <0
 18 Altering the shares and overweighting employees or employers is straightforward.




                                                     26
                                                                       
          W = (1 - p)u(0, A + w, T - h) + p                               f (  ) u (  , A + w, T - h ) d 
                                                                   0
                           1
                   +           f (  ) u (  , A +  w, T ) d 
                       
                                                                                                  1
                   +(1 - p)( (0) - w) + p                        f ()( () - w)d - p                   f ()wd.    (8)
                                                          0                                      




   The social planner varies sick pay generosity in order to maximize total welfare such that:




                  dW                dU 
                           =          +
                  d                 d   
                                         1
                           = pw              f (  ) u c (  ,  w, T ) d 
                                        
                                                                                          1
                                                     
                                   +p        f ( )( ( ) - (1 -  ) w ) - p                     f ()wd.            (9)
                                                                                         




   Thus, the social planner considers the cost and benefits of more generous sick pay for both

employees and employers. The second part of Equation (9) is the same as Equation (7) and

shows how varying sick pay affects employer profits.

   The first part of Equation (9) is the same as Equation (4) and shows how varying sick pay

affects employee utility. More generous sick pay reduces labor supply and fewer employees

will work. However, employees who work will be healthier. Overall, more generous sick pay

is beneficial for employees. Therefore, as long as the social planner considers employee utility

in her overall welfare function, the social planner will choose a higher level of optimal sick pay

than the profit maximizing employer.

   When rearranging Equation (9), we obtain the welfare maximizing optimality condition,

under which both sides of Equation (10) are equal:



                               1
                       w           f ()(uc (, w, T ) - 1)d                     ( ) - (1 -  ) w
                                        1
                                                                          =                    .                (10)
                                             f ()d                                  
                                        




                                                              27
      where the left-hand side (LHS) is the difference between marginal employee benefits (higher

consumption utility) and marginal employer costs (higher sick pay), normalized by the share

of sick employees. The right-hand side (RHS) is the difference between employee produc-

tivity when working sick (`presenteeism') and the difference between the wage and sick pay,

weighted by the labor supply elasticity .19

      Essentially, the social planner would increase sick pay as long as (1) the increase in marginal

employee utility (because of the higher marginal consumption utility) exceeds marginal em-

ployer costs, and until this differential equals (2) the differential between the lower productiv-

ity when working sick, and the difference between sick pay and wages.

      Equation (10) is similar to the standard Baily-Chetty formula (Baily, 1978; Chetty and Finkel-

stein, 2013), but there are some notable differences. First, in the standard Baily-Chetty frame-

work, employees pay for their own welfare benefits through higher taxes. This phenomena

results in the balancing of marginal utilities in different states (low and high taxes). Our setting

is different because the employer provides sick pay; the social planner trades-off how much

employees value more sick pay against the employer costs of providing the benefit.

      Second, sickness is a continuous state and affects work productivity. Hence, for the em-

ployer, the provision of some sick pay is optimal because it incentivizes sick and unproductive

employees (who are, at least partially, unobservable for the employer) to call in sick and take

the lower sick pay, not the higher salary. However, because employers maximize profits and

not employee utility, optimal employer sick pay will always be lower than welfare optimizing

sick pay.20


6.2     Welfare Effects of Mandating Sick Pay

Whether sick pay mandates increase welfare depends on Equation (10) and the empirical suf-

ficient statistics from the previous section. Under optimal sick pay, both sides of Equation (10)

are identical. The LHS is the difference between higher marginal employee utility and higher

marginal employer costs as a result of more sick pay, weighted by the share of employees on

sick leave. The RHS is the effect of more sick pay on employer production and wage payments,
               1
                   f ()d                    
  19    =                       
                                       = -                
                                            f (  )
                                           
                           1                         1
                               f ()d                     f ()d
  20 Note that, to keep the model tractable, we abstain from negative externalities due to infections at the workplace,

see Pichler and Ziebarth, 2017.




                                                                 28
weighted by the labor supply elasticity . When substituting  and  we can write Equation

(10) as:21




                                                        w  - (1 -  ) w
                                            w                          .                                (11)
                                                              


    Next we incorporate our empirical inputs from the previous section to calculate the RHS.

First, the elasticity  can be calculated from Table 1 and Table 2. We use the coefficient estimates

in Table 2, Panel D, columns (2) and (3), indicating the causal effect of obtaining access to sick

leave on sick hours taken (1.816 + 0.479 = 2.295) as a share of total hours paid (1838.1, Table 1).

Then, we scale by the increase in the coverage rate  = 0.128 (Table 2, column (1)). Second, we

multiply by the baseline coverage level  = 0.659 (Table 2, column (1)) and also consider the

baseline level of sick hours taken as a share of total hours worked (17.8 + 0.541= 18.341/1838.1,

Table 2, columns (2) + (3)). We then obtain the elasticity  as:



          1
              f ()d                                                      2.295/1838.1     0.659
                                              
=                       1
                                    =-     f ( )         1
                                                                     =                              = 0.644.
                            f ()d                            f ()d           0.128    18.341/1838.1
                                                         
                                                                                                        (12)

    That is, when sick pay coverage rates increase by 1% at the population level, sick hours

taken (as a share of total work time) increase by 0.64%.

    In the RHS of Equation (11),  indicates work productivity when sick, which is challenging

to elicit. However, the American Working Conditions Survey (AWCS) asks a nationally repre-

sentative sample of U.S. adults to estimate their reduced work productivity when working sick

(Maestas et al., 2018). The estimate for the average employee is a reduction of 23%, which is

why we use  = 0.77 as our baseline scenario.

    When incorporating the remaining values for w and , taken from Table 1, we obtain a RHS
                      (21.69×0.77-(1-0.659)×21.69)
value of 0.644 ×                  0.659              = 9.10. Figure 4 graphically plots the RHS values as
a solid black line and function of ; the x-axis indicates all possible  values, which we allow to

vary as a sensitivity test. As seen, for  = 0.77, the sample average taken from the AWCS, we

obtain a y-axis value of 9.10.
  21 We                                                                               1
      substitute  assuming on average that uc (.) - 1 =  for the population share  f ( )d. We also substitute
                                                                                    
w for  (  ) assuming that work productivity can be written as a multiplier of the wage.




                                                          29
                                  [Insert Figure 4 about here]


   The y-axis in Figure 4 indicates the LHS of Equation (11) for different values of . Recall that

the LHS is the difference between the marginal increase in employee utility and the marginal

employer costs when sick pay becomes more generous. As already noted by Summers (1989),

this difference between the employee value of a mandated benefit and the employer cost of

providing it should be fundamental in the social planner's decision whether or not to mandate

benefits. If this difference is negative, the employer costs of the benefit exceed its value to the

employee. In that case, mandating the benefit cannot be welfare improving. Sick pay is thus

optimal when the differential is positive and equal to the RHS of Equation (11), as shown in

Figure 4. As derived above, for  = 0.77, this will be the case if the LHS equals 9.10.

   How can we determine  and the LHS? We offer three approaches. First, there is suggestive

evidence that employees place substantial value on sick pay. Recall that 75% of Americans

support sick pay mandates and 69% consider this benefit `very important' for them. Further,

a clear majority of Americans considers sick leave a basic employee's right and believe that

providing this benefit is more important than existing employees' rights such as the right to

join a union (National Paid Sick Days Study, 2010).

   Second, Figure 4 includes several gray horizontal lines for different LHS values, assuming

a constant marginal utility. To test the robustness of our conclusions, we display several hori-

zontal lines for   0; 0.2; 0.4; 0.6; 0.8. For a RHS value of 9.10, we find that  must exceed 0.42

for mandating sick pay to be welfare improving. In other words, for our baseline scenario, the

welfare model suggests that mandating sick pay is welfare improving as long as the marginal

employee utility exceeds the marginal employer costs by 42% or more. Recall that our estimate

of the increase in labor costs is about $0.21 per hour worked for the marginal employer (Section

5.1 and Table 2, Panel D).

   Finally, we refer to a recent study by Maestas et al. (2018) that experimentally elicits the

willingness-to-pay (WTP) for ten PTO days among a representative sample of U.S. employees.

The findings shows that the average WTP equals 15% of the annual gross wage. In fact, assum-

ing 260 workdays per year, for an annual gross wage of $50K, this WTP equals $750 per day

whereas the daily gross wage is only $192. In any case, the elicited WTP value clearly exceeds

even the largest possibly assumed LHS differential of 80% in Figure 4. If  = 0.8, independent




                                                30
of the productivity when working sick, the LHS will always exceed the RHS in Figure 4 and

more generous sick pay will always increase welfare.

    In conclusion, if the true WTP of employees for more generous sick leave is anywhere close

to the elicited WTP in Maestas et al. (2018), welfare will improve if more states mandate sick

pay in the U.S. Specifically, based on our model of optimal sick pay and our causal labor supply

estimates, this will be the case if marginal employees' valuation of gaining access to sick pay

exceeds the employer costs of providing it by at least 42%.

    A final note of caution almost always applies in such calculations, but is still worth men-

tioning. The empirical inputs for these welfare calculations stem from average coefficient esti-

mates for several U.S. states and the first post-reform years. Considering effect heterogeneity,

statistical uncertainty, and alternative economic conditions would naturally introduce wider

bandwidths.



7   Discussion and Conclusion

This paper comprehensively evaluates the labor market and welfare effects of enacting sick

pay mandates at the state level in the United States. In the first part of the paper, we estimate

the effects of mandating sick pay on coverage, paid and unpaid sick leave utilization, labor

costs, and non-mandated benefits. In particular, we leverage the experiences of several U.S.

states with more than 70 million residents. For our empirical estimates, we use the National

Compensation Survey (NCS) from 2009 to 2017, coupled with difference-in-differences and

event study models which exploit the policy-induced variation in the implementation of the

mandates across U.S. states and over the past decade. The NCS is a rich government dataset

at the employer-job level specifically designed to measure and track labor compensation and

costs.

    Our findings address important gaps in the economics literature on labor market inequali-

ties and employer mandates more broadly. The U.S. is a country with one of the least generous

paid leave systems among all OECD countries (Adema et al., 2016; Raub et al., 2018). Federal

minimum standards concerning paid vacation, paid parental leave, paid eldercare, and paid

sick leave are largely absent, leading to large variation in the voluntary provision of such ben-

efits by employers. In general, better paying jobs for higher educated employees tend to offer

paid leave benefits, whereas part-time and low-income jobs for lower educated employees do

                                               31
not. An important open question is to what extent employer mandates are effective in provid-

ing and facilitating the provision and use of such benefits; or whether they have unintended

consequences and lead to a reduction, and potentially inefficient reallocation, of non-mandated

benefits (that employees may value). Other crucial questions are to what extent such mandates

increase labor costs and depress employment and wage growth. Pichler and Ziebarth (2020)

find no evidence that the U.S. sick pay mandates significantly affect employment and wages,

or lower the growth rate of wages, by more than 2%.

   This paper provides state-of-the-art empirical evidence on the overall effectiveness of sick

pay mandates along several margins. It also provides a welfare analysis. To this end, we study

the important `first stage' effects of mandating sick pay on actual changes in sick pay coverage.

Using government data we also estimate sick leave utilization effects, assess the relevance of

mandates for labor costs, and estimate the extent to which employers respond to the mandates

by curtailing other forms of compensation. We also develop a model of optimal sick pay and

use the empirical inputs to assess whether mandating sick pay is welfare improving or not.

Our research provides timely evidence on all these questions and contributes to a better un-

derstanding of how recent mandates function, which is relevant from both an economic and a

policy perspective.

   Our findings show a clear and significant increase in sick leave coverage rates of 13 per-

centage points (or 20% relative to the pre-treatment mean of 66%) in the four years following

mandate passage. Interestingly, after an initial increase in coverage rates by 18 percentage

points, we find no further increase in subsequent years. Further research should probe the

persistent coverage gap that we document. Non-compliance and lack of awareness are both

plausible explanations. For instance, Hall et al. (2018) report that, in New York City, only 30%

of employees were aware of the new sick pay mandate in the first year after the implementa-

tion. However, more data-driven explanations of this finding are an important path for future

work.

   As expected, we also find a significant two hours increase in paid sick leave use following

mandate implementation. Scaling this average increase by the share of marginal jobs that have

been covered by the mandates suggests that newly covered employees take, on average, two

additional sick days per calendar year. The implied elasticity is 0.64, meaning that the share of

total work time spend on sick leave increases by 0.64% for every increase in the coverage rate

by 1%. Further, we find that total sick leave costs increase by 10%, which translates to 21 cents

                                               32
per hour for marginal employers and represents 1% of the hourly wage. Moreover, we find

limited evidence that employers curtail non-mandated benefits as a response to the mandates

to reduce overall labor costs.

   Finally, we develop a welfare model of optimal sick pay and generate several findings. First,

the models shows that profit maximizing employers will also provide some level of sick pay

in the absence of mandates. The intuition for this finding is that work productivity decreases

when employees work sick. When wages clearly exceed the productivity of the working sick,

sick pay incentives those employees to call in sick and take (the lower) sick pay instead. Second,

the profit maximizing sick pay level of the employer falls short of the level that a social planner

would set, because the social planner also considers employee utility. Third, for the social plan-

ner to mandate sick pay, (1) the employee utility of more generous sick pay has to exceed the

employer costs of providing this benefit, and (2) this differential must be benchmarked with the

effects of more sick pay on employer production, specifically the changes in productivity and

wage payments, weighted by the labor supply elasticity. Finally, when plugging sample means

and our estimated causal effects into our derived optimality condition, we find that mandating

sick pay is welfare-improving in the U.S., as long as employees' valuation of the benefit exceeds

the employer costs by 42%. Survey evidence as well as evidence of experimentally validated

compensating wage differentials suggest that this is the case (National Paid Sick Days Study,

2010; Maestas et al., 2018). Moreover, this threshold is likely an upper bound as it does not

consider reductions in infectious diseases as a result of reduced presenteeism behavior (Pichler

and Ziebarth, 2017).

   As cities and states will be implementing more sick pay mandates, more empirical evidence

on the indented and unintended consequences of these mandates will become available. We

look forward to fruitful discussions among social scientists.


References
A Better Balance (2020). Overview of paid sick time laws in the United States. https://www.
  abetterbalance.org/resources/paid-sick-time-legislative-successes/,
  retrieved January 9, 2020.

Adema, W., C. Clarke, and V. Frey (2016). Paid parental leave and other supports for par-
 ents with young children: The United States in international comparison. International Social
 Security Review 69(2), 29­51.

ADP (2016). Paid sick leave vs. PTO: Frequently asked questions. https://sbshrs.adpinfo.
 com/blog/paid-sick-leave-vs-pto-frequently-asked-questions, retrieved

                                                33
  October 9, 2018.

Ahn, T. and A. Yelowitz (2016). Paid sick leave and absenteeism: The first evidence from
 the U.S. mimeo. http://www.yelowitz.com/Ahn_Yelowitz_2016_08_12.pdf, re-
 trieved March 17, 2016.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2008). Trends in U.S. wage inequality: Revising the
 revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2), 300­323. Data and Replication Files.

Bailey, M. J., T. S. Byker, E. Patel, and S. Ramnath (2019). The long-term effects of California's
  2004 paid family leave act on women's careers: Evidence from U.S. tax data. Technical report.
  NBER Working Paper 26416.

Baily, M. N. (1978). Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 10(3), 379­402.

Bartel, A. P., M. Rossin-Slater, C. J. Ruhm, J. Stearns, and J. Waldfogel (2018). Paid family leave,
  fathers' leave-taking, and leave-sharing in dual-earner households. Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management 37(1), 10­37.

Basu, A. K., N. H. Chau, and R. Kanbur (2010). Turning a blind eye: Costly enforcement,
  credible commitment and minimum wage laws. The Economic Journal 120(543), 244­269.

Bauernschuster, S., P. Duersch, J. Oechssler, and R. Vadovic (2010). Mandatory sick pay provi-
  sion: A labor market experiment. Journal of Public Economics 94(11), 870 ­ 877.

Baum, C. L. and C. J. Ruhm (2016). The effects of paid family leave in California on labor
  market outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 35(2), 333­356.

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and M. Sendhil (2004). How much should we trust differences-in-
  differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 249­275.

Bloomberg BNA - Workplace Law Report (2018). Airline group wants to stop Massachusetts sick
  leave law. https://convergenceapi.bna.com/, retrieved April 19, 2019.

Boots, S. W., K. Martinson, and A. Danziger (2009). Employers' perspectives on San Francisco's
  paid sick leave policy. Technical report, The Urban Institute.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2018a). Consolidated leave plans: Access. U.S. Department of
  Labor. https://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2018/ownership/civilian/
  table39a.htm, retrieved October 8, 2018.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2018b).    Employee Benefits Survey. U.S. Department of
  Labor.  https://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2018/ownership/private/
  table32a.pdf, retrieved January 8, 2019.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020a). National compensation measures: Concepts. https://www.
  bls.gov/opub/hom/ncs/concepts.htm, retrieved January 24, 2020.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020b). National Compensation Survey. https://www.bls.gov/ncs/,
  retrieved January 24, 2020.

                     ¨
Busse, R. and M. Blumel (2014). Germany: health system review. Health Systems in Transi-
  tion 16(2), 1­296.

Callison, K. and M. Pesko (2017). The effect of paid sick leave mandates on access to paid leave
  and work absences. Upjohn Institute Working Paper; 16-265.


                                                34
Campbell, Z., E. Chyn, and J. Hastings (2019). The impact of paid maternity leave: Evidence
  from Temporary Disability Insurance in Rhode Island. Technical report. mimeo.

Chetty, R. (2006). A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance. Journal of Public
 Economics 90(10-11), 1879­1901.

Chetty, R. (2008). Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance. Journal
  of Political Economy 116(2), 173­234.

Chetty, R. and A. Finkelstein (2013). Social insurance: Connecting theory to data. In Handbook
  of Public Economics, Volume 5, pp. 111­193.

Colla, C. H., W. H. Dow, A. Dube, and V. Lovell (2014). Early effects of the San Francisco paid
  sick leave policy. American Journal of Public Health 104(12), 2453­2460.

Commonwealth     of     Massachusetts   (2019).        Massachusetts   workplace
  poster  requirements.               https://www.mass.gov/service-details/
  massachusetts-workplace-poster-requirements, retrieved April 19, 2019.

Dale-Olsen, H. (2013). Absenteeism, efficiency wages, and marginal taxes. Scandinavian Journal
 of Economics 115(4), 1158­1185.

De Paola, M., V. Scoppa, and V. Pupo (2014). Absenteeism in the Italian public sector: The
 effects of changes in sick leave policy. Journal of Labor Economics 32(2), 337­360.

Drum Major Institute for Public Policy (2010). Paid sick leave does not harm business
  growth or job growth. Technical report. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/f3fa/
  248f0fefa6853e909892118722c1b4771a8c.pdf, retrieved December 5, 2017.

Earn, D. J. D., P. W. Andrews, and B. M. Bolker (2014). Population-level effects of suppressing
  fever. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 281(1778).

Fevang, E., I. Hardoy, and K. Røed (2017). Temporary disability and economic incentives. The
  Economic Journal 127(603), 1410­1432.

Fevang, E., S. Markussen, and K. Røed (2014). The sick pay trap. Journal of Labor Economics 32(2),
  305­336.

Finkelstein, A., E. F. P. Luttmer, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2013). What good is wealth without
  health? The effect of health on the marginal utility of consumption. Journal of the European
  Economic Association 11, 221­258.

Gilleskie, D. (2010). Work absences and doctor visits during an illness episode: The differential
  role of preferences, production, and policies among men and women. Journal of Economet-
  rics 156(1), 148­163.

Gilleskie, D. B. (1998). A dynamic stochastic model of medical care use and work absence.
  Econometrica 66(1), 1­45.

Goerke, L. and M. Pannenberg (2015). Trade union membership and sickness absence: Evi-
 dence from a sick pay reform. Labour Economics 33(C), 13­25.

Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing. NBER
 Working Paper 25018.

Goodman-Bacon, A., T. Goldring, and A. Nichols (2019). BACONDECOMP: Stata module to
 perform a Bacon decomposition of difference-in-differences estimation. Technical report.


                                               35
Gruber, J. (1994). The incidence of mandated maternity benefits.            American Economic Re-
  view 84(3), 622­641.

Hall, G., S. Walters, C. Wimer, A. Seligson, M. Maury, J. Waldfogel, L. H. Gould, and S. Lim
 (2018). Workers not paid for sick leave after implementation of the New York City Paid Sick
 Leave Law. Journal of Urban Health 95(1), 134­140.

Hendren, N. (2013). Private information and insurance rejections. Econometrica 81(5), 1713­
 1762.

Hendren, N. (2017). Knowledge of future job loss and implications for unemployment insur-
 ance. American Economic Review 107(7), 1778­1823.

Herrmann, M. A. and J. E. Rockoff (2012). Does menstruation explain gender gaps in work
 absenteeism? Journal of Human Resources 47(2), 493­508.

Ichino, A. and G. Maggi (2000). Work environment and individual background: Explaining
  regional shirking differentials in a large Italian firm. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3),
  1057­1090.

Ichino, A. and E. Moretti (2009). Biological gender differences, absenteeism, and the earnings
  gap. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1), 183­218.

Ichino, A. and R. T. Riphahn (2005). The effect of employment protection on worker effort.
  A comparison of absenteeism during and after probation. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 3(1), 120­143.

Industrial Commission of Arizona (2019).    Requirements for posters that em-
  ployers must display.       Technical report.        https://www.azica.gov/
  posters-employers-must-display, retrieved April 19, 2019.

Johansson, P. and M. Palme (2005). Moral hazard and sickness insurance. Journal of Public
  Economics 89(9-10), 1879­1890.

Jorgensen, H. and E. Appelbaum (2014). Expanding federal family and medical leave coverage:
  Who benefits from changes in eligibility requirements? CEPR Reports and Issue Briefs.

Kaczmarek,     C. B. (2018).   Massachusetts high court rules that sick
  pay does not constitute wages under state law.        Technical report.
  https://www.littler.com/publication-press/publication/
  massachusetts-high-court-rules-sick-pay-does-not-constitute-wages,
  retrieved April 19, 2019.

Katz, L. F. and A. B. Krueger (2019). The rise and nature of alternative work arrangements in
  the United States, 1995-2015. ILR Review 72(2), 382­416.

Keeler, E., J. Malkin, D. Goldman, and J. Buchanan (1996). Can medical savings accounts for
  the nonelderly reduce health care costs? JAMA 275(21), 1666­1671.

Kruth, R. (2018). Michigan manufacturers say paid sick leave mandate could hurt job
  growth. Npr news station, michigan radio. http://www.michiganradio.org/post/
  michigan-manufacturers-say-paid-sick-leave-mandate-could-hurt-job-growth,
  retrieved December 7, 2018.

                                                     ¨
Lalive, R., A. Schlosser, A. Steinhauer, and J. Zweimuller (2014). Parental leave and mothers'
  careers: The relative importance of job protection and cash benefits. The Review of Economic
  Studies 81(1), 219­265.

                                                 36
Lexis    Practice   Advisor       (2017).     Guidance   for employers on  navi-
  gating     paid    sick     leave     laws.       https://www.lexisnexis.com/
  lexis-practice-advisor/the-journal/b/lpa/archive/2017/04/12/
  guidance-for-employers-on-navigating-paid-sick-leave-laws.aspx,
  retrieved October 10, 2018.
Lindemann, A. and K. Miller (2012).       Paid time off:    The elements
  and prevalence of consolidated leave plans.     Technical report, Insti-
  tute for Women's Policy Research.     https://iwpr.org/publications/
  paid-time-off-the-elements-and-prevalence-of-consolidated-leave-plans/,
  retrieved October 19, 2018.
Maestas, N., K. J. Mullen, D. Powell, T. von Wachter, and J. B. Wenger (2018). The value of
 working conditions in the United States and implications for the structure of wages. NBER
 Working Paper 25204.
Maestas, N., K. J. Mullen, and S. Rennane (2018). Absenteeism and presenteeism among Amer-
 ican workers. mimeo.
Markussen, S. (2012). The individual cost of sick leave. Journal of Population Economics 25(4),
 1287­1306.
Massachusetts Attorney General's Office (2016). Earned sick time in Massachusetts: Fre-
 quently asked questions. www.mass.gov/ago/docs/workplace/earned-sick-time/
 est-faqs.pdf, retrieved December 7, 2017.
Miller, B. (2015). Pros and cons of using a PTO bank instead of vacation and sick time.
 Technical report. https://hrdailyadvisor.blr.com/2015/01/12/pros-and-cons-of-using-a-
 pto-bank-instead-of-vacation-and-sick-time/ , retrieved October 1, 2018.
Moore, D. (2018).      Ahead of court hearing on controversial pittsburgh law,
 restaurants remain divided on paid sick leave.  Technical report.      https:
 //www.post-gazette.com/business/career-workplace/2018/10/22/
 Paid-sick-leave-Pittsburgh-law-restaurants-health-care/stories/
 201707300004, retrieved April 19, 2019.
National Paid Sick Days Study (2010). Paid sick days: Attitudes and experiences.
 http://www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/workplace/
 paid-sick-days/paid-sick-days-attitudes-and-experiences.pdf, retrieved
 January 9, 2019.
Nordberg, M. and K. Røed (2009). Economic incentives, business cycles, and long-term sickness
 absence. Industrial Relations 48(2), 203­230.
Pauly, M. V., J. C. Goodman, J. Feder, L. Levitt, S. M. Butler, D. M. Cutler, and G. R. Wilensky
  (1995). Tax credits for health insurance and medical savings accounts. Health Affairs 14(1),
  125­139.
Pichler, S. (2015). Sickness absence, moral hazard, and the business cycle.          Health Eco-
  nomics 24(6), 692­710.
Pichler, S. and N. R. Ziebarth (2017). The pros and cons of sick pay schemes: Testing for conta-
  gious presenteeism and noncontagious absenteeism behavior. Journal of Public Economics 156,
  14­33.
Pichler, S. and N. R. Ziebarth (2020). Labor market effects of U.S. sick pay mandates. Journal of
  Human Resources 55(2), 611­659.

                                               37
Raub, A., P. Chung, P. Batra, A. Earle, B. Bose, N. De Guzman Chorny, E. Wong, D. Franken,
  and J. Heymann (2018). Paid leave for personal illness: A detailed look at approaches
  across OECD countries. Technical report, WORLD Policy Analysis Center. https://www.
  worldpolicycenter.org/ retrieved February 10, 2020.

Rossin-Slater, M., C. J. Ruhm, and J. Waldfogel (2013). The effects of California's Paid Family
  Leave Program on mothers' leave? Taking and subsequent labor market outcomes. Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management 32(2), 224­245.

Ruhm, C. J. (1998). The economic consequences of parental leave mandates: Lessons from
  Europe. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1), 285­317.

Sandy, R. and R. F. Elliott (2005). Long-term illness and wages: The impact of the risk of
  occupationally related long-term illness on earnings. Journal of Human Resources 40(3), 744­
  768.

Schmidheiny, K. and S. Siegloch (2019). On event study designs and distributed-lag models:
  Equivalence, generalization and practical implications. IZA Discussion Papers 12079.

Senate Bill 840 - Healthy Families Act (2019). 116th United States Congress. https://www.
  congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/840, retrieved May 28, 2019.

Shapiro, C. and J. E. Stiglitz (1974). Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline device.
  American Economic Review 74(3), 433­444.

Song, J., D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. von Wachter (2019). Firming up inequality.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1), 1­50.

Stearns, J. and C. White (2018). Can paid sick leave mandates reduce leave-taking? Labour
  Economics 51, 227­246.

Summers, L. H. (1989). Some simple economics of mandated benefits. American Economic
  Review 79(2), 177­183.

Susser, P. and N. R. Ziebarth (2016). Profiling the US sick leave landscape: Presenteeim among
  females. Health Services Research 51(6), 2305­2317.

Waldfogel, J. (1999). The impact of the Family and Medical Leave Act. Journal of Policy Analysis
 and Management 18(2), 281­302.

Ziebarth, N. R. and M. Karlsson (2010). A natural experiment on sick pay cuts, sickness absence,
  and labor costs. Journal of Public Economics 94(11-12), 1108­1122.

Ziebarth, N. R. and M. Karlsson (2014). The effects of expanding the generosity of the statutory
  sickness insurance system. Journal of Applied Econometrics 29(2), 208­230.




                                              38
Figures and Tables


                   Figure 1: Event Studies from Difference-in-Differences Models




               (a) Sick pay coverage                                    (b) Paid sick leave hours taken




        (c) Unpaid sick leave hours taken                           (d) Sick leave costs per hour worked


Notes: The graphs show event studies based on DD models as in Equation (2). All models include employer-job
fixed effects, time fixed effects and state time trends (for event studies without trend see Figure B1). The standard
errors are clustered at the state level and the gray bars depict 95% confidence intervals. The corresponding DD
point estimates can be found in Panel D of Table 2. For more information about the sick pay reforms, see Table A1.




                                                         39
               Figure 2: Coverage Effect Heterogeneity by Industry and Occupation


                            Average (all industries)

                              Construction industry

                               Retail trade industry

                Admin and support and waste man.

                 Accommodation and food services




                          Average (all occupations)

           Food preparation and serving occupation

                      Sales and related occupation

               Office and administrative occupation

             Transportation and material occupation

                                                       0      .2         .4         .6          .8        1

                                                                   baseline         after law


Results are for coverage only. Full results are in Table 4. Industries and occupations are sorted by the weighted
frequency of the industries and occupations.
                                    Figure 3: Placebo Regression Results




          (a) Sick pay coverage (p=0.001)                          (b) Paid sick leave hours taken (p=0.01)




   (c) Unpaid sick leave hours taken (p=0.05)                   (d) Sick leave costs per hour worked (p=0.01)


Notes: This figure plots the distribution of the estimated placebo regressions (n=200) that excluded treatment states
and randomly assigned pseudo treatment states, as compared to the true estimate. All models include
employer-job fixed effects, year fixed effects and state time trends (for event studies without trend see Figure B2 in
the Appendix). The vertical black line and corresponding bar denotes the true coefficient estimates. The p-values
are displayed next to the variable name. The corresponding DD point estimates can be found in Panel D of Table 2.
For more information about the sick pay reforms, see Table A1.
                             Figure 4: Welfare Effects of Sick Pay Mandates
  20
  10
  0
  -10




        0               .2               .4               .6               .8               1


                                         LHS, =0.8             LHS, =0.6

                                         LHS, =0.4             LHS, =0.2

                                         LHS, =0.0             RHS




Notes: The graph depicts the LHS and RHS of Equation (11) for different values of  on the y-axis and  on the
x-axis. If the LHS exceeds the RHS of Equation (11), more generous sick pay is welfare improving.
   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, National Compensation Survey (NCS) 2009-2017 (weighted)

                                                                     Mean                    Std. Dev.
Outcomes
Sick leave offered (binary)                             0.632                                  0.482
Paid sick hours taken (hours per year)                  15.84                                  18.72
Unpaid sick hours taken (hours per year)                0.647                                  4.595
Sick leave costs total (in 2017 $)                      448.5                                  792.5
Sick leave cost per hour worked (in 2017 $)             0.251                                  0.479
Other benefits and characteristics
Full-time employment (binary)                           0.739                                  0.439
Part-time employment (binary)                           0.261                                  0.439
Unionized (binary)                                      0.086                                  0.281
Hourly wage (in 2017 $)                                 21.69                                  18.42
Hourly health insurance cost (in 2017 $)                2.403                                  2.427
Hourly non-production bonus (in 2017 $)                 0.656                                  5.619
Paid vacation hours per year                            69.58                                  57.57
Paid national holiday hours per year                    44.11                                  32.91
Paid overtime hours per year                             57.2                                  106.2
Annual hours worked                                     1700                                    469
Annual hours paid leave                                  138                                    102
Annual hours paid (=sum of worked and leave)            1838                                    523
Health insurance offered (binary)                       0.688                                  0.464
Presc. drug insurance offered (binary)                  0.673                                  0.469
Dental insurance offered (binary)                       0.436                                  0.496
Life insurance offered (binary)                         0.571                                  0.533
Short-term disability offered (binary)                  0.378                                  0.485
Long Term disability offered (binary)                   0.329                                  0.470
Family leave offered (binary)                           0.111                                  0.314
Fixed paid sick time (binary)                           0.424                                  0.494
Consolidated sick plan PTO (binary)                     0.163                                  0.369
Main employee occupations (sorted by weighted frequency)
Office and administrative                               0.166                                  0.372
Sales and related                                       0.113                                  0.316
Food preparation and serving                            0.104                                  0.305
Transportation and material                             0.086                                  0.281
Production                                              0.086                                   0.28
Health practitioners and technicians                    0.061                                  0.240
Installation, maintenance, and repair                   0.045                                  0.207
Management                                              0.042                                  0.200
Main employer industries (sorted by weighted frequency)
Healthcare and social assistance                        0.158                                  0.365
Retail trade                                            0.139                                  0.346
Manufacturing                                           0.120                                  0.325
Accommodation and food services                         0.113                                  0.317
Admin, support and waste mgmt., and remed. services     0.072                                  0.258
Professional, scientific, and technical services        0.068                                  0.252
Finance and insurance                                   0.049                                  0.2180
Construction                                            0.049                                  0.2160
Wholesale trade                                         0.048                                  0.2140
Transportation and warehousing                          0.040                                  0.1970
Employer size                                            612                                   2,127
Observations                                           399,586
Source: National Compensation Survey (NCS) 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and
illustration. Yearly data at the employer-job level. Weights are provided by the BLS. Minimum and maximum values not
available due to data confidentiality reasons.
                  Table 2: Effect of Mandates on Coverage, Utilization and Labor Costs

                          Sick leave       Paid sick         Unpaid sick       Sick leave        Sick leave
Outcome                   offered          hours taken       hours taken       costs total       costs per hour
                          (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
Pretreatment mean:        0.659            17.8              0.541             567.6             0.326
(in treated localities)
Panel A
Sick leave mandate        0.128***         1.983***          0.442**           51.566***         0.031***
( Dc × Tt )               (0.035)          (0.610)           (0.199)           (13.564)          (0.007)
Year FE                   X                X                 X                 X                 X
Employer FE               X                X                 X                 X                 X
Panel B
Sick leave mandate        0.129***         2.027***          0.441**           52.941***         0.032***
( Dc × Tt )               (0.034)          (0.587)           (0.199)           (13.189)          (0.007)
Year FE                   X                X                 X                 X                 X
Employer FE               X                X                 X                 X                 X
Employee controls         X                X                 X                 X                 X
Panel C
Sick leave mandate        0.130***         2.060***          0.462*            54.211***         0.033***
( Dc × Tt )               (0.041)          (0.704)           (0.243)           (15.740)          (0.009)
Year FE                   X                X                 X                 X                 X
Employer-job FE           X                X                 X                 X                 X
Panel D
Sick leave mandate        0.128***         1.816**           0.479**           45.813***         0.027***
( Dc × Tt )               (0.038)          (0.701)           (0.193)           (16.288)          (0.008)
Year FE                   X                X                 X                 X                 X
Employer-job FE           X                X                 X                 X                 X
State time trend          X                X                 X                 X                 X
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. FE=fixed-
effects. Each column in each panel stands for one DD model as in Equation (1). ***, **, and * = statistically
different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights. Employee
controls: unionized employee and part-time employment. Standard errors clustered at the state level and
reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586 employer-job observations. Employers below the employer
size cutoff are coded as zero. See Table B4 for results after dropping these observations.
         Table 3: Effect Heterogeneity of Mandates: Coverage, Utilization and Labor Costs

                         Sick leave         Paid sick          Unpaid sick        Sick leave         Sick leave
   Outcome               offered            hours taken        hours taken        costs total        costs per hour
                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)
Pretreatment mean:      0.659      17.8                        0.541              567.6              0.326
(in treated localities)
Panel A: Full-time vs. part-time
Sick leave mandate 0.258***        1.656***                    0.364**            18.579**           0.019***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.062)    (0.532)                     (0.154)            (8.064)            (0.006)
Sick leave mandate -0.182***       0.223                       0.160              38.072***          0.011**
×full-time              (0.032)    (0.262)                     (0.184)            (12.228)           (0.005)
Panel B: Union vs. non-union
Sick leave mandate 0.145***        1.950**                     0.499**            42.864**           0.024**
( Dc × Tt )             (0.044)    (0.798)                     (0.197)            (18.537)           (0.010)
Sick leave mandate -0.168***       -1.310                      -0.198***          28.874             0.027
×union                  (0.044)    (0.895)                     (0.064)            (24.942)           (0.018)
Panel C: Large employers (>500 employees)
Sick leave mandate 0.151***        1.828**                     0.648***           35.211**           0.020**
( Dc × Tt )             (0.038)    (0.706)                     (0.222)            (15.630)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate -0.120***       -0.059                      -0.865***          54.078***          0.036***
×large employers        (0.018)    (0.307)                     (0.267)            (15.694)           (0.007)
Panel D: Small employers (<50 employees)
Sick leave mandate 0.071**         1.640**                     0.016              47.901**           0.024***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.028)    (0.749)                     (0.110)            (19.683)           (0.008)
Sick leave mandate 0.153***        0.464**                     1.243***           -5.813             0.006***
×small employers        (0.022)    (0.229)                     (0.373)            (8.830)            (0.002)
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Each
column in each panel stands for one model similar to Equation (1), but augmented with triple interaction
terms and all two-way interactions, see main text for details. ***, **, and * = statistically different from zero
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights. Standard errors clustered at the
state level and reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586 employer-job observations. All models in all
panels control for year fixed-effects (FE), employer-job FE, and state-specific linear time trends (for estimations
without trends see Table B5 in the Appendix). Controls for all other two-way interaction terms are included in
all models but not shown (available upon request).
                Table 4: Effect Heterogeneity of Mandates: Industries and Occupations

                         Sick leave         Paid sick          Unpaid sick        Sick leave         Sick leave
   Outcome               offered            hours taken        hours taken        costs total        costs per hour
                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)
Pretreatment mean:      0.659         17.8       0.541                            567.6              0.326
(in treated localities)
Panel A: Industries
Panel A1: Construction
Sick leave mandate 0.119***           1.790**    0.445**                          46.767***          0.028***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.036)       (0.693)    (0.189)                          (16.495)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.202***           0.589***   0.764***                         -22.164***         -0.023***
×construction           (0.038)       (0.200)    (0.128)                          (3.725)            (0.003)
Panel A2: Retail trade
Sick leave mandate 0.121***           1.857**    0.561**                          50.767***          0.029***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.040)       (0.729)    (0.216)                          (17.265)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.049***           -0.312     -0.605***                        -36.583***         -0.017***
×retail trade           (0.011)       (0.234)    (0.204)                          (8.792)            (0.003)
Panel A3: Admin and support and waste man. and remed. services
Sick leave mandate 0.121***           1.864**    0.450**                          49.063***          0.029***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.039)       (0.738)    (0.219)                          (17.556)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.070***           -0.501     0.307                            -33.846***         -0.025***
×admin services         (0.021)       (0.399)    (0.538)                          (12.538)           (0.007)
Panel A4: Accommodation and food services
Sick leave mandate 0.104***           1.676**    0.131                            48.240***          0.028***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.037)       (0.673)    (0.096)                          (17.382)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.184***           1.068***   2.679***                         -19.134***         -0.011***
×accommodation          (0.033)       (0.182)    (0.758)                          (6.301)            (0.003)
Panel B: Occupations
Panel B1: Food preparation and serving
Sick leave mandate 0.105***           1.685**    0.129                            48.810***          0.028***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.037)       (0.651)    (0.095)                          (17.341)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.195***           1.139***   3.034***                         -26.013***         -0.015***
×food                   (0.035)       (0.288)    (0.820)                          (5.823)            (0.003)
Panel B2: Sales and related
Sick leave mandate 0.122***           1.920**    0.548**                          50.915***          0.029***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.039)       (0.755)    (0.215)                          (17.884)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.052**            -0.942*    -0.630***                        -46.357***         -0.024***
×sales                  (0.025)       (0.503)    (0.204)                          (14.033)           (0.007)
Panel B3: Office and administrative
Sick leave mandate 0.140***           1.998**    0.550**                          50.875***          0.030***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.041)       (0.766)    (0.213)                          (18.082)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate -0.075***          -1.145***  -0.447***                        -32.035***         -0.019***
×office                 (0.014)       (0.390)    (0.116)                          (10.853)           (0.006)
Panel B4: Transportation and material
Sick leave mandate 0.128***           1.776**    0.495**                          44.618**           0.025***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.037)       (0.686)    (0.201)                          (17.095)           (0.009)
Sick leave mandate -0.002             0.417*     -0.175*                          12.589             0.021**
×transportation         (0.018)       (0.235)    (0.089)                          (10.860)           (0.008)
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Each
column in each panel stands for one model similar to Equation (1), but augmented with triple interaction
terms and all two-way interactions, see main text for details. ***, **, and * = statistically different from zero
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights. Standard errors clustered at the
state level and reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586 employer-job observations. All models in all
panels control for year fixed-effects (FE), employer-job FE, and state-specific linear time trends (for estimations
without trends see Table B6 in the Appendix). Controls for all other two-way interaction terms are included in
all models but not shown (available upon request).
                                Table 5: Decomposition of Treatment Effects

                                     Sick leave        Paid sick        Unpaid sick      Sick leave       Sick leave
Outcome                 Weight       offered           hours taken      hours taken      costs total      costs per hour
                                     (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
Timing groups           0.020        0.119             0.926            0.318            52.250           0.024
Always vs timing        0.005        0.045             -1.323           0.908            -39.417          -0.022
Never vs timing         0.969        0.093             0.899            0.323            41.436           0.022
Always vs never         0.000        -2.618            -141.792         16.436           -8795.130        -5.114
Within                  0.006        0.966             34.358           2.741            1216.231         0.625
Sick leave mandate                   0.099***          1.089**          0.342***         48.042**         0.026**
( Dc × Tt )                          (0.013)           (0.440)          (0.106)          (19.485)         (0.0101)
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Each column in each
panel stands for one DD model as in Equation (1). ***, **, and * = statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights and estimated with employee controls (unionized employee and
part-time employment). Standard errors clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586
employer-job observations. Employers below the employer size cutoff are coded as zero. See Table B4 for results after
dropping these observations.
                                                 Table 6: Effect of Sick Leave Mandates on Non-Mandated Benefits

                                         Insurance plans                           Disability            Family         Paid sick leave
                            health     presc. drug dental        life       short-term long-term         leave      fixed     consolidated
                            (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)             (7)        (8)       (9)
Pretreatment mean:          0.698      0.685           0.515     0.531      0.264          0.311         0.119      0.474       0.135
(in treated localities)
Panel A
Sick leave mandate          -0.009**   -0.004          0.003     -0.006     0.002          0.003         0.002      0.142***    -0.017***
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.006)   (0.004)    (0.005)        (0.004)       (0.002)    (0.034)     (0.006)
Year FE                     X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Employer FE                 X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Panel B
Sick leave mandate          -0.008*    -0.003          0.003     -0.005     0.002          0.004         0.002      0.142***    -0.017***
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.005)    (0.006)         (0.006)   (0.004)    (0.005)        (0.004)       (0.002)    (0.034)     (0.006)
Year FE                     X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Employer FE                 X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Employee controls           X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Panel C
Sick leave mandate          -0.006     -0.003          0.004     -0.004     0.002          0.005         0.002      0.142***    -0.018**
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.006)    (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.005)    (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.002)    (0.041)     (0.007)
Year FE                     X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Employer-job FE             X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Panel D
Sick leave mandate          -0.012*    -0.009          -0.005    -0.002     0.001          0.004         0.002      0.131***    -0.007
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.006)    (0.007)         (0.007)   (0.005)    (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.002)    (0.040)     (0.008)
Year FE                     X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Employer-job FE             X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
State-spec. lin. time tr.   X          X               X         X          X              X             X          X           X
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. FE=fixed-effects. Each column in each
panel stands for one DD model as in Equation (1). ***, **, and * = statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models
are weighted using NCS weights. Employee controls: unionized employee and part-time employment. Standard errors clustered at the state
level and reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586 observations, except for models (8) and (9) where we observe sick leave plans for
392,225 job year pairs. For an event study on health insurance see Figure B3.
                                          Table 7: Effect of Sick Leave Mandates on Hours Worked vs. on Paid Leave

                                       Annual hours                    Total annual hours                            Costs per hour
                            vacation     holiday   overtime       worked paid leave paid               wage        health ins. non-production
                            (1)          (2)       (3)            (4)       (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)
Pretreatment mean:          69.92        46          48.79        1674.2      140           1814.3     24.67       0.97          3.591
(in treated localities)
Panel A
Sick leave mandate          -0.253       -0.818***   0.776        -1.473      0.738         -0.734     0.334**     -0.036        -0.030*
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.431)      (0.234)     (0.968)      (1.310)     (0.586)       (1.514)    (0.163)     (0.033)       (0.017)
Year FE                     X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Employer FE                 X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Panel B
Sick leave mandate          -0.05        -0.724***   0.71         1.026       1.101**       2.127      0.229***    -0.034        -0.029
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.376)      (0.267)     (1.108)      (1.557)     (0.436)       (1.293)    (0.044)     (0.033)       (0.018)
Year FE                     X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Employer FE                 X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Employee controls           X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Panel C
Sick leave mandate          0.083        -0.699**    0.881        0.983       1.266**       2.249      0.191***    -0.029        -0.024
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.446)      (0.311)     (1.086)      (1.650)     (0.549)       (1.363)    (0.039)     (0.041)       (0.021)
Year FE                     X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Employer-job FE             X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Panel D
Sick leave mandate          0.503        -0.652*     1.31         1.462       1.373***      2.825**    0.203***    0.047         -0.035
( Dc × Tt )                 (0.466)      (0.388)     (0.788)      (1.569)     (0.467)       (1.386)    (0.046)     (0.076)       (0.023)
Year FE                     X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Employer-job FE             X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
State-spec. lin. time tr.   X            X           X            X           X             X          X           X
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. FE=fixed-effects. Each column in each
panel stands for one DD model as in Equation (1). ***, **, and * = statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models
are weighted using NCS weights. Employee controls: unionized employee and part-time employment. The wage regression (7) includes the
local minimum wage as additional control. Standard errors clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586
observations.
Appendix


             Figure A1: Examples of Legally Required Employee Right Notifications




Left figure shows an earned sick time poster from Massachusetts (Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 2019).
Right figure shows a general workplace poster that is compliant with notification requirements in Arizona
(Industrial Commission of Arizona, 2019). The Arizona poster includes all labor laws that employers are
required to post at the workplace in Arizona.




                                                  50
                                                      Table A1: Overview of Employer Sick Pay Mandates in the United States (I)

Region               County                 Law Passed               Law Effective            Content
(1)                  (2)                    (3)                      (4)                      (5)

San Francisco, CA    SF                     Nov 7, 2006              Feb 5, 2007              all employees including part-time and temporary; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours worked;
                                                                                              up to 5 to 9 days depending on employer size; for own sickness or family member; 90 days accrual period

Washington D.C.      D.C.                   May 13, 2008             Nov 13, 2008             'qualified employees'; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 43 hours, 90 days accrual period;
                                                                                              up to 3 to 9 days depend. on employer size; own sickness or family; no health care or restaurant employees
                                            Dec 18, 2013             Feb 22, 2014             extension to 20,000 temporary employees and tipped employees
                                                                     (retrosp. in Sep 2014)

Connecticut                                 July 1, 2011             Jan 1, 2012              full-time service sector employees at employers with >49 employees (20% of workforce); 1 hour for every
                                                                                              40 hours; up to 5 days; own sickness or family member, 680 hours accrual period (4 months)

Seattle, WA          King                   Sep 12, 2011             Sep 1, 2012              all employees at employers with >4 full-time employees; 1 hour for every 30 or 40 hours worked;
                                                                                              up to 5 to 13 days depending on employer size, for own sickness or family member; 180 days accrual period

New York, NY         Bronx, Kings,          June 26, 2013            April 1, 2014            employees w >80 hours p.a at employers >4 employees or 1 domestic employee; 1 hour for every 30 hours;
                     New York, Queens,      Jan 17, 2014 extended                             up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member; 120 days accrual period
                     Richmond

Portland, OR         Multnomah              March 13, 2013           Jan 1 2014               employees w >250 hours p.a. at emploeyrs >5 employees; 1 hour for every 30 hours;
                                                                                              up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member

Jersey City, NJ      Hudson                 Sep 26, 2013             Jan 22, 2014             all employees at private employers with >9 employees; 1 hour for every 30 hours;
                                            Oct 28, 2015 extended                             up to 40 hours; own sickness or family; 90 days accrual period

Oakland, CA          Alameda                Nov 4, 2014              March 2, 2015            all employees at emmployers >9 employees; 1 hour for every 30 hours; 90 days accrual period;
                                                                                              up to 40 to 72 hours depending on employer size; own sickness or family member

Newark, NJ           Essex                  Jan 29, 2014             May 29, 2014             all employees in private companies; 1 hour for every 30 hours; 90 days accrual period;
                                                                                              up to 24 to 40 hours depending on employer size; own sickness or family

Philadelphia, PA     Philadelphia           Feb 12, 2015             May 13, 2015             all employees at employers with >9 employees; 1 hour for every 40 hours;
                                                                                              up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member; 90 days accrual period

California                                  September 19, 2014       July 1, 2015             all employees; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours;
                                                                                              minimum 24 hours; own sickness or family member; 90 days accrual period

Massachusetts                               Nov 4, 2014              July 1, 2015             all employees at employers with >10 employees; 1 hour for every 40 hours;
                                                                                              up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member; 90 days accrual period

Oregon                                      June 22, 2015            Jan 1, 2016              all employees at employers with >9 employees; 1 hour every 30 hours; 90 days accrual period;
                                                                                              up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member
Source: several sources, authors' own collection and illustration.
                                                       Overview of Employer Sick Pay Mandates in the United States of America (II)

Region                  County                Law Passed            Law Effective     Content
(1)                     (2)                   (3)                   (4)               (5)

Montgomery County                             July 2, 2015          Oct 1, 2016       all employees except independent contractors, those without regular schedules and agency employees ;
                                                                                      1 hour every 30 hours; up to 56 hours p.a. at employers with >4 employees, up to 32 paid and 24 unpaid
                                                                                      at employers with < 5 employees; own sickness or family member; 90 days accrual

Vermont                                       March 9, 2016         Jan 1, 2017       employees w/ 18 hours/week & >20 weeks/year at employers with > 5 employees; 1 hour every 52 hours; up to 24
                                                                                      hours in 2017, 40 hours thereafter; own sickness or family member; underage employees and employers in first year
                                                                                      exempt; some state employees & per diem employees in health care or long-term care facility exempt

Arizona                                       November 8, 2016      July 1, 2017      all employees; 1 hour for every 30 hours; up to 40 hours at employers with >14 employees,
                                                                                      up to 24 hours <15 employees; own sickness or family member;
                                                                                      employers can impose 90 day accrual period for new employees

Cook County                                   June 2, 2016          July 1, 2017      all employees w/ 80 hours in 120 days, some local gov employees exempt;
& Chicago, IL                                                                         1 hour for every 40 hours; carry over half of unused up to 20 hours (40 hours if FMLA covered);
                                                                                      can use up to 40 hours/years; own sickness or family member;
                                                                                      180 day accrual period for new employees

Minneapolis, MN         Hennepin County       May 26, 2016          July 1, 2017      all employees w/ 80 hours at employers with > 5 employees (<6 employees &
                                                                                      first year of business: unpaid), ind. contractors exempt;
                                                                                      1 hour for every 30 hours up to 48 hours a year; own sickness or family member; 90 day accrual for new employees

Saint Paul, MN          Ramsey County         Sep 7, 2016           July 1, 2017      all employees w/ 80 hours (first 6 months of business: unpaid),
                                                                    (>23 employees)   ind. contractors exempt; 1 hour for every 30 hours up to 48 hours a year
                                                                    Jan 1, 2018       own sickness or family member; 90 day accrual for new employees
                                                                    (<24 employees)
Washington                                    Nov 8, 2016           Jan 1, 2018       all employees except those who are exempt from minimum wage law; 1 hour for every 40 hours; no cap but no more
                                                                                      than 40 hours carry over; own sickness or family member; 90 day accrual for new employees

Tacoma, WA              Pierce County         Sep 26, 2017          Jan 1, 2018       all employees w/ 80 hours; ind. contractors, single person employers, and
                                                                                      fed. gov. employees exempt; 1 hour for every 40 hours; employers can cap carry over at 40 hours
                                                                                      own sickness or family member; 90 day accrual period for new employees

Austin, TX              Travis County,        Feb 16, 2018          Oct 1, 2018       all private sector employees w/ 80 hours , ind. contractors and
                        (+ Hays &                                   (>4 employees)    unpaid interns exempt; 1 hour for every 30 hours up to 64 hours a year for employers with > 15 employees (48
                        Williamson)                                 Oct 1, 2020       hours for employers with <5 employees); own sickness or family member; 60 day accrual period for new employees
                                                                    (<5 employees)
Maryland                                      Jan 12, 2018          Feb 11, 2018      employees w/ 12 hours/week at employers with > 14 employees (<15 employees 40 hours unpaid);
                                              (override veto                          1 hour for every 30 hours; employers can cap at 64 hours accrual and 40 hours carry over;
                                              by Governor)                            own sickness or family member, also for parental leave; certain groups exempt (e.g. temp. agency employees)

New Jersey                                    May 2, 2018           Oct 28, 2018      all employees; 1 hour for every 30 hours up to 40 hours/year; per diem health care employees exempt
                                                                                      own sickness or family member; 120 day accrual for new employees; preempts city laws

Michigan                                      Dec 13, 2018          March 28, 2019    employees w/ 25 hours/week employed for 25 weeks at employers with > 49 employees; 1 hour for every 35 hours;
                                              (weakened in lame                       government employees, certain railway and air carrier employees exempt; own sickness or family member;
                                              duck session)                           90 day accrual for new employees
Source: several sources, own collection, own illustration.
         Figure B1: Event Studies from Difference-in-Differences Models (no state time trends)




                 (a) Sick pay coverage                                       (b) Paid sick leave hours taken




          (c) Unpaid sick leave hours taken                        (d) Employer sick leave costs per hour worked


Notes: Source: National Compensation Survey (NCS) 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own
calculation and illustration. The graphs show event studies based on DD models as in Equation (2). All models include
employer-job fixed effects and time fixed effects. The standard errors are clustered at the state level and the gray bars
depict 95% confidence intervals. The corresponding DD point estimates can be found in Panel D of Table 2. For more
information about the sick pay reforms, see Table A1.
                         Figure B2: Placebo Regression Results (no state time trends)




           (a) Sick pay coverage (p=0.001)                              (b) Paid sick leave hours taken (p=0.01)




     (c) Unpaid sick leave hours taken (p=0.05)                      (d) Sick leave costs per hour worked (p=0.01)


Notes: Source: National Compensation Survey (NCS) 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own
calculation and illustration. This figure plots the distribution of the estimated placebo regressions (n=200) that excluded
treatment states and randomly assigned pseudo treatment states as compared to the true estimate. All models include
employer-job fixed effects and time fixed effects. The vertical black line and corresponding bar denotes the coefficient
estimates. The p-values are displayed next to the variable name. The corresponding DD point estimates can be found in
Panel D of Table 2. For more information about the sick pay reforms, see Table A1.
                                Figure B3: Event Study on Secondary Outcomes




    (a) Health insurance offered (no state trends)               (b) Health insurance offered (including state trends)




     (c) Annual hours holiday (no state trends)                   (d) Annual hours holiday (including state trends)




              (e) Wages (no state trends)                                   (f) Wages (including state trends)


Notes: Source: National Compensation Survey (NCS) 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own
calculation and illustration. The graphs show event studies based on DD models as in Equation (2). The corresponding
point estimates are in column (1) of Table 6 (health insurance), in column (2) of Panels C and D of Table 7 (holiday hours),
and in column (7) of Table 7 (wages). All models include employer-job fixed effects and time fixed effects. The standard
errors are clustered at the state level and the gray bars depict 95% confidence intervals. For more information about the
sick pay reforms, see Table A1.
                   Table B1: Sick Leave Offered by Subgroup, 2009-2017 (weighted)

                                                                          N        Percent with sick leave offered
Inflation adjusted hourly wages
Hourly wage < 15$                                        124,354                                  0.442
Hourly wage 15-25$                                       125,710                                   0.73
Hourly wage 25-35$                                        68,380                                  0.821
Hourly wage  35$                                          81,142                                  0.885
Employer size
<10 employees                                            26,396                                   0.525
10-50 employees                                           57,333                                   0.52
50-100 employees                                          38,634                                   0.58
100-500 employees                                        114,480                                  0.696
 500 employees                                           162,743                                  0.825
Other characteristics
Full-time employment                                     334,383                                  0.761
Part-time employment                                      65,203                                  0.268
Non-unionized                                            354,183                                  0.625
Unionized                                                 45,403                                  0.714
Main employee occupations (sorted by weighted frequency)
Office and administrative                                 85,343                                  0.753
Sales and related                                         36,629                                  0.56
Food preparation and serving                              15,032                                  0.25
Transportation and material                               26,091                                  0.562
Production                                                36,979                                  0.57
Health practitioners and technicians                      31,167                                  0.816
Installation, maintenance, and repair                     17,811                                  0.682
Management                                                23,356                                  0.919
Main employer industries (sorted by weighted frequency )
Healthcare and social assistance                          64,973                                  0.779
Retail trade                                              48,721                                  0.526
Manufacturing                                             64,595                                  0.659
Accommodation and food services                           12,873                                  0.272
Admin and support and waste man. and remed. services 11,851                                       0.433
Professional, scientific, and technical services          11,779                                  0.846
Finance and insurance                                     59,183                                  0.933
Construction                                              17,978                                  0.423
Wholesale trade                                           16,718                                  0.784
Transportation and warehousing                            12,494                                  0.72
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Yearly data at the
employer-job level. Weights are provided by the BLS.
                      Table B2: County-Level Aggregation: Main Treatment Effects

                        Sick leave         Paid sick         Unpaid sick        Sick leave        Sick leave
   Outcome              offered            hours taken       hours taken        costs total       costs per hour
                        (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
Pretreatment mean:      0.659              17.8              0.541              567.6             0.326

Panel A
Sick leave mandate      0.117***           1.385***          0.465***           58.396**          0.033***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.028)            (0.478)           (0.143)            (25.291)          (0.011)
Year FE                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
County FE               X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Panel B
Sick leave mandate      0.119***           1.477***          0.470***           61.853**          0.035***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.026)            (0.428)           (0.149)            (24.049)          (0.011)
Year FE                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
County FE               X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Job controls            X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Panel C
Sick leave mandate      0.149***           1.212***          0.255**            40.664***         0.014
( Ds × Tt )             (0.021)            (0.362)           (0.120)            (14.500)          (0.010)
Year FE                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
County FE               X                  X                 X                  X                 X
State Time Trends       X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Yearly
data at the county level. Each column in each panel stands for one DD model as in Equation (1). ***, **, and *
= statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights.
Job controls: union and part-time. Standard errors clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. All
models have 8,100 county-year observations.
                        Table B3: State-Level Aggregation: Main Treatment Effects

                        Sick leave         Paid sick         Unpaid sick        Sick leave        Sick leave
   Outcome              offered            hours taken       hours taken        costs total       costs per hour
                        (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
Pretreatment mean:      0.659              17.8              0.541              567.6             0.326

Panel A
Sick leave mandate      0.107***           1.040**           0.369***           46.082**          0.024**
( Ds × Tt )             (0.023)            (0.394)           (0.119)            (21.549)          (0.010)
Year FE                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
State FE                X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Panel B
Sick leave mandate      0.110***           1.125**           0.393***           49.123**          0.025**
( Ds × Tt )             (0.020)            (0.440)           (0.128)            (20.303)          (0.010)
Year FE                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
State FE                X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Job controls            X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Panel C
Sick leave mandate      0.127***           0.532             0.173              33.808***         0.009
( Ds × Tt )             (0.027)            (0.444)           (0.130)            (12.228)          (0.009)
Year FE                 X                  X                 X                  X                 X
State FE                X                  X                 X                  X                 X
State Time Trends       X                  X                 X                  X                 X
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Yearly
data at the state level. Each column in each panel stands for one DD model as in Equation (1). ***, **, and *
= statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights.
Job controls: union and part-time. Standard errors clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. All
models have 451 state-year observations.
              Table B4: Dropping Employers below Employee Size Mandate Threshold

                             Sick leave        Paid sick         Unpaid sick       Sick leave        Sick leave
     Outcome                 offered           hours taken       hours taken       costs total       costs per hour
                             (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
Pretreatment mean: 0.657     17.69             0.544             564.5             0.324

Panel A
Sick leave mandate           0.137***          2.146***          0.436**           56.216***         0.034***
( Ds × Tt )                  (0.032)           (0.557)           (0.216)           (11.516)          (0.006)
Year FE                      X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Employer FE                  X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Panel B
Sick leave mandate           0.138***          2.190***          0.435**           57.621***         0.035***
( Ds × Tt )                  (0.031)           (0.531)           (0.216)           (11.064)          (0.006)
Year FE                      X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Employer FE                  X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Employee controls            X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Panel C
Sick leave mandate           0.139***          2.228***          0.458*            59.032***         0.035***
( Ds × Tt )                  (0.037)           (0.632)           (0.263)           (13.101)          (0.007)
Year FE                      X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Employer-job FE              X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Panel D
Sick leave mandate           0.136***          1.968***          0.464**           49.862***         0.028***
( Ds × Tt )                  (0.037)           (0.659)           (0.228)           (14.798)          (0.008)
Year FE                      X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Employer-job FE              X                 X                 X                 X                 X
State Time Trends            X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Yearly
data at the employer-job level. Each column in each panel stands for one DD model as in Equation (1). ***,
**, and * = statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS
weights. Employee controls: unionized employee and part-time employment. Standard errors clustered at the
state level and reported in parentheses. All models have 393,609 employer-job observations.
   Table B5: Effect Heterogeneity: Coverage, Utilization and Labor Costs (no state time trends)

                         Sick leave        Paid sick          Unpaid sick        Sick leave        Sick leave
   Outcome               offered           hours taken        hours taken        costs total       costs per hour
                         (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)
Pretreatment mean:       0.659             17.8               0.541              567.6             0.326

Panel A: Full-time vs. part-time
Sick leave mandate 0.259***        1.893***                   0.341*             26.782***         0.025***
( Ds × Tt )            (0.066)     (0.536)                    (0.194)            (7.608)           (0.006)
Sick leave mandate -0.180***       0.233                      0.168              38.262***         0.011**
×full-time             (0.033)     (0.265)                    (0.181)            (12.374)          (0.005)
Panel B: Union vs. non-union
Sick leave mandate 0.147***        2.189***                   0.480*             51.156***         0.030***
( Ds × Tt )            (0.047)     (0.805)                    (0.247)            (18.000)          (0.010)
Sick leave mandate -0.165***       -1.258                     -0.177**           29.770            0.027
×union                 (0.046)     (0.921)                    (0.080)            (25.252)          (0.018)
Panel C: Large employers (>500 employees)
Sick leave mandate 0.154***        2.089***                   0.634**            44.301***         0.026***
( Ds × Tt )            (0.040)     (0.696)                    (0.269)            (14.572)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate -0.124***       -0.154                     -0.884***          50.870***         0.033***
×large employers       (0.017)     (0.293)                    (0.256)            (17.124)          (0.008)
Panel D: Small employers (<50 employees)
Sick leave mandate 0.071**         1.871**                    -0.004             56.023***         0.030***
( Ds × Tt )            (0.031)     (0.763)                    (0.126)            (19.424)          (0.008)
Sick leave mandate 0.157***        0.503*                     1.249***           -4.966            0.007**
×small employers       (0.022)     (0.286)                    (0.372)            (9.917)           (0.003)
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Each
column in each panel stands for one model similar to Equation (1), but augmented with triple interaction
terms and all two-way interactions, see main text for details. ***, **, and * = statistically different from zero
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights. Standard errors clustered at the
state level and reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586 employer-job observations. All models in all
panels control for year FE and employer-job FE. Controls for all other two-way interaction terms are included
in all models but not shown (available upon request).
          Table B6: Effect Heterogeneity: Industries and Occupations (no state time trends)

                         Sick leave        Paid sick          Unpaid sick        Sick leave        Sick leave
   Outcome               offered           hours taken        hours taken        costs total       costs per hour
                         (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)
Pretreatment mean:      0.659         17.8       0.541                           567.6             0.326
(in treated localities)
Panel A: Industries
Panel A1: Construction
Sick leave mandate 0.121***           2.030***   0.427*                          55.110***         0.034***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.039)       (0.696)    (0.238)                         (15.970)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.207***           0.662***   0.789***                        -20.666***        -0.022***
×construction           (0.037)       (0.211)    (0.126)                         (5.113)           (0.004)
Panel A2: Retail trade
Sick leave mandate 0.123***           2.103***   0.545**                         59.184***         0.035***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.042)       (0.732)    (0.265)                         (16.763)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.049***           -0.319     -0.613***                       -36.655***        -0.017***
×retail trade           (0.010)       (0.226)    (0.198)                         (8.755)           (0.003)
Panel A3: Admin and support and waste man. and remed. services
Sick leave mandate 0.123***           2.110***   0.432                           57.533***         0.035***
( Dc × Tt )             (0.042)       (0.737)    (0.270)                         (16.906)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.069***           -0.530     0.313                           -34.673***        -0.026***
×admin services         (0.022)       (0.399)    (0.542)                         (11.971)          (0.007)
Panel A4: Accommodation and food services
Sick leave mandate 0.105**            1.911***   0.111                           56.470***         0.034***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.040)       (0.685)    (0.127)                         (17.054)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.186***           1.138***   2.682***                        -17.395**         -0.010**
×accommodation          (0.035)       (0.211)    (0.757)                         (8.384)           (0.004)
Panel B: Occupations
Panel B1: Food preparation and serving
Sick leave mandate 0.107**            1.921***   0.107                           57.085***         0.034***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.040)       (0.660)    (0.126)                         (16.944)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.199***           1.195***   3.049***                        -24.734***        -0.014***
×food                   (0.037)       (0.267)    (0.810)                         (7.330)           (0.004)
Panel B2: Sales and related
Sick leave mandate 0.124***           2.165***   0.531*                          59.355***         0.035***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.042)       (0.755)    (0.265)                         (17.283)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate 0.053**            -0.958*    -0.627***                       -46.690***        -0.024***
×sales                  (0.026)       (0.495)    (0.211)                         (13.656)          (0.007)
Panel B3: Office and administrative
Sick leave mandate 0.142***           2.242***   0.530*                          59.358***         0.036***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.043)       (0.767)    (0.264)                         (17.468)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate -0.075***          -1.151***  -0.433***                       -32.440***        -0.020***
×office                 (0.014)       (0.387)    (0.129)                         (10.529)          (0.005)
Panel B4: Transportation and material
Sick leave mandate 0.130***           2.016***   0.478*                          52.907***         0.031***
( Ds × Tt )             (0.040)       (0.692)    (0.250)                         (16.595)          (0.009)
Sick leave mandate -0.001             0.468*     -0.172*                         13.819            0.022***
×transportation         (0.019)       (0.244)    (0.088)                         (11.317)          (0.008)
Source: NCS 2009-2017 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020b), authors' own calculation and illustration. Each
column in each panel stands for one model similar to Equation (1), but augmented with triple interaction
terms and all two-way interactions, see main text for details. ***, **, and * = statistically different from zero
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All models are weighted using NCS weights. Standard errors clustered at the
state level and reported in parentheses. All models have 399,586 employer-job observations. All models in all
panels control for year FE and employer-job FE. Controls for all other two-way interaction terms are included
in all models but not shown (available upon request).
