                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         URBANIZATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS

                                      Edward L. Glaeser

                                      Working Paper 26839
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26839


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




This essay was written as a Presidential Address for the Eastern Economics Association. I am
grateful for research assistance from Ben Austin and Brandon Tan. Margaret Brissenden and
Theodore Glaeser provided helpful editorial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Urbanization and its Discontents
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 26839
March 2020
JEL No. H70,R10,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

American cities have experienced a remarkable renaissance over the past 40 years, but in recent
years, cities have experienced considerable discontent. Anger about high housing prices and
gentrification has led to protests. The urban wage premium appears to have disappeared for less
skilled workers. The cities of the developing world are growing particularly rapidly, but in those
places, the downsides of density are acute. In this essay, I review the causes of urban discontent
and present a unified explanation for this unhappiness. Urban resurgence represents private sector
success, and the public sector typically only catches up to urban change with a considerable lag.
Moreover, as urban machines have been replaced by governments that are more accountable to
empowered residents, urban governments do more to protect insiders and less to enable growth.
The power of insiders can be seen in the regulatory limits on new construction and new
businesses, the slow pace of school reform and the unwillingness to embrace congestion pricing.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
    I.       Introduction

Discontent roils America's most successful cities: high housing prices, allegedly racist policing,
technological innovations like ride-sharing and apparent inequities in public schooling have all
sparked fierce protests from New York to San Francisco. Why has urban triumph produced
acrimony rather than joy?

Paradoxically, success often generates disputes. Rent-seeking only makes sense where there are
rents to fight over. Throughout most of the 1970 to 2000 period, urban fortunes seemed to hang
on a knife's edge. Urban mayors emphasized core services that would prevent more urban flight,
not redistribution (Peterson, 1981, Ferreiro and Gyourko, 2009). In a world of apparent urban
plenty, activists believe that urban governments can focus more on social problems.

Moreover, as Florida (2017) notes, there are many ways in which successful cities are failing
their poorer inhabitants. Cities are productive, but they do not appear to enable upward mobility
(Chetty et al., 2018, Glaeser and Tan, 2020). The urban wage premium appears to have
disappeared for the less skilled (Autor, 2019). As the wealthy bid up the price of urban real
estate, the poor must either pay higher prices or move elsewhere (Hsieh and Moretti, 2019).
Those prices may explain why poorer people no longer move disproportionately to cities with
higher wages (Ganong and Shoag, 2017). Everywhere, but especially in the developing world,
urban mobility has been slowed by terrible levels of congestion (Kreindler, 2019), and crime has
reappeared as an urban curse in some cities, such as Chicago.

In Section II of this paper, I review backdrop to our current urban discontent: the technological
changes that led to urban resurgence. Following previous work (Gaspar and Glaeser, 1998,
Glaeser, 2011), I argue that mid-20th century technological changes, such as the interstate
highway system and containerization, were largely centrifugal, leading both industry and people
to leave urban cores. 2 In more recent decades, technological change has become more
centripetal. Globalization and mechanization have increased the returns to skill and innovation,
and urban density abets knowledge accumulation and creativity. There is a strong
complementarity between cities and skills (Glaeser and Resseger, 2010) so that more skilled
places have achieved more success and more skilled urbanites have experienced greater wage

2
 Paul Krugman taught me to understand the dance between centripetal and centrifugal forces that shapes urban
concentration.

                                                        2
growth. The economic success and growth of cities in the developing world is even more
impressive (Chauvin et al., 2018).

But even as many cities have experienced robust economic growth, they have failed to generate
upward mobility. The Opportunity Atlas created by Chetty et al. (2018) provides upward
mobility by neighborhood across the U.S. As Glaeser and Tan (2020) document, upward
mobility is lower in dense metropolitan areas and lower in denser neighborhoods within
metropolitan areas. Many central city school districts appear to be performing poorly, and urban
children often live spatially segregated lives. For some teenagers, the urban advantage in making
markets may have become a curse because urban drug markets distract from education.

Autor (2019) documents that the urban wage premium has largely disappeared for less skilled
workers. In Section IV, I show that this change has occurred in less skilled cities that have
experienced less success, but there is still a wage premium for less skilled workers who work in
more skilled cities. As a whole, cities appear to perform poorly for less skilled workers partially
because less skilled workers live disproportionately in less skilled cities. In developing world
cities, weak rule of law means that more vulnerable citizens, particularly women, have difficulty
forming reciprocally beneficial partnerships that enable them to benefit from urban collaboration
(Ashraf, Delfino and Glaeser, 2019).

Anger about gentrification partially reflects the fact that housing price growth has often outpaced
income growth, especially for less skilled workers. That increase in housing prices reflects both
demand for consumer amenities by higher skilled workers and limits on housing supply. As I
discuss in Section V, cities where housing supply is relatively fixed, such as San Francisco,
create the sharpest conflicts as rich and poor battle over a zero-sum stock of homes.

Historically, cities have been an escape route for the underemployed residents of rural areas,
such as the African-Americans who fled north during the Great Migration. Since 1980, migration
rates have declined (Molloy, 2011) and poor people no longer disproportionately move to higher
wage areas (Ganong and Shoag, 2017). Limited housing supply provides one potential
explanation for this change, but cities sometimes also fail to provide particularly good jobs for
outsiders with the wrong set of skills.




                                                 3
The Highway Revolts of the 1960s and 1970s were the transportation equivalent of community
opposition to new housing construction. As more drivers crowd into a fixed supply of city
streets, those streets become congested and urbanites waste billions of hours stuck in traffic
(Texas Transportation Institute, 2019). Few cities have adopted the congestion pricing that could
induce drivers to internalize the social costs of their motoring. Endless traffic jams are even
prevalent in developing world cities, although Kreindler (2019) finds that congestion pricing in
those areas would have only modest benefits because the quality of roads is so limited. As I
discuss in Section VII, urban disamenities, such as traffic, effectively limit urban success.

In Section VIII, I discuss a simple hypothesis to explain these liked phenomena. Our recent
urban success primarily reflects private sector productivity which has been enhanced by urban
density. But there have been few matching improvements in the efficiency of urban government.
Policing is the only area that seems to have generated real success and that success came at the
terrible cost of mass incarceration. More generally, the public sector has failed to keep up with
private sector led urban growth.

A mismatch between private urban expansion and public capacity is not unusual in either our
urban past or in the developing world today. Typically, cities grow and then the public sector
needs to catch up by building infrastructure, enacting regulations and supporting the poor. This
catchup may also happen today, but there are far more breaks on public sector change than
existed in the past. New infrastructure is harder to build. Schools are harder to reform. An
empowered and educated citizenry has created more checks on city government.

Those checks have upsides. Communities are less likely to be haphazardly bulldozed to make
way for urban renewal than they were in the past. Yet an urban government that protects insiders
too stringently will end up having a public sector that lags many decades behind. Lengthy
construction delays have further reduced public sector accountability, because the leader who
starts a major project is unlikely to be around when it is finished.

This hypothesis echoes the argument made by Sigmund Freud in Civilization and Its
Discontents, which motivates the title of this essay. Freud was concerned with the conflict
between individual desires and the rules that define civilized behavior. That conflict is
minimized when individuals are taught to accommodate social rules and when the rules are
limited to restricting the most harmful behavior. The urban discontent of today arguably reflects

                                                  4
failures in both education and regulation that have made cities far less accommodating to the less
fortunate.

Section IX concludes with a discussion of the ways in which future research might improve
current and future urban policy debates. We need more research on the consequences of
gentrification. We need to better understand why urban mobility is low. We especially need to
understand the barriers to making developing world cities more livable.



       II.      Understanding Urban Resurgence 3

While this paper focuses on urban traumas rather than urban success, the roots of urban
resurgence are important preconditions for understanding the current discontent. City
populations feel empowered to demand more because cities appear to have more resources. If
New York City's government was near bankruptcy, it seems unlikely that New York's citizens
would have elected a highly progressive mayor. In 1977, after the Bronx burned and the city
lurched towards bankruptcy, New York's voters rejected the progressive Bella Abzug and turned
to the more pragmatic Ed Koch.

Urban fortunes are shaped by technological change. During some periods, technological shifts
are largely centripetal, meaning that they pull people towards cities. During other eras,
technological trends are centrifugal, meaning that they push people away from dense urban
cores.

The 19th century was predominantly a centripetal century, marked by a series of innovations,
including steam engines, streetcars and skyscrapers, that abetted urban growth. The first sixty
years of the 20th century was largely a centrifugal era, largely because technological change
reduced the tyranny of distance. Cheaper shipping costs, from highways, cheaper railroads and
containerization, allowed far-flung people to participate more fully in the global economy
(Glaeser and Kolhase, 2004). Radio and television enabled the rural population to enjoy
previously entertainment.




3
    This section largely follows the discussion in Glaeser (2011).

                                                             5
These lower costs reduced the need to locate production near the urban ports and railroads that
once anchored all of America's cities. The mass-produced automobile enabled low density
mobility and the rise of car-oriented suburbs (Baum-Snow, 2007). These centrifugal technologies
first slowed the rise of American cities and then enabled a mass exodus from urban America.
The air conditioner made America's warmer places far more appealing than they had been before
World War II, and a move to sun accompanied the move to sprawl.

Urban social problems, especially weak schools and crime, were exacerbated by suburbanization
and then further encouraged the move to the suburbs and to lower density sunbelt cities. The
1970s were a particularly grim decade for urban America, when many formerly great cities, such
as Chicago, New York and Philadelphia, lost ten percent or more of their populations.
Midwestern industrial cities, such as Cleveland and Detroit, were particularly badly hit and each
of those cities lost more than twenty percent of their populations during the 1970s. That
population decline reflects both reductions in the number of households and smaller household
sizes.

While transportation costs for goods, people and ideas continued to fall, some cities managed to
come back, especially after the Crack Epidemic faded. The populations of New York, Boston,
San Francisco and Seattle have all increased steadily since 1980. Other, less visible, urban
renaissances have occurred in Minneapolis, Indianapolis, and Columbus, Ohio. Sunbelt cities,
such as Atlanta, Dallas, Houston and Phoenix, have experienced far more spectacular population
growth.

Economic success lies behind that population growth. The industrial jobs that had once been the
backbone of urban economies did not return. Instead, human capital-intensive business services
became the new export industries for urban areas. Financial services expanded enormously in
urban America from 1980 to 2007. At its height in 2007, finance and insurance generated over
forty percent of the total payroll on the island of Manhattan. The urban edge in transferring
knowledge is particularly valuable in finance, because a bit of extra information can make
millions for a trader in minutes.

Face-to-face contact is often part of the delivery mechanism for urban services. Clients like to
meet their accountants, bankers, lawyers and management consultants in person. Face-to-face
contact is even more imperative for barbers and manicurists. Urban interactions enable young

                                                 6
workers to become more skilled. Researchers have long noticed that cities offer a steeper age-
earnings profile (Glaeser and Mare, 2001, DeLaRoca and Puga, 2017) that has been interpreted
as reflecting faster learning in cities.

Why didn't improvements in electronic communication make face-to-face contact obsolete?
While email is possible almost everywhere, face-to-face interactions generate a richer
information flow that includes body language, intonation and facial expression. As the world
became more complex, the value of intense communication also increases. Physical immersion
in an informationally intense environment, such as trading floor or an academic seminar,
generates a rush of information that is hard to duplicate online. Moreover, dense environments
facilitate random personal interactions that can create serendipitous flows of knowledge and
collaborative creativity.

The knowledge-intensive nature of the urban resurgence helps to explain why educated cities
have done much better than uneducated cities. Glaeser et al. (1995), Glaeser and Saiz (2004) and
Shapiro (2006) document the strong link between education and the growth of both urban
populations and urban incomes. Rauch (1993) and Moretti (2004) measure human capital
externalities, which are defined as the economic benefits associated with working in a more
educated place. These benefits appear to have increased over time. In recent years, earnings
appear to increase by ten percent as the share of adults in a metropolitan area increases by ten
percentage points, holding individual education constant.

While highly educated workers moved into professional and business services, successful cities
also generated employment for less skilled workers in other parts of the service economy. Many
workers switched from manufacturing to wholesale and retail trade during the 1990s. Hospitality
and food services also expanded dramatically after 1980. Employment in these service industries
depends on the demand generated by the success of more export-oriented services, like finance.
In areas that lack viable export industries, the dominant sector is typically healthcare and social
assistance, where demand is maintained by Federal transfers.

Cities also came back as places of consumption as well as places of production (Glaeser, Kolko
and Saiz, 2001), which partially reflects the rise in returns to skill. As Americans became better
educated and as educated people came to earn more, they spent more on higher-end urban
pleasures, such as fine dining, art galleries and expensive retail. Young people increasingly lived

                                                  7
in cities, even as they worked in suburbs. Prices rose dramatically in urban cores and remained
flat in the suburbs.

The rise of consumer cities was also enabled by reductions in crime levels, especially when the
Crack Epidemic ended. A night on the town is much less fun when the risk of a mugging is
omnipresent, although Schwartz et al. (2003) find that only a quarter of the increase in New York
City's property values can be associated with reductions in the level of criminal activity.

The causes of the urban crime decline are still hotly debated. Donahue and Levitt (2001) also
emphasize the role of rising abortion levels. Reyes (2006) points to a reduction in the level of
lead. Police forces themselves emphasize tactical innovations, such as broken-windows or hot
spots policing. Levitt (2001) gave more credit to the increasing number of police on New York
City streets and to the incarceration of vast numbers of potential criminals. The rise in the
number of incarcerations reminds us that declining crime levels have come at a large cost to
poorer urban neighborhoods.

Regardless of the cause, falling crime levels must be counted as a public sector success.
Somewhat surprisingly, there are few other ways in which urban government saw meaningful
improvement. Most big city school districts experienced only modest improvements in test
scores, and many parents still suburbanize to get access to more exclusive public schools. Rising
commute times suggest little improvement in the area of urban mobility. While some cities, such
as New York, managed to get their finances into better shape, the post-1980 urban comeback
was overwhelmingly driven by the private sector.

The success of many European cities, such as London and Frankfurt, looks quite similar to the
success of New York and San Francisco. Skilled service industries replaced erstwhile
manufacturing plants in western cities. Urbanization in East Asia is still oriented towards
manufacturing in places like Shenzhen, but in South Asia, Africa and South America,
urbanization occurred without industrialization and at far lower income levels than in western
history (Jedwab and Vollrath, 2019).

One explanation for the growth of cities in the poor world is that western urbanization occurred
in largely closed economies, where agricultural surpluses must exist before cities expand.
(Glaeser, 2014). In open economies, cities can be fed through trade and so countries that have a


                                                 8
comparative disadvantage in agriculture will urbanize. The cities of the poor world have also
expanded because of urban fertility levels that are vastly higher than those seen in the west either
today or in the past (Jedwab and Vollrath, 2019).

The common thread between developing world urbanization and wealthy world urbanization is
the limits of the public sector. The world's poorest cities have governments with limited capacity
to provide core services or enforce rule of law. Consequently, these places face all of the
challenges that density always creates without the public sector capacity needed to address those
challenges.



   III.       The Limits on Urban Opportunity

During the difficult 1970s, much of the urban exodus was led by parents seeking better or at least
different, schools for their children. Suburbs disproportionately attracted wealthier parents
because the suburban lifestyle, with its reliance on car and home ownership, was more
expensive. American local schooling then meant that suburban schools disproportionately
educated the children of the rich, and consequently those schools had more resources and faced
fewer social problems. Suburban school districts then turned became an added draw for other
parents, who happily left urban schools that were often crowded with poorer children.

Racial divisions exacerbated the appeal of suburban schools to many parents. In 1971, the
Supreme Court ruled in Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education that school
districts must eliminate racially segregated schools, even if that meant busing children across
neighborhoods. In 1974, the Court ruled in Milliken v. Bradley that busing must occur within
districts but could not be forced across districts. Consequently, a child who lived within the
city's boundaries would go to a racially integrated school, but if that child lived outside the city
limits, he or she could attend an almost completely white school. This ruling meant that parents
could escape busing entirely, as long as they left the city.

When cities came back in the 1980s and 1990s, their school districts did not particularly
improve. Many of the new urbanites were young and childless and they didn't mind
underperforming schools. The modern school reform movement that began around 2000



                                                  9
achieved mixed results in many cities. Graduation rates slowly increased, but there was less
visible improvement in test scores in places like New York City.

Until the publication of the Opportunity Atlas by Chetty et al. (2018), the ability to assess urban
upward mobility was limited. The Atlas takes the cohort born between 1978 and 1983 and
measures their economic performance as adults. The core measure of opportunity is adult
economic performance for a child whose parents were in the 25th percentile of the income
distribution around 1980. This data is available at the metropolitan area and neighborhood level
and its results are deeply troubling for urban America.

Figure 1 shows the robust positive relationship between metropolitan area density and per capita
Gross Metropolitan Product, as measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Figure 2 shows
the robust negative relationship between metropolitan area density and upward mobility, as
measured by the Chetty et al. (2018) Opportunity Atlas.




Figure 1: Relationship Between Density and Per Capital GDP

                                                 10
Figure 2: Relationship between Density and Metro Area Mobility

A child born to a 25th percentile parent in one of America's least dense metropolitan areas can
expect to end up in the 44th percentile of the national income distribution as an adult. A child
born to parents with the same level of income in one of America's most dense areas can expect
to end up at the 40th percentile of the income distribution. Cities appear to be almost as bad for
upward mobility as they are good for productivity.

Glaeser and Tan (2020) document a series of related facts and attempt to explain those facts.
Within cities, productivity is much higher in areas with greater population density, especially in
New York (Glaeser et al., 2018). Glaeser and Tan (2020) find that opportunity is lower in more
densely populated neighborhoods within cities. Opportunity is also lower in neighborhoods that
are closer to the city center.

Across the country as a whole, there is a clear spatial discontinuity at the border of the central
city's school district. On average, adult income is at least two percentile points higher just

                                                 11
outside the school district line than within the school district line. The share of children being
incarcerated when they are adults falls from 2.75 percent to 2.1 percent. Central city school
districts appear to be a significant part of the problem, although it is impossible to control for
selection on unobservable attributes at the school district boundary.

Glaeser and Tan (2020) analyze the possible role of unobserved parental attributes and a number
of other explanations for why cities appear to be so bad for upward mobility. Controlling for
observable parental attributes does little to change the within-city estimates or the spatial
discontinuity estimates. Cities also appear to harm upward mobility for the children of richer
parents. If income levels were higher for lower human capital parents in 1980, then the Chetty et
al. (2018) procedure of controlling for parental income actually induces bias, since parents with
the same income in a city will have lower education levels. Yet this argument cannot explain the
within city results, since all parents within the city are participating in the same labor market.

One explanation for lower urban mobility is that cities abet racial and income segregation, and
consequently poor children in a big city may be less exposed to positive influences than children
in a small town. Urban adults who live in poorer areas are still exposed to richer people when
they go to work. Urban children who live in the same areas may live far more isolated
existences. Controlling for segregation does reduce the negative impact of urban density,
especially for African-American children.

A second explanation for low urban mobility is that cities create opportunities that distract from
human capital accumulation. Parents have more to do outside the home and so may end up
investing less in children. Children can participate in illegal urban activities, such as the drug
market, that may reduce their time spent doing homework. The evidence on this hypothesis is
limited, but the much higher rates of adult incarceration rates for children who grew up in cities
suggests that it may be significant.

A third explanation is that cities have environmental attributes, such as lead and other pollutants,
that reduce academic accomplishment. Reyes (2006) documented the connection between lead
and crime. Manduca and Sampson (2019) found that environmental pollutants negatively impact
opportunity in one large industrial city. Glaeser and Tan (2020) show that opportunity was lower
in older industrial cities, and for children growing up in neighborhoods with older buildings. As


                                                  12
pollutants are likely to be more present in older, industrial areas, these facts further support the
hypothesis that the physical environment of some cities is detrimental to upward mobility.

I remain unsure why opportunity is lower in central cities, but I am sure that lower urban
opportunity remains a major problem for American cities. Perhaps this fact reflects the cohort
born between 1978 and 1983 and perhaps recent urban cohorts have experienced more success.
Yet as both cities and urban researchers face the future, they must continue to worry about
whether cities are failing their children. It is a great paradox that cities appear to be forges of
human capital for adults, but places where children seem to learn less productive knowledge.

We know even less about whether cities are engines of opportunity in the developing world.
Marx, Stoker and Suri (2013) show that longer term residents of slums are not richer than poorer
residents, but this may reflect the selection of those who choose to remain in slums. Perlman and
Moser (2010) follows the children and grandchildren of the residents of one of Rio de Janeiro's
favelas in 1969. She finds considerable upward mobility, although she cannot compare the slum
dwellers with other residents of the city.

We typically lack good inter-generational panel data for the residents of global slums, let alone
trials that randomize location. Consequently, we cannot be sure whether slums are good or better
for children relative to life in rural poverty. Yet the forces that might explain why American
cities are associated with negative outcomes for children could also be operating in developing
world slums. Segregation is considerable in these areas, and there are many environmental
hazards. Urban children often start begging or street vending, and some get involved in criminal
activity.

Economists have long argued that cities should not be judged negatively because of their
inequality. Successful cities attract both the rich and the poor, and another name for inequality is
diversity. Yet cities should be judged on whether they are turning poor children into rich adults,
and many apparently are failing in this fundamental task.



    IV.     Cities, the Less Skilled and the Vulnerable
An additional explanation reason for low urban mobility is that cities may be providing limited
economic opportunity for less skilled adults. Autor (2019) documents that the urban wage

                                                  13
premium appears to have disappeared for Americans without a high school degree. Urban
America has experienced increased levels of inequality, partially because the returns to skill have
increased sharply within cities (Glaeser, and Resseger, 2010). Will there be a future for less
skilled urbanites?

Autor's (2019) fact is quite real, but it is incomplete. The end of the urban wage premium for
less skilled Americans partially reflects the fact that less skilled urbanites live disproportionately
in less skilled cities, and such places have particularly poor labor markets (Shapiro, 2006).
Figure 3 shows the flattened relation between population density and earnings for male workers
with less than a high school degree. In 1970, the relationship is robust and positive.




Figure 3: Less than High-School Wages: All CZs




                                                  14
Figure 4 shows the same graph for the one-fourth of metropolitan areas that have the highest
share of the adult population with college degrees in 1970. In this case, the lines show a parallel
shift down.




Figure 4: Less than High-School Wages: CZs with highest 25% of 4yr college attainment, 1970

The wage curve has fallen, reflecting the general decline in the returns to unskilled workers, but
the slopes of the lines are not statistically different. High school dropouts in the densest, most
skilled cities earn approximately .2 log points higher wages than they earn in the least dense,
most skilled cities. That gap is approximately the same as the gap that existed in 1970.

The gap between more and less dense, skilled cities is larger for more skilled workers as shown
in Figure 5. In this case, both in 1970 and 2015, the workers earn between .3 and .4 log points
more in the densest cities. Even the most skilled cities, most dense cities yield higher returns to
more skilled workers than to less skilled workers, but that was true in 1970 as well.



                                                 15
Figure 5: 4yr College Wages: CZs with highest 25% of 4yr college attainment, 1970

One interpretation of these facts is that skilled cities, both in 1970 and 2015, have export
industries that particularly rely on skilled workers. Their industrial specialization leads them to
deliver a healthy urban wage premium for skilled workers, whose skills become even more
valuable when they are able to connect with each other in dense markets. For example, a
Computer and Information Systems Manager in San Francisco, a dense and highly skilled area,
earns a median hourly wage of 88 dollars. The same occupation earns an hourly wage of 67
dollars in Atlanta, Georgia, which is also skilled but less dense. Both of these wages are still
quite high, reflecting the increased demand for information-intensive services in large
metropolitan areas.

Unskilled workers in skilled cities specialize in non-traded services. The returns to these
activities are higher in dense areas, both because the skilled consumers in those areas have higher
incomes and perhaps also because density enables service provision. The median hourly wage


                                                 16
for a bartender in Atlanta, Georgia, is nine dollars. The median hourly wage for a bartender in
San Francisco is fourteen dollars and fifty cents. The San Francisco service worker earns a
significantly higher hourly wage, at least on a percentage basis, but as I will discuss in the next
section, that wage may not be able to cover San Francisco's far more expensive housing costs.

While skilled dense cities pay a sizable premium for service sector workers, unskilled dense
cities no longer provide a significant wage premium for either service workers or for workers in
tradeable industries. In 1970, unskilled, dense cities often specialized in manufacturing. These
cities employed less skilled workers to create industrial products that were exported throughout
the country and the world. Over the past 45 years, the demand for less skilled manufacturing
work has plummeted and this shift has particularly hit unskilled workers in less skilled, dense
cities. Unions that once deliver high wages have grown weaker over time.

In 1979, the U.S. had 19.5 million manufacturing workers. By 2019, the U.S. had only 12.8
million manufacturing workers. Globalization and technological change means that products that
were once made by American workers are made by machines and workers elsewhere. Cities that
were once manufacturing powerhouses, such as Cleveland, Detroit and Gary, Indiana, have
become synonymous with urban decline.

The decline has been particularly painful for less skilled Americans, because the old
manufacturing jobs were far more likely to enjoy a union-related wage premium than the new
service sector jobs. The union jobs in places like Detroit enabled millions of Americans to
increase their wages substantially by moving to cities. That path has narrowed substantially over
time, and there are far fewer cities that offer a path to middle income living standards for less
skilled Americans.

In a sense, the declining demand for less skilled Americans reflects a failure of entrepreneurial
imagination. Nineteenth century entrepreneurs, like Henry Ford and Andrew Carnegie, innovated
in ways that provided employed for Americans and immigrants, with low skill levels. Twenty-
first century entrepreneurs, like Mark Zuckerberg and Sergey Brin, provide services that are
valued by the less-skilled, but their employees are far more likely to be trained computer
engineers.




                                                 17
Uber founder Travis Kalanick provides one exception to this claim. Uber and Lyft do provide
earning opportunities for the less skilled by enabling them to become transportation service
providers. This companies provide one model for 21st century cities. If information technology
increases the range of services that less skilled urbanites can provide to more skilled urbanites,
then there is at least the possibility that the urban wage premium will again increase for workers
with limited levels of education. This chance seems far more likely to appear in densely
populated areas, where the ability to access skilled customers is greater, and in skill places,
where the income of customers is higher.

Indeed, the future looks even bleaker for the residents of lower density America or of cities with
few viable export industries. If a region doesn't export goods or services, then there is far less
demand for consumer services that the less skilled could potentially provide. Indeed, the prime
aged male joblessness that has become endemic in America's Eastern Heartland (Austin, Glaeser
and Summers, 2018), appears so bleak because it is hard to imagine what jobs could even
materialize in that region. By contrast, it is easier to envision good service sector jobs for
children growing up in the Bronx or East Los Angeles.

Nonetheless, too few of those urban service jobs seem to exist today. One hypothesis is that
many service jobs have been crowded out by automation and the internet. This view argues that
Amazon Prime is a substitute for local shops and even grocery stores. Certainly, urban logistics
jobs, such as the stevedores who once crowded the wharves, have been eliminated by more
efficient means of moving goods over space. The techno-dystopian view warns that robots and
future automation will eliminate more existing urban service jobs.

The alternative view is that many wealthier urbanites would love to find better service providers,
such as cooks, house cleaners and babysitters, but that they currently cannot find reliable, low
cost workers. According to this view, technology is more likely to be a solution than a problem,
and current government regulations limit the ability of low wage workers to sell their time to
high wage workers. In some cases, as with Uber, technology can do an end run around
regulation. Uber and Lyft's technology eliminate the limits on taxi supply that had been created
by local medallion and other licensing rules.

The role that regulation may play in limiting the supply of low human capital services is a
particularly important area for future research. Somewhat oddly, much of America appears to

                                                  18
regulate low human capital entrepreneurship much more tightly than it regulates high human
capital entrepreneurs. When Mark Zuckerberg started Facebook in his Harvard College
dormitory, he faced few regulatory hurdles. If he had been trying to start a bodega that sold milk
products three miles away, he would have needed more than ten permits. One question is
whether the inequality that persists in America's system is exacerbated by the legal and
regulatory system.

In developing world cities, certain forms of inequality appear to be perpetuated by the absence of
a strong legal system. Urban trade requires trust that we take for granted in the wealthy west,
where contracts are typically enforced and rule-of-law is strong. In the developing world, courts
are virtually inaccessible to the poor and the police are often seen as unreliable and self-
interested. Consequently, transactions must be enforced by informal means.

In rural villages, individuals interact with each other for years and even over generations. Bad
behavior can be easily punished with ostracization, since villagers typically need the cooperation
of the rest of the community. One of the glories of urban markets is that people can interact with
strangers, but since those strangers can easily find new partners, ostracization is less of a
punishment and norms become much harder to enforce.

The difficulty of enforcing cooperation in the lawless environment of a developing world city
disproportionately harms the most vulnerable, which may include women. When law is absent,
violence appears and men have shown a greater proclivity towards violence throughout all of
human history. Consequently, women may fear to interact with men and may either work in
female-dominated industries or avoid market work altogether.

Ashfraf, Delfino and Glaeser (2019) explore this hypothesis both globally and in the context of
Lusaka, the capital city of Zambia. They find that female entrepreneurs interact less than their
male counterparts and they are less likely to learn their trade from other entrepreneurs. An
inability to trust may cause women to lose the benefits from information transfer that can be so
richly available in dense, urban areas. Women concentrate primarily in two industries ­ apparel
and food manufacturing ­ where they can work primarily with other women. Unfortunately,
those industries deliver lower earnings and industrial choice can largely explain the income gap
between female and male entrepreneurs.


                                                 19
Both in the cross-section and in a trust game, woman cooperate and earn more when they have
access to better legal institutions. Well-defined Zambian markets have an institution called the
"Market Chief" who adjudicates commercial disputes. Women trust more when they work in
markets with chiefs, especially when those markets are predominantly women. When we give
women access to market chiefs in a trust game, the trust gap between women and men
disappears.

The larger point is that cities have provided riches for their most skilled and luckiest inhabitants.
Cities have done less well at providing employment opportunities for the less fortunate. Some
part of that inequality may reflect global technological trends, but public policies may also
explain some of the difference. A failure to educate, a failure to protect and a tendency to over-
regulate the entrepreneurship of the less skilled may help to explain why urban economic
inequality has widened over the past three decades.



    V.        Unaffordable Cities and the Limits of Urban Housing Supply

Urban inequality is particularly painful in the 21st century because of the high cost of housing. A
bartender in San Francisco may earn $36,000 annually, but that doesn't go far in the San
Francisco housing market. The urban battles over gentrification partially reflect the anger that
many older, poorer community members experience when wealthier urbanites move into their
neighborhood and drive up prices. That competition over space ultimately reflects the limited
supply of space within many successful cities both in the U.S. and in Europe.

Urban land has always been more expensive than rural land. The Alonso-Muth-Mills model,
which is the core intellectual framework of urban economics, is built around the increased
willingness to pay for proximity to jobs downtown. No one should expect to be able to afford a
single-family detached house on a half-acre lot within a mile of a downtown, and demand for
such space partially drove the move to the suburbs after World War II.

But urban living space is built by combining land and physical structures. Throughout most of
the past 150 years, the ability to build up has reduced the cost of living in cities. If it cost 80
dollars per square foot to build a suburban home, and 200 dollars per square foot to build an
urban apartment, then economics would predict that new homes would be 2.5 times more

                                                   20
expensive in urban areas. Today, we experience price gaps that are much larger than the gap in
construction costs (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2018), which is probably best understood as a
reflection of the difficulty of building new construction in many dense urban cores.

For much of the post-war period, many urbanites could find housing that cost substantially less
than construction costs even in successful cities (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005). Housing
depreciates, like cars and clothing, and so poorer urbanites could find older apartments in less
fashionable neighborhoods that cost less. Filtering models predict that neighborhoods go through
transitions, and that the rich would live in a newer, nicer areas but the poor occupy older, more
dilapidated areas. The rich vacate areas as they depreciate and then move to a new area that had
been built with higher quality housing.

Apparently, this model appears to have broken down after 1970, probably because of regulation
and increased neighborhood opposition to redevelopment. Anger at the teardown of the old
Beaux Arts Penn Station in New York City galvanized the historic preservation movement,
which then organized and eventually passed legislation that established widespread historic
preservation districts. Community activists, such as Jane Jacobs, fought to prevent new
construction in areas, such as Greenwich Village. Eventually, a large swath of the most desirable
areas of Manhattan became effectively off-limits to new construction (Been et al. 2016).

Economists have tried to quantify the economic impact of land use regulation in many different
ways. The most direct method is to compare areas with more regulation and areas with less
regulation (Katz and Rosen, 1982). Across metropolitan areas, places with more regulation
appear to have less construction and higher prices (Saiz, 2010, Glaeser and Gyourko, 2018). A
second approach is simply to look at the relationship between new construction and the gap
between construction costs and housing prices. Glaeser and Gyourko (2018) find that places that
are expensive don't build a lot and that places that build abundantly are much less expensive,
which is most compatible with the view that some areas have more supply restrictions than
others.

More evidence on the importance of regulation is provided by comparing the marginal cost of
building with the market price of building. If prices are substantially higher than market costs,
then there is presumably some barrier to building. In a big city, the marginal cost of an extra unit
is the cost of adding an extra story to a new building. Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005a) find

                                                 21
that the market price of housing in parts of Manhattan is more than five times higher than the
marginal cost of building. A similar approach asks whether land that sits under a new building is
worth more than land that extends the lot of an existing building. In high cost areas, land that sits
under a new building can be worth more than ten times the value of land that is attached to an
existing building, which suggests that the implicit tax created by zoning rules can be quite high.

The limits on new building appear related not only to higher prices, but to more volatility in
housing prices. Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz (2008) compare the price fluctuations of housing in
constrained and unconstrained areas during much housing booms. Both during the 1980s and
during the 2000s, constrained areas saw much larger price increases. During the 2000 to 2010,
prices in unconstrained Atlanta barely moved, while the amount of new construction first soared
and then crashed. By contrast, prices in San Francisco heaved up and down and the level of
permitting activity barely changed.

During the early 1920s, New York built as many as 100,000 units during a single year and prices
remained affordable despite soaring demand for urban space. Tenements replaced older slums
and large apartment buildings replaced tenements. In more recent decades, the stock of housing
has remained far more fixed in coastal cities, and consequently older residents keenly experience
a conflict over space with newer urbanites. Instead of a filtering process where the wealthy more
into new neighborhoods, the wealthy instead gentrify and prices rise in once affordable areas.

Gentrification is associated with other conflicts as well. As the rich move into older
neighborhoods, the character of local retail can change as well. The lack of new construction sets
up a conflict over neighborhood character that can lead to community mobilization to further
block change. Rent control has reappeared as a popular policy partially because the rich are
trying to rent space in neighborhoods that were once poor.



   VI.     The Limits to Entry into Successful Cities

The limitations on new construction mean that existing urbanites must pay more for their space.
These limitations also block migration into cities. The large wage difference for bartenders
between Atlanta and San Francisco doesn't attract more bartenders to San Francisco because
housing prices more than offset higher wages. The housing supply freeze in successful cities may

                                                 22
help explain why there has been an overall decline in American mobility and a decline of
movement by poor people into rich places (Ganong and Shoag, 2017).

Throughout most of American history, productive places provided space for the residents of
poorer areas. The farmers of rocky New England found it easy to build balloon-frame houses on
the frontier before the Civil War. Poorer farmers could find space in urban tenements or mass-
produced Sears, Robuck homes in the growing cities of the late 19th century. African-Americans
refugees from the Jim Crow South were able to rent apartments in the ghettos of mid-twentieth
century northern cities. Dust bowl farmers, like John Steinbeck's Joads, were able to find at least
some accommodation in California.

Yet in the late 20th century, land use regulations mean that huge economic success stories, such
as Silicon Valley, have been seen only modest amounts of new building. Despite the high wages
paid even to less skilled workers in Seattle and Boston, many less skilled workers stay away
because they cannot afford the rent. Historically, housing price differences across space were
modest (Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks, 2005b) and so higher wages represented almost an arbitrage
opportunity. Today, the high housing prices that typically accompany high wages eliminate any
economic benefits, which perhaps explains why poor people no longer move to rich places
(Ganong and Shoag, 2017).

Limited housing supply is only one potential explanation for why poor people no longer move to
rich American cities in the numbers that they once did. As discussed above, the rich places may
not provide that much economic opportunity for poorer people. The schools in rich places may
not generate opportunity for the children of poor people. Poorer people may have trouble moving
their Section 8 Housing Voucher, or other public benefits, to another metropolitan area.
Schleicher (2017) argues that a variety of public programs have limited portability and that limits
migration across space.

Private social insurance may be even less portable than public social insurance. Austin, Glaeser
and Summers (2018) document that more than 30 percent of long-term jobless men sleep in their
parent's homes. A large fraction of the jobless live off the earnings of other members of their
households. Parents and girlfriends may not be willing to pick up stakes and move somewhere
else for the benefit of their jobless dependent.


                                                   23
Immobility means that cities are failing to be a safety valve for economic distress in lower
density America. Frederick Jackson Turner famously argued that 19th century American had
been defined by its open frontier that offered economic opportunity to anyone with the courage
to head towards empty land. For much of America's history, cities have been an urban frontier
that offered an escape from economic dislocation. That frontier appears to be closing, just as
Jackson's western frontier closed more than a century ago.

The closing of the urban frontier means that America is less productive than it could be if labor
was more mobile over space. Hsieh and Moretti (2017) quantify the losses from the spatial
misallocation of labor that is associated with limitations on new construction. They find that
trillions of dollars of losses that come from the underdevelopment of areas like New York City
and Silicon Valley.

The limits on moving into high wage urban areas also means that migration becomes more
selective and that imposes costs on the community that is left behind. When less skilled people
can find neither jobs nor homes in high wage areas, then only high skilled people leave
depressed parts of the U.S. The selective out-migration of the skilled means that these areas
suffer "brain drain" and end up with even less human capital. If local economic fortunes depend
on local human capital then this leaves these areas with even less of an economic future.

The lack of mobility between depressed parts of America and successful cities may have
exacerbated the political tensions that have always existed between American cities and lower
density parts of the country. When non-urbanites had many friends and relatives who moved to
cities, then they presumably came to believe that urbanites weren't all bad. If they expected that
they would move themselves in the future, then this presumably reduced their incentives to
support policies that redistributed away from these successful places.

In the 2016 election, there was a stark divide between urban and lower density America. That
divide seemed to have lent political support to the subsequent reduction of the Federal income
tax deduction for payments to state governments, local governments and mortgage interest. The
reduction ended up increasing taxes substantially for many residents of America's more
successful cities, while the overall income tax reduction benefitted residents in lower density
parts of America. This spatial twist in taxation seems entirely compatible with the geographic
divide that marked the election.

                                                24
In the developing world, cities still play their historic role as an escape route from rural poverty.
Places such as Mumbai try to limit new construction, but the limits on public capacity mean that
they cannot effectively block new homes being crammed into slums. The great urban failure in
these places is not to provide space, but instead not to provide public services that might that
space more livable.



   VII.     Failing to Tame the Demons of Density

The crowding of thousands into a dense city generates negative, as well as positive, externalities.
Drivers congest roads. Waste infects the water supply. Cooking and heating fires pollute the air.
Criminals find victims more easily on crowded streets and use urban anonymity to escape
detection. For millenia, urban governments have tried to tame the downsides of urban life
through a combination of infrastructure and regulation. Yet despite this long experience, many
poorer cities throughout the world still suffer from the considerable downsides of urban density,
and urban externalities have become worse over time in some richer cities.

Negative Urban Externalities in the United States

American cities made enormous investments in sewerage and clear water during the 19th and
early 20th centuries (Cutler and Miller, 2005). In some cases, water and sewerage were provided
by private companies, but many cities turned to direct public provision or quasi-independent
public water authorities, such as the Croton Aqueduct's Water Commission. Institutional design
was important because private water companies, such as the Manhattan Company, frequently
lacked the financial incentives to provide clear water to poor or minority residents (Troesken,
2003).

Poor residents were often unwilling to pay to connect with clean water, just as African urbanites
are sometimes unwilling to pay for water connections today (Ashraf, Glaeser and Ponzetto,
2018). Cities sometimes solved this problem by imposing fines on tenement owners that didn't
connect, and these were enforced by boards of health. These fines can be rationalized as
Pigouvian taxes that internalized the negative externalities associated with water-borne
contagious disease. By the early 20th century, American cities had developed a combination of



                                                  25
infrastructure, institutions and incentives that produced clean water, eliminate sewage and
reduced mortality rates dramatically.

Air quality remained a problem through the 1970s, and that was addressed by regulation more
than infrastructure. The direct use of coal for home heating was phased out and largely replaced
by natural gas. Automobile regulation led to the use of catalytic converters, and car related smog
decreased. Euclidean zoning banned industry from core residential parts of the city. The decline
of urban manufacturing also had environmental benefits, as polluting industries left from urban
cores (Kahn, 1999).

Today, air and water pollution remain modest problems in most American cities, but water
problems have again reappeared because of a failure to maintain older infrastructure. At its heart,
the Flint water crisis reflected insufficient maintenance investment in century-old lead pipes.
America's declining industrial cities face budgetary shortfalls, and Flint tried to save money on
its water bill. Unfortunately, reducing the maintenance spending on water can create health risks.
The combination of old infrastructure and limited resources exists throughout America's
declining industrial cities, and so it is possible that the Flint water crisis will repeat itself
elsewhere. Air quality is less likely to deteriorate because cities cannot eliminate regulations to
save money.

Crime waves were common in 19th and early 20th century U.S. Cities. The end of prohibition and
improvements in law enforcement were followed by reductions in urban crime levels through the
1950s. Crime then soared in the 1960s and 1970s and then plummeted in the 1980s. As discussed
above, many observers thought that American cities had essentially solved their crime problem
by the 2000s.

Yet over the past five years, some cities, like Chicago, have experienced significant increases in
criminal activities. Chicago's homicide rate fell from over 30 murders per 100,000 inhabitants in
the early 1990s to about 16 murders per 100,000 in the early 2000s. Murder rates remained much
higher than in New York City, but for over a decade, Chicago seemed like a much safer place.
That safety disappeared in 2016 when Chicago's homicide rate rose dramatically to over 25
murders per 100,000, and that rate lower than the homicide rates in Baltimore, Detroit, New
Orleans and St. Louis.


                                                    26
The rise in Chicago's crime levels is associated with a decline in the clearance rate, which is
defined as the share of murders that lead to a criminal charge. Typically, the clearance rate in
U.S. cities has been over 60 percent and that was even true in Chicago in the early 1990s. High
clearance rates reflected the fact that many murders were the outcomes of quarrels among
acquaintances and even spouses. Those acquaintance murders have fallen and been replaced by
gang-related homicides, which are much more difficult to solve. Gang related homicide is also
prone to significant volatility, since gangs go to war and then make peace.

The low clearance rate also reflects a failure of community members to talk to police, either
because of fear of retribution or because the community does not trust law enforcement. The
friction between the policy and ordinary citizens has become a fact of life in many American
cities. Riots have broken out repeatedly, protesting police violence. Unfortunately, the by-
product of community unrest has sometimes been that police pull back from minority
neighborhoods, which leads to even higher crime levels (Devi and Fryer, 2020). Eliminating
some aggressive police policies, such as "Stop and Frisk" in New York City, seems to have little
cost, but when the police pull back dramatically, serious crime can follow.

Good policing typically works together with the community, not in opposition to the community.
Yet the incarceration-intensive approach to policing that appeared to work during the 2000s also
left behind a bitter rift between law enforcement and minority neighborhoods. That rift made it
more difficult for law enforcement to respond to an uptick in gang behavior over the past five
years.

If water and air pollution are generally a success story in the U.S., and crime is a roller coaster,
then traffic congestion is the one area in which American cities have generally gotten worse. The
Texas Transportation Institute's 2019 Urban Mobility Report (Ellis and Glover, 2019) estimates
that the total costs of urban traffic delays has risen by $15 billion in 1982 to $179 billion in 2017,
correcting for inflation. In 1982, the average commute last 20 hours per year to traffic. In 2017,
traffic delays accounted for 54 hours per year.

In the 19th century, urban mobility was greatly improved by a series of mass transit innovations,
which were typically provided by private companies. Horse-drawn omnibuses, streetcars and
elevated trains all enabled faster commutes over longer distances. During the 20th century, the
car transformed urban commutes and indeed all of urban America. Newer cities, like those that

                                                  27
grew after World War II in the Sunbelt, were built entirely around the automobile. Older cities
needed expensive new freeways and bridges to retrofit their spaces to the automobile.

The older public transit systems regulated traffic on their rails and they could price in ways that
rationed the available space. City streets have typically been open to all drivers, and so there is
no mechanism for limiting use. Building more infrastructure in older cities is extremely
expensive, and will elicit further driving. The fundamental law of highway traffic (Duranton and
Turner, 2011), suggests that it is almost impossible for cities to build their way out of traffic
congestion.

Robust demand to live and work in successful cities, like New York and San Francisco, has
collided with a limited stock of residential real estate to create high prices. That same demand
has collided with a fixed supply of city streets to create traffic congestion. If access to those
streets were auctioned off, then presumably, we would see sky high prices just as in the case of
gentrifying apartments. Since the price mechanism is not used to deal with congestion on
American city streets, robust demand shows up in the lengthy queues that we call traffic jams.
While New York City will allegedly have congestion pricing by 2021, it is less clear if the
pricing will be effective or whether other cities will follow New York's example.

Urban Disamenities in the Developing World

Developing world cities face the same downsides of density that afflict all cities, but they have
far fewer public resources to mitigate those downsides. Typically, these cities lack both the
financial resources to invest in major infrastructure and the public capacity to enforce urban
regulations, especially when those regulations are targeted towards poorer, informal settlements.
Moreover, the lack of clear property ownership in slums makes it particularly hard to impose
obligations on landlords, like connecting to the sewer system.

In many cases, there exist two distinct technological paths. One technology borrows technology
from the rich world, such as modern sewerage systems, bus rapid transit and tall public housing
projects. The other technology uses tools that are common in the poor world, such as pit latrines,
jitneys and shanties. One key policy question is whether to switch to the rich world technology
or whether to upgrade the existing poor world technology.



                                                  28
In the case of clean water and sewerage, the prevailing wisdom is that developing world cities
need to provide rich world infrastructure, like water pipes. But the provision question also
includes the institutional choice of whether to use private public partnerships or independent
public entities or the executive branch of government. While independent authorities were
popular and often effective in 19th century America, they have had less success in many poor
nations today, as they can provide the same opportunities for patronage as standard public
provision with less accountability. Private-public partnerships can provide cost-reducing
efficiency, but they can also lead to the corruption of government. Engel, Fischer and Galetovic
(2011) detail the many ways in which Public-Private Partnerships can go wrong in the
developing world.

Infrastructure can be funded with user fees or property taxes or general tax revenues. Property
taxes are harder to collect when property rights are poorly defined. User fees may also be
difficult to collect in poorer communities where households just make illegal connections to the
electricity network.

A second challenge is solving the last mile problem. When the social benefits of adoption exceed
private costs which exceed private benefits, then the state is faced with the choice of fining
households that don't adopt of subsidizing those households that do adopt. Ashraf, Glaeser and
Ponzetto (2018) argue that the choice between fines and subsidies depends on the reliability of
the executive branch versus the reliability the judicial branch. When police and courts are
relatively honest, then fines will be more effective, and they do not have the downside of
subsidizing urbanization. When the executive branch is more efficient, then the waste involved
in subsidies will be more contained.

A third challenge is maintenance. As the example of Flint illustrates, maintenance can even be a
problem in the rich world, but it is a particularly large problem in the developing world. Ashraf,
Glaeser, Holland and Steinberg (2018) document the constant disruptions to the water supply in
Lusaka, Zambia. When the water supply stops, disease increases and young women must spend
more time on household chores. Incentives seem to matter, for the water company seems to fix
the water supply more rapidly for households that pay by the liter than for households that pay a
fixed monthly fee.



                                                 29
Air pollution remains problematic in many developing world cities. Industry, transportation and
home cooking all contribute particulates to the air. Road paving combined with regulations that
limited particulates produced by cars, factories and home fires to produce better air in the west. It
is less clear if developing world cities have the public capacity to enforce such regulations.

Many developing world cities regulate far more activities on paper than they can control in
practice. Consequently, illegal activity is present almost everywhere in developing world cities.
In South Asia, such "crime" is typically against the environment. In Latin America, violence
against other people is a major problem. The opportunities for drug sales, both domestically and
exporting to the U.S., particularly engender violence.

Reducing crime and enforcing regulations requires both spending and management. The police
must have incentives to reduce the crime rather than to extort the citizenry. In some cases, it may
make sense to set up a parallel inspection service that operates separately from an already
corrupted constabulary. The limited ability to enforce can mean that optimal fines are low
enough to avoid extortion of the innocent (Ashraf, Glaeser and Ponzetto, 2018).

Traffic is particularly horrendous problem in many developing world cities, where commutes are
over one hour. Congestion pricing has been effective in Singapore since 1975, but it is less clear
if other cities can enforce such rules. Moreover, poor road quality can limit the benefits of
charging congestion fees to smooth out commuting patterns (Kreindler, 2019).

Curitiba, Brazil, pioneered Bus Rapid Transit, which has proven to be a lower cost alternative to
rail-based public transit. Other cities, like Bogota, have followed Curitiba's lead. Bus Rapid
Transit critically requires that other vehicles are prevented from entering into the dedicated bus
lanes, which is again an enforcement problem that requires public capacity.

It can be tempting to look at the travails of developing world cities and think that it would be
better if poorer people just stayed on their farms. Yet the agglomeration benefits provided by
these cities are real, and few developing countries have the public capacity to enforce limitations
on city growth. Public action to limit the downside of density seems like a more appealing
option, but this will require both more spending and improvements in the quality of local
government.



                                                 30
   VIII. An Interpretation

Why has urban success been accompanied by so much discontent? The most natural explanation
is that the success of private enterprise in cities has not been accompanied by sufficient
development of public capacity. The public sector has often focused on limiting urban change,
rather than working to improve the urban experience. In many cases, this focus reflects the
political priorities of empowered insiders.

Better urban schools seem like a plausible antidote for the limited upward mobility in cities. Yet
school reform has often been limited both by the inherent difficulty of the problem and by the
interests of insiders, such as the teachers' unions. The best way to promote affordability is to
allow unfettered new construction. Yet building has been limited by neighborhood activists who
create rules and lengthy approval processes that limit new construction. New entrepreneurship
that might provide jobs for less educated urbanites is limited by regulations that reduce
competition to existing businesses. Occupational licensing requirements limit the ability of
outsiders to come to cities and compete with existing workers.

At their best, cities promote change. They welcome migrants. They educate the young both at
school and on the job. They create a fertile environment for new cultural and intellectual
movements. The government can either promote that change by educating the young, or stymie
that change by erecting barriers that protect the status quo.

American cities have never been great champions of educational opportunity, but historically,
they did not stand in the way of new business formation and new construction. A flurry of local
governmental activity over the last three decades has not improved urban schools dramatically,
but it has enacted rules that limit urban evolution, by stopping new construction and business
formation.

There are many good things about citizen empowerment, but the most empowered citizens tend
to be longer term residents with more resources. Those citizens do not internalize the interests of
people who live elsewhere and would want to come to the city. Consequently, their political
actions are more likely to exclude than to embrace.

The power of insiders can also explain why cities have not embraced congestion pricing. Many
drivers in New York are middle income residents, who have figured out ways to get inexpensive

                                                 31
parking, typically in public street space. These residents objected strongly to New York's
attempt to enact congestion pricing in 2008 and they found a champion in New York State
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver. Silver's power essentially doomed congestion pricing in the
city for over a decade.

Urban discontent today does not reflect a failure of the economic city, but rather the
shortcomings of the political city. Political progress has swept away corrupt urban machines, but
those machines often embraced the new immigrants who provide votes and the urban growth that
increased tax revenues and graft. Improvements in accountability have created a far more static
city that is far less accommodating of urban change, and so inevitably, urban success leads to
painful urban friction.



   IX.     Conclusion

Many American cities are in far better shape in 2019 than they were in 1979. They are richer and
cleaner and even their schools are better. Yet opportunity has not kept pace with productivity,
and that the public sector has not kept pace with the private sector.

There is no policy conclusion that flows easily from the observations in this essay, but there is
certainly a need for further research. That research must both confront the technical aspects of
public service delivery, and the political process that limits reforms. We must learn both how to
make our schools better and to provide evidence that will illustrate sensible reforms to both
voters and Teachers' Unions.

Over the past three millenia, cities enabled remarkable bursts of innovation and creativity. Urban
labor markets have turned millions of poor people into middle income people. That urban
potential is still there, but the public sector must be more effective if more people are to
experience that potential. The upside is large, even if the challenges are severe. I deeply hope
that more scholars and ordinary citizens recognize that solving urban problems, both in the U.S.
and in the developing world, is one of the great vocations of the 21st century.




                                                 32
References

Ashraf, Nava, Alexia Delfino and Edward Glaeser. "Rule of Law and Female Entrepreneurship."
(NBER Working Paper 26366) October 2019. DOI: 10.3386/w26366

Ashraf, Nava, Edward Glaeser, Abraham Holland and Bryce Millett Steinberg. "Water, health
and Wealth." (NBER Working Paper No. 23807) September 2017. DOI: 10.3386/w23807

Ashraf, Nava, Edward L. Glaeser and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto. "Infrastructure, Incentives, and
Institutions." American Economic Review Vol. 106 No. 5 (May 2016): 77-82. DOI:
10.1257/aer.p20161095

Austin, Benjamin A., Edward L. Glaeser and Lawrence H. Summers. "Jobs for the Heartland:
Place-Based Policies in 21st Century America." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1:
Spring). 2018: 151-232.

Autor, David. "Work of the Past, Work of the Future." (NBER Working Paper No. 25588)
February 2019. DOI: 10.3386/w25588

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. "Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?" The Quarterly Journal of
Economics Vol. 122, 2 (May 2007): 775-805. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.122.2.775

Been, Vicki, Ingrid Gould Ellen, Michael Gedal, Edward Glaeser and Brian J. McCabe.
"Preserving History or Restricting Development? The Heterogeneous Effects of Historic
Districts in Local Housing Markets in New York City." Journal of Urban Economics Vol. 92
(March 2016): 16-30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2015.12.002

Chauvin, Juan Pablo, Edward Glaeser, Yueran Ma and Kristina Tobio. "What is different About
Urbanization in Rich and Poor Countries? Cities in Brazil, China, India and the United States."
Journal of Urban Economics Vol. 98 (March 2017): 17-49

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter. "The
Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility." (NBER Working Paper
No. 36257) October 2018. DOI: 10.3386/w25147

Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 133 (3).
1107-1162. DOI: 10.1093/qje/qjy007.

Cutler. David and Grant Miller. "The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances:
The Twentieth-Century United States." Demography Vol. 42 (1) (February 2005): 1-22.

De La Roca, Jorge and Diego Puga. "Learning by Working in Big Cities." The Review of
Economics Studies Vol. 84 (1) (January 2017): 106

Devi, Tanaya and Roland Fryer. "Policing the Police." (2010) Harvard University.

                                               33
Donohue, John and Steven D. Levitt "The impact of legalized abortion on crime," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116(2) (2001): 379-420.

Duranton, Gilles, Peter Morrow and Matthew Turner. "The Fundamental Law of Road
Congestion: Evidence from the US Cities." American Economic Review 101(6) (October 2011):
2616-2652.

Engel, Eduardo, Ronald Fischer and Alexander Galetovic. "The Basic Public Finance of Public-
Private Partnerships." Journal of the European Economic Association Vol. 11 (1) (February
2013): 83-111. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1542-4774.2012.01105.x

Ferreira, Fernando and Joseph Gyourko. "Do Political Parties Matter? Evidence from U.S.
Cities." The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol 124 (1) (February 2009): 399-422
https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.124.1.399

Florida, Richard. The New Urban Crisis: How our Cities are Increasing Inequality, Deepening
Segregation, and Failing the Middle Class ­ and What We Can Do About It. New York: Basic
Books, April 11, 2017.

Ganong, Peter and Daniel Shoag. "Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S.
Declined?" Journal of Urban Economics Vol. 102 (November 2017): 76-90.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2017.07.002

Gaspar, Jess and Edward Glaeser. "Information Technology and the Future of Cities." Journal of
Urban Economics 43(1) (1998): 136-156.

Glaeser, Edward L. The Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer,
Smart, Greener, Healthier and Happier. New York: Penguin Books, 2011.

Glaeser, Edward L., Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. "Economic Growth in a Cross-
Section of Cities." Journal of Monetary Economics 36, no. 1 (1995).

Glaeser, Edward L. "A world of cities: The causes and consequences of urbanization in poorer
countries." Journal of the European Economic Association 12, no. 5 (2014): 1154-1199.

Glaeser, Edward L., Scott Duke Kominers, Michael Luca and Nikhil Naik. "Big Data and Big
Cities: The Promises and Limitations of Improved Measures of Urban Life." Economic Inquiry
Vol. 56 (1) (January 2018): 114-137. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecin.12364

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks. "Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up?"
The American Economic Review Vol. 95 (2) (May 2005a): 329-333.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/4132842

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Raven Saks. "Why Is Manhattan So Expensive?
Regulation and the Rise in Housing Prices." The Journal of Law and Economics Vol 48 (2)
(October 2005b): 331-369. https://doi.org/10.1086/429979

                                              34
Glaeser. Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko. "Arbitrage in Housing Markets." (NBER Working
Paper No. 13704) December 2007. DOI: 10.3386/w13704

Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko. "The Economic Implications of Housing Supply."
Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 32 (1) (Winter 2018): 3-30. DOI: 10.1257/jep.32.1.3

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz. "Housing supply and housing
bubbles." Journal of urban Economics 64, no. 2 (2008): 198-217.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Janet E. Kohlhase. "Cities, regions and the decline of transport costs."
In Fifty Years of Regional Science, pp. 197-228. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.

Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko and Albert Saiz, "Consumer City." Journal of Economic
Geography Vol. 1 (1) (January 2001): 27-50. https://doi.org/10.1093/jeg/1.1.27

Glaeser, Edward L. and David C. Maré. "Cities and Skills." Journal of Labor Economics Vol. 19
(2) (April 2001): 316-342. https://doi.org/10.1086/319563

Glaeser, Edward L. and Matthew G. Resseger. "The Complementarity Between Cities and
Skills." Journal of Regional Science Vol. 50 (1) (February 2010): 221-244.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.2009.00635.x

Glaeser, Edward L., Albert Saiz, Gary Burtless and William C. Strange. "The Rise of the Skilled
City." Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs (2004): 47-105.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/25067406

Glaeser, Edward L. and Brandon Tan. "Why Do Cities Increase Productivity but Decrease
Opportunity?" Harvard University. 2010.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti. "Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation."
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics Vol. 11 (2) (April 2019): 1-39. DOI:
10.1257/mac.20170388

Jedwab, Remi and Dietrich Vollrath. "The Urban Mortality Transition and Poor-Country
Urbanization" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics Vol. 11 (1) (January 2019): 223-
275. DOI: 10.1257/mac.20170189

Kahn, Matthew E. "The Silver Lining of Rust Belt Manufacturing Decline." Journal of Urban
Economics Vol.46 (3) (November 1999): 360-376.

Katz, Lawrence, and Kenneth T. Rosen. "The interjurisdictional effects of growth controls on
housing prices." The Journal of Law and Economics 30, no. 1 (1987): 149-160.

Kreindler, Gabriel. "The Welfare Effects of Road Congestion Pricing: Experimental Evidence
and Equilibrium Implications" (2020) Harvard University.


                                                35
Manduca, Robert and Robert Sampson. "Punishing and Toxic Neighborhood Environments
Independently Predict the Intergenerational Mobility of Black and White Children." Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences (2019).

Marx, Benjamin, Thomas Stoker and Tavneet Suri. "The Economics of Slums in the Developing
World." Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 27 (4) (Fall 2013): 187-210. DOI:
10.1257/jep.27.4.187

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith and Abigail Wozniak. "Internal Migration in the United
States." Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 25 (3) (Summer 2011): 173-196. DOI:
10.1257/jep.25.3.173

Moretti, Enrico. "Human Capital Externalities in Cities." In Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics Vol. 4 (2004), edited by J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-Francois Thisse. 2063-
3073. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0080(04)80008-7

Perlman, Janice and Caroline O.N. Moser. Favela: Four Decades of Living on the Edge in Rio de
Janeiro; Ordinary Families, Extraordinary Lives: Assets and Poverty Reduction in Guayaquil,
1978-2004. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.

Peterson, Paul E. City Limits. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.

Rauch, James. "Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human Capital: Evidence
from Cities." Journal of Urban Economics 34 (1993): 380-400.

Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw. "Environmental policy as social policy? The impact of childhood lead
exposure on crime." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 7, no. 1 (2007).

Schwartz, Amy Ellen, Scott suin and Ioan Voicu, "Has falling crime driven New York City's
real estate boom?" Journal of Housing Research (2003): 101-135.

Saiz, Albert. "The geographic determinants of housing supply." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125, no. 3 (2010): 1253-1296.

Sampson et al. (2019) found that environmental pollutants negatively impact opportunity in one
large industrial city p 14

Schleicher, David. "Stuck: The Law and Economics of Residential Stagnation." Yale LJ 127
(2017): 78.

Shapiro, Jesse M. "Smart cities: quality of life, productivity, and the growth effects of human
capital." The review of economics and statistics 88, no. 2 (2006): 324-335.

Troesken, Werner. Water, race, and disease. MIT Press, 2004.




                                                36
