                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INTEGRATING REFUGEES:
                 LANGUAGE TRAINING OR WORK-FIRST INCENTIVES?

                                     Jacob Nielsen Arendt
                                         Iben Bolvig
                                         Mette Foged
                                        Linea Hasager
                                        Giovanni Peri

                                      Working Paper 26834
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26834


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




This project is conducted as part of the Economic Assimilation Research Network (EARN),
generously financed by the Innovation Fund Denmark. We thank the Ministry of Immigration and
Integration for assistance with data and reports on early language training in Denmark and Janis
Kreuder for excellent research assistance. We also thank Oddbjøn Raaum, Torben Tranæs, and
Matti Sarvimaki for their comments and suggestions. The project also benefited from comments
from participants at the workshops on "Forced Displacement, Asylum Seekers and Refugees" at
Queen Mary University London, the first "EARN Workshop on Integration" at University of
Copenhagen and seminars at Global Migration Research Center, UC Davis and Danish Center for
Social Science Research (VIVE). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jacob Nielsen Arendt, Iben Bolvig, Mette Foged, Linea Hasager, and Giovanni Peri.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Integrating Refugees: Language Training or Work-First Incentives?
Jacob Nielsen Arendt, Iben Bolvig, Mette Foged, Linea Hasager, and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 26834
March 2020
JEL No. E64,I30,J18,J24,J60

                                         ABSTRACT

Social and economic integration of refugees are key to their personal fulfillment and to producing
positive effects in the host country. We evaluate the impact of a reform that expanded and
improved early language classes to refugees in Denmark while also temporarily lowering welfare
benefits for a subgroup of them. The policy change applied to those who obtained refugee status
in Denmark on or after January 1, 1999. Using a regression discontinuity design around the cutoff
date we find that employment and earnings gradually diverged for the treated group after
completion of the language program. The effect was significant and resulted in four percentage
points permanently higher employment and almost USD 2,510 in extra yearly earnings over
eighteen years. We do not find temporary or permanent labor market effects of cutting welfare
benefits, but we find evidence of temporarily higher property crime when refugees received lower
benefits. We also find that children of refugees who received enhanced language classes were
more likely to complete lower secondary school and less likely to commit crime.


Jacob Nielsen Arendt                            Linea Hasager
The Rockwool Foundation's Research Unit         University of Copenhagen
Ny Kongensgade 6, DK 1472                       Øster Farimagsgade 5
Copenhagen K                                    Building 26,
Denmark                                         DK 1353 Copenhagen
jar@rff.dk                                      tlh@econ.ku.dk

Iben Bolvig                                     Giovanni Peri
The Danish Center for                           Department of Economics
Social Science Research (VIVE)                  University of California, Davis
Olof Palmes Alle 22, DK 8200                    One Shields Avenue
Aarhus N                                        Davis, CA 95616
Denmark                                         and NBER
IbBo@vive.dk                                    gperi@ucdavis.edu

Mette Foged
Department of Economics
Univertsity of Copenhagen
Øster Farigmagsgade 5, building 26
1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark
Mette.Foged@econ.ku.dk
1     Introduction

International refugees, who usually escape from extreme conditions of persecution or war, begin their

lives in the host country with significant disadvantages. Research shows that even in the medium and

long run, they fare worse than economic immigrants in their labor market and social outcomes. Even

after several years the employment and wage gap between them and natives and other immigrants is

significant (Fasani, Frattini, and Minale, 2018; Dustmann et al., 2017; Brell, Dustmann, and Preston,

2020). Considering data from the 2000-2014 period, Schultz-Nielsen (2017); Bratsberg, Raaum, and

Røed (2017) show that the employment probability of refugee men in Denmark and Norway was, re-

spectively, 31 and 22 percentage points lower than their native counterparts ten years after immigration,

even after controlling for a wide range of individual background characteristics and local labor market

conditions1 . Policies aimed at improving the labor market integration of refugees and humanitarian

migrants, therefore, have the potential to bring large returns to the migrants and to their host society.

Refugees that are productively employed earn more, contribute more to the local economy and increase

tax revenues in the host country. These economic benefits make other forms of social integration more

likely.

    While the goal of enhancing the labor market outcomes of refugees is a common goal of host coun-

tries, the way to effectively achieve such outcomes is less clear. Integration efforts, therefore, have

taken many forms. Several countries, such as the US, leave this effort to local interventions (Bloemraad

and De Graauw, 2012; Williamson, 2018), often coordinated by private charities and churches. Several

Northern European governments, instead, in line with their larger involvement in the economy and so-

ciety, support and fund early interventions for refugees. These interventions are usually a combination

of several approaches, including active labor market support, provision of incentives, and teaching of

relevant skills. Which one of these approaches is preferred varies across countries and periods. How

effective each of these approaches are in improving labor market and social outcomes for refugees has

been subject to strong debate and to very limited rigorous analysis.

    In an approach that one can characterize as "skill first" and specifically "language skill first", Ger-

many passed an integration act in 2005 that mandated a six-month language class and a similar length

course in German history, law and culture for newly arrived refugees (H¨
                                                                       ubschmann, 2015; Martin et al.,

2016). France introduced Contract d'accueil et d'intgration in 2007, which also focused on "country-
     1
       The corresponding gaps are even larger for refugee women at 45 and 30 percent for Denmark and Norway, respectively.
Other studies that do not distinguish refugees from other immigrants, due to data limitations, still find large and persistent gaps
for immigrants coming from poor, underdeveloped, war-torn countries, likely reflecting a combination of differences in skill
and pre-migration experiences (since Chiswick, 1978; Borjas, 1985).


                                                                2
specific skills" requiring immigrants to participate in language training and civic training (Lochmann,

Rapoport, and Speciale, 2019). Since the 1990s Northern European countries have been using integra-

tion programs that combine language-skill training with employment support. These programs typically

last between two and five years (Arendt, 2018; Joyce, 2017) with an equal emphasis on "language

skill first" and "job first". A country, like the United States, that has limited availability of skill- and

language-training options for refugees, but that is relatively rich in low-wage jobs available to refugees,

can be considered as following a model of "job first" in the integration of refugees. The evaluation of

the effectiveness of these approaches has been very limited. Which policies, between teaching language

skills, helping job finding or providing incentives to work has been more conducive to refugees getting

and keeping a job in the long run? And which one ensures better earnings and better social outcomes?

Which of these policies helps the second generation refugees? We know very little about these ques-

tions. The present paper sheds light on the causal effects of two alternative policies, language training

and job incentives, on short and long-run outcomes of refugees.

    This paper uses a policy change to analyze the effect of improved language training on the economic

assimilation of refugees. In general, we have very little causal evidence about the broader question: How

does language learning improve the labor market options and earnings of immigrants? The literature

established a strong and positive association between language skills/proficiency and the earnings of

immigrants.2 Part of the correlation likely arises from omitted variable bias, as more able and more

motivated immigrants acquire better language skills and earn more. Part of the correlation likely reflects

a causal link between language proficiency and earnings in the host country (Borjas, 1994). Without a

clear identification strategy it is hard to separate these two components or even to say whether language

instruction is effective at all in enhancing job outcomes. This is especially true when we talk about

specific language classes offered to refugees (or other immigrants) that may crowd out time for other

potentially productivity enhancing activities, such as learning job-specific skills, or looking for a job.

    Our identification strategy involves a reform of the Danish refugee integration program that allows

us to isolate the effect of language training in the early years after arrival in Denmark. The reform

involved an expansion and improvement of language learning provision in Denmark. The program was

mandatory for refugees and family-reunified with refugees. However, only those who obtained refugee

status in Denmark on or after January 1, 1999 were entitled to such extensive language classes. Hence,

we use a regression discontinuity (RD) design based on the date when refugee status was granted to

identify treated and non-treated refugees. While the language training component was the more relevant

   2
       See for instance Chiswick (1991); Chiswick and Miller (1995) and Dustmann (1994).


                                                            3
part of the reform, another change was also introduced with the same discontinuity date, namely a

significant reduction of welfare benefits for refugees over the age of 25 or with children. This second

change was only temporary, as it was rolled back after 13 months (February 1, 2000), and it only targeted

refugees aged 25 or older or refugees who had children. This policy was justified as a way of creating

strong incentives for newly arrived refugees to find a job. The fact that not all refugees in 1999 were

subject to it, and the fact that it was only in place for a year allows us to analyze temporary effects for the

targeted group as being specifically produced by such a policy, and it is distinguishable from the impact

of language training, which is a permanent policy accessible to all refugees 18 years and older.3

    Several features make this reform interesting and the content of this paper novel. First, the intro-

duction of this program with a sharp time discontinuity allows us to implement a credible estimation

strategy for causal inference, as assignment of refugees to the treatment around the threshold is as good

as random. Second, as we follow refugees over time and we can observe their education and training, we

can see whether language classes were the catalyst for further education. Third, we can look at the long-

run effects occurring up to two decades after the reform and refugees' settlement in Denmark. Fourth,

we also observe the children of the immigrants, and we can therefore analyze any effect on fertility and

on the second generation.

    Several clear and important findings emerge from the analysis of the Danish reform. First, we find

that being exposed to the reform permanently increases the employment probability and earnings over

an eighteen year period. The positive and significant effects emerge four-five years after the reform was

implemented and are significant six years after the reform. Consistent with gradual language acquisition

and with the fact that the language classes were mostly attended in the first three years after settlement

in Denmark, we find precisely estimated zero effects on employment and earnings during the first three

years, followed by a gradual improvement and then consistently higher earnings and employment in the

treatment group from around year six after arrival. The effect is driven by increases in the probability

of employment and higher earnings. Second, we also find evidence of substantial formal skill upgrad-

ing in the form of more years of schooling, presumably because the better language skills facilitated


    3
      There is some doubt about whether the policy of welfare reduction to refugees was fully enforced, even in 1999. A
report released in December 1999 showed that affected individuals had been compensated by increases in supplementary
transfers (Ministry of Interior Affairs, 1999). The welfare portion of the reform was heavily debated already before it came
into effect, and UNHCR stated in the summer of 1998 that the welfare benefit reduction "violates Article 23 of the UN Refugee
Convention". The UNHCR, however, agreed to the Danish Ministry of Interior Affairs' requirement to await an evaluation.
In November 1999, the Danish Prime Minister announced that the reduced benefit did not work as intended, based on results
from an evaluation published in December 1999 (Ministry of Interior Affairs, 1999). The evaluation showed that very few
immigrants could supplement the welfare benefit with income from work, which was part of the motivation for the reduced
welfare benefits, and that immigrants, to a large extent, received supplemental transfer payments on top of their basic welfare
benefit.


                                                              4
access to education in Denmark. We also see evidence of occupational upgrading to jobs with a stronger

communication requirement. Third we find, for the treated group 25 and older, an increase in the proba-

bility of committing property crime in the first year after the reform. This period and group of refugees

corresponds to those who lost most of their welfare payments (temporarily) due to the reform. This is

consistent with the idea that lower income for this group pushed some of them, temporarily, to shoplift-

ing and other forms of property crime. These effects disappear in the following years when the welfare

payments returned to the original level. Finally, we do not find any impact of the reform on fertility, and

when we look at the next generation, we see that children of treated refugees are more likely to complete

lower secondary school and less likely to commit a crime when 16 years or older.

    Analyzing the costs and benefits of the policy change, we find that the benefit-cost ratio from lan-

guage classes varies between two and fifteen, measured eighteen years after the reform. The time before

the aggregate net present value of the additional investment in the language skills of the refugees is pos-

itive is five-six years. Similarly, it takes six years before the investment breaks even in the government's

fiscal budget.

    A closely related paper to this one is Sarvim¨
                                                 aki and H¨
                                                          am¨
                                                            al¨
                                                              ainen (2016) who study a similar reform

in Finland in 1999. The Finnish reform, however, mandated individual "integration plans" consisting

of a sequence of active labor market programs (ALMPs) tailored to the individual and put together at

meetings between the refugee and the caseworker. The reform did not allocate additional economic

resources. The authors show that "integration plans" changed the composition of services provided to

refugees towards more language training and less regular ALMP, and the reform had very significant

effects. Earnings increased by 47 percent and cumulative social benefits decreased by 13 percent for

those obtaining "integration plans" ten years later. Our paper is new and different relative to Sarvim¨
                                                                                                      aki

and H¨
     am¨
       al¨
         ainen (2016) in several respects. First, we separate the impact of additional language training

as an individual policy and contrast this with the impact of a reduction in welfare benefits. Second, we

analyze outcomes besides employment and earnings, such as schooling, mobility and crime, which are

quite relevant in designing policies for refugees' integration. Third, we also establish whether the early

intervention for refugees has effects on the next generation.

    Another recent paper related to ours, specifically in the evaluation of the impact of language train-

ing on employment of immigrants, is Lochmann, Rapoport, and Speciale (2019). The authors use the

introduction of a program in France that assigns non-EU immigrants to language training based on a

threshold in their score in an initial test.4 Such a discontinuity in the score produces random assignment

   4
       France, due to its history, is different from settings such as the Danish one where the immigrants do not know the language


                                                                5
to the language treatment around the threshold. The authors find that 100 hours of language training

increases labor force participation by 15 to 27 percentage points. This is a sizable effect; measured two

years after completion of classes and equivalent to roughly a quarter of the sample mean (labor force

participation is 81 percent). The authors cannot analyze longer-term effects, nor other outcomes due to

data limitations.

    By looking at outcomes of refugees' children, our paper also contributes to a growing literature

on family disadvantage and child outcomes. The schooling outcomes of children of disadvantaged

families, especially boys, seem harmed disproportionately by challenging childhood environments (e.g.

Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Chetty et al., 2016; Autor et al., 2019). In a paper focused on the consequences

of reducing welfare benefits for refugees in Denmark, Andersen, Dustmann, and Landersøe (2016)

show that such measures increased crime rates and lowered educational achievements among teenage

household members.

    Our paper has implications for the debate about "job first" or "skill first", which continues to affect

policies towards refugees in many countries. For instance, Northern European countries have been mov-

ing away from the policy of "skill first" in recent years. Language training played a pivotal role in the

early integration support in Denmark for decades. However, this changed in 2016 when all refugees were

required to actively search for jobs and participate in job-training immediately upon arrival. The reform

clearly shifted the focus of early interventions towards "job-first". Arendt (2019) finds large positive

employment effects of these new policies one year after settlement in Denmark. The effect, however,

seems to fade out already half a year later. Joona and Nekby (2012) evaluate a trial introduction pro-

gram in Sweden where new immigrants were randomly selected to receive more intensive counselling

than the regular employment support and also find significant employment effects one year after assign-

ment. There is, however, no available evidence of longer-run effects. Other researchers have analyzed

the impact of regular ALMPs for immigrants. The evidence, while still preliminary, points towards

larger program effects than those found in the broader ALMP evaluation literature, which is usually

rather negative in its assessment of the effectiveness of those programs.5 The impact of these ALMP

policies, however, seems short-lived, while the returns to language training documented by Sarvim¨
                                                                                                 aki

and H¨
     am¨
       al¨
         ainen and this paper are long lasting. The combination of strong effects of language skills on

long-run employment and no effect of short-term incentives (reducing welfare transfers) on employment


prior to arrival.
     5°
      Aslund and Johansson (2011) conclude that more intensive counselling is associated with better employment for immi-
grants. Clausen et al. (2009) and Heinesen, Husted, and Rosholm (2013) suggest that ALMPs reduce time to find the first
regular job, using timing-of-events duration models.


                                                           6
found in this paper, seems to suggest the need for a reconsideration of the recent direction taken by the

refugee policies in Denmark and other European countries.6

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 3 discusses the reform and its implementation.

Section 4 describes the identification strategy. Section 5 describes the samples and the key outcomes

we look at. We analyze the direct impact on the working-age refugees who were targeted by the policy

(section 6.1) and the effects on their children (section 7). Section 8 concludes the paper.



2    Refugees in Denmark: Recent History

Following a period of low immigration and small numbers of refugee arrivals in the 1970s and early

1980s, a significant number of refugees have resettled in Denmark. The largest inflows of refugees to

date are the Bosnians in the early 1990s and recently people fleeing the war in Syria. In both cases more

than 30,000 were resettled in Denmark within a few years. In between these major influxes, annual

refugee admissions to Denmark have averaged 2,500. Denmark grants refugee status to persons entitled

to protection under the UNHCR Refugee Convention as well as supplementary national rules.

    Displaced individuals who apply for asylum in Denmark are registered by the police and referred to

accommodation centers where they live until their case has been determined. The centers are usually in

sparsely populated areas and the asylum seekers were not allowed to work (this changed in 2013). Most

asylum seekers, therefore, have very little contact with Danes and the Danish society prior to obtaining

refugee status. The refugees waited more than one year before a decision on asylum was made around the

time of the reform. Once/if the asylum claim is recognized, the refugee is resettled in a municipality, that

is chosen by the government with the aim to distribute the refugees across municipalities and encourage

assimilation.7 The municipality is responsible for finding suitable public housing for the refugees they

receive and generally provides social support and unemployment services for its citizens. Language

training was offered up to 1.5 years after settlement at schools run by the Danish Refugee Council. This

was changed by the 1999 reform (section 3).

    Similar to refugees in other European countries, refugees in Denmark have shown a significant initial

disadvantage and slow convergence to native earnings and employment probabilities. Refugees arrive

without a job and are dependent on welfare early on. Employment and earnings grow during the first

five to ten years after settlement but then seem to stabilize with a considerable gap between them and

     6
       Consistent with our results but extended to a more general analysis, Card, Kluve, and Weber (2010, 2018) conclude that
the returns to employment support, such as job search assistance, are small or zero, whereas returns to programs with a clear
skill-training component are larger but only after a couple of years.
     7
       UNCHR Quota refugees are resettled directly from refugee camps abroad. They constitute 10 percent of our sample.


                                                             7
natives and other immigrants.8 The employment gap between refugee men and (low skilled) native-born

men is 31 (15-16) percentage points ten years after immigration (Schultz-Nielsen, 2017, Table 2). While

the countries of origin have changed, the initial conditions and the difficulty in integrating economically

and socially have been persistent features of the Danish experience as well as of the experience of other

European countries (Schultz-Nielsen, 2017; Bratsberg, Raaum, and Røed, 2017; Brell, Dustmann, and

Preston, 2020).



3       The Reform

The first Act on Integration and the new Act on Language Education went into effect in Denmark on

January 1, 1999. Refugees granted refugee status before this date were subject to the old rules whereas

individuals obtaining it after this date were subject to the new rules. The main purpose of the reform was

to promote integration into civil society and improve labor market outcomes for newly arrived refugees.

The central measure to achieve these goals was higher-quality and more extensive language training.

The reform simultaneously modified somewhat the work-incentives for a subgroup of older workers,

as it temporarily lowered their welfare benefits. This section describes details of this reform and it

documents the changes for newly arrived refugees and for the family members reunified with them.

Participation in the new program was mandatory for this group and non-participants could be financially

sanctioned and, more importantly, acquiring permanent residence status required proof of completion of

the program.

    The reduction in welfare benefits for newly arrived immigrants was temporary, and it was imple-

mented with a strict age threshold. Those aged 18 to 24 without children received the additional lan-

guage training with no other changes. Instead those aged 25 or older or with children received both the

expanded language training and a decrease in welfare benefits. Welfare benefits to this group were cut to

71 percent (75 percent if children present) of the regular welfare benefits of unemployed individuals in

Denmark. The cuts were not trivial, amounting to a 25-29 percent cut in benefits, but they were smaller

than the cuts to welfare benefits directed at immigrants in 2002 in Denmark and studied by Andersen,

Dustmann, and Landersøe (2016), Rosholm and Vejlin (2010) and Agersnap, Jensen, and Kleven (2019).

The cut in the level of welfare benefits for the 25 or older age group was withdrawn after 13 months

on February 1, 2000. Hence the group of 25 years and older shared with the younger group of refugees

arrived on or after January 1, 1999, the higher level of language training, but for one year was subject to

    8
     Appendix Figures 1.1 to 1.3 in Schultz-Nielsen (2017) show employment rates, earnings and welfare dependency of a
refugee cohort very similar to ours and two subsequent cohorts.


                                                          8
lower welfare transfers. A comparison between the two groups (below 25 years of age without children

and the rest) allows us to analyze, in addition to the effect of language training, whether any additional

work-incentive effect was generated by lowering welfare benefits for the older group. Work-incentive

effects should only be in place, if at all, within the 13 months the reduction was in place, and only for

the older group. After 13 months all age groups continued to share the intensified language treatment

and had no differences in welfare treatment.

    What was the exact nature of the change introduced by the reform? The new policy increased the

language learning time from 1,370 to 1,800 hours and allowed such training to occur over an extended

period of 36 months; a doubling of the 18-month limit existing before.9 The whole structure and the

quality of the language training was also changed; centralized goals and national tests were introduced

and resources to increase the qualifications of the teachers were provided. The Act on Integration also

introduced a course in civic education. While important, this was more limited in scope when compared

to the great boost of language education. Only 20 hours were to be dedicated to civic education, while

430 hours of additional language training were provided. We refer to the augmented language and civic

education provided by the reform as "integration services". The regular active labor market policies

(ALMPs), including on-the-job training, which were not targeted or changed by the reform are referred

to as "employment services".

    Another minor administrative change produced by the reform was that, after January 1, 1999, the

municipalities (rather than the Danish Refugee Council as it was before the reform) became responsible

for managing language training, while they also remained responsible for managing the ALMPs for all

residents. Therefore, the reform combined the responsibility for integration and employment services

in one place, namely the municipalities. As it took around two months between admission into Den-

mark and resettlement in a Danish municipality, refugees arriving shortly before and after the cutoff

both received employment and language support from the municipalities. This implies that this small

administrative change was not perfectly aligned with the discontinuity in the change in language training

and lower transfers. Municipalities were only fully reimbursed for the additional language training for

people obtaining refugee status from January 1, 1999 on, and only a subgroup of those were subject to

the reduction in welfare benefits.

    While the responsibility for language training of all refugees moved to municipalities as of January 1,

1999, reimbursement per refugee was larger for those arriving after January 1, 1999 relative to those who


    9
    The reform resulted in more extensive language training than offered to immigrants in most other countries (e.g. the
German introductory language course is 600-900 hours and Sweden offers on average 525 hours of language training).


                                                           9
arrived before. The reimbursement was constituted by a fixed monthly payment per refugee and activity-

based payments for months where the refugee was receiving employment or integration services. Both

the fixed and the activity-based payments were higher for refugees arriving after the reform and they

lasted twice as long (36 compared to 18 months).10 The activity-based payments were USD 212 and 288

(DKK 1,400 and 1,900) for employment services and USD 500 (DKK 3,300) for integration services

to refugees arriving after January 1, 1999, whereas no earmarked payment was made for integration

services to refugees arriving before the reform, (as per Act on Integration 1999, section 45(5), 45(6) and

45(7) and section 59(3) and 59(4)). Hence, municipalities had to provide more services to those arriving

after the cutoff and they had no incentive to increase service provision above the entitlement for those

arriving earlier, since there was no reimbursement of this.

    Figure 1 Panels a and b show the share of individuals receiving integration and employment services

within the first three years for the refugees who obtained refugee status in Denmark in a four year

window around January 1, 1999 (day 0 in the graphs) as recorded by municipal staff. As expected from

the description of the policy change, we observe a large discontinuity in the share receiving integration

services (Panel a) and no discontinuity in the share receiving employment support (Panel b) from the

municipalities.11 Additionally Panels c and d of Figure 1 show the number of hours of service provided,

conditional on receiving the service. Even in this case the difference in language learning around the

cutoff is large and significant and equals 1,506 hours (RD estimate).12 Instead, we see no discontinuity in

the hours of employment support (RD estimate is insignificant -41 hours) received during the first three

years following settlement in the municipality. When looking at the time profile of these treatments

(Appendix Table A.1), we see that more intensive language training after the reform crowded out time

spent in employment support in the early months. This difference was significant within the first year

after arrival. After one year of settlement in the municipality there was no significant difference in

employment services, either in participation or cumulative hours. However, treated refugees continued

to be more likely to be enrolled in language training and to accumulate additional hours of integration

services, steadily growing towards the 1,800 hours they were entitled to after the reform.

    Using additional data from all language training facilities (rather than only from the municipalities),

we find that the treated refugees participated in more hours of language classes and were enrolled for


   10
       The fixed payments were USD 340 and 515, respectively, per month for refugees arriving before and after the reform.
   11
       The RD estimates are 54 percentage points and insignificant -8 percentage points (Appendix Table A.1).
    12
       Note, this difference is far beyond the difference in entitlement to language training (1,370 and 1,800). This may partly
reflect that participation was not mandatory before the reform and partly that it was provided by other authorities and not
necessarily recorded in the municipal service provision statistics. Evidence from language training facilities (Appendix Figure
A.1 described below suggest the latter interpretation is correct.)


                                                              10
longer than the untreated ones but both groups had the same probability of ever attending the course

(Appendix Figure A.1). Furthermore, these data from the training facilities reveal that treated and control

refugees were rarely in the same classes, which suggests that language support was different; not just in

the number of hours but also in the quality and structure provided.

    The Act on Integration also brought a new procedure for the settlement of refugees. The settlement

process was aimed at producing a uniform distribution of refugees across municipalities both before and

after 1999. Prior to 1999, however, the Danish Refugee Council was responsible for the settlement of

refugees by making bilateral arrangements directly with the municipalities. From 1999, the settlement

was decided in a more mechanical way, following a model that first distributed the refugees according to

county quotas, while taking the number of immigrants already living in the municipalities into account.

The municipalities within a county were then supposed to agree upon the within-county settlement, but

if they failed to agree, the central government would determine the number by municipal quotas. Hence,

after the reform the distribution was somewhat more mechanical and the central government was only

involved in cases of disagreement.

    This somewhat different procedure does not need to imply any specific sorting or selection in the

distribution of refugees across municipalities. To rule out that it generated different sorting, potentially

confounding the impact of increased language training, we will include a set of municipality characteris-

tics in the balancing tests between treated and control refugees that we conduct in section 4, Table 1. We

also investigate the post-assignment mobility out of the municipality (section 6.2, Figure 7). We find no

differences in municipality characteristics nor in the probability of moving by the end of the integration

program between treated and control refugees, implying that there was no different incentive to relocate

for the post-January 1, 1999 admissions.



4    Identification and Empirical Design

The impact evaluation we perform uses the pre-determined and arbitrary cutoff for the date of obtaining

refugee status in Denmark. Admission after January 1, 1999 determines eligibility for the longer and

improved language training and for temporarily lower welfare benefits if one is 25 or older. We apply

a Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD) focusing on refugees admitted around the discontinuity date.

The Danish government was in charge of granting residence permits, so that the exact admission date

was outside the control of refugees as well as of municipalities, which provided the integration services.

Individual caseworkers could potentially affect the speed of processing of some applications. This sec-



                                                    11
tion describes the estimating equation, discusses potential threats to identification and presents some

tests of validity of our identification strategy, namely a large set of tests of balancing of pre-treatment

characteristics.

    We consider individual refugees, and their treated/untreated status is determined by the date when

they were granted refugee status in Denmark. Specifically, the treatment variable for individual i, Di , is

an indicator equal to one for being admitted at or after January 1, 1999 and equal to 0 otherwise. Our

running variable, xi , is the distance between this cutoff date and the date of admission, and we assume

a linear trend in the admitted refugee cohorts at both sides of the cutoff in the following way:


                                       Yit =  +  Di + 1 xi + 2 Di xi + it                                                 (1)


    where  captures the causal local average treatment effect of the reform, and Yit is the outcome of

interest measured at t = 1, 2...18 years after the reform.13 We estimate a separate regression for out-

comes in each year from 1 to 18 after the reform using Weighted Least Squares (WLS) with a triangular

kernel to give more weight to the observations closer to the cutoff. We restrict the observations used

in the estimations to a narrow window around the cutoff, determined by the optimal bandwidth selec-

tion algorithm from Calonico et al. (2019). The selected bandwidth is much smaller than the four year

window included in our full sample and ranges between 216 and 277 days for the main outcomes we

analyze.

    Asylum seekers obtaining refugee status in Denmark around the cutoff would have applied for asy-

lum long before the new legislation came into effect. Most refugees, at the time of applying, had no

knowledge of the changes that were about to happen. The Act on Integration was proposed on April 16,

1998, and passed on June 26, 1998. In comparison, the average waiting time for decisions on applica-

tions for asylum was 13 months at the time (Table 1), and the median was slightly more than ten months.

Hence, a majority of the refugees who were granted asylum near January 1, 1999 had applied before the

law was even proposed the first time.14

    Most applications were turned in well before the reform was approved and there is no recorded or

anecdotal evidence that authorities had changed the processing time of asylum applications in response

to the reform or around the cutoff. A check that "strategic timing" in the approval of applications did

not occur is that the number of approved applications should not show any unusual bunching (or drop)

    13
       Note that  is free from confounding factors even when cov (x, ) = 0 as long as the linear function correctly specifies
potential outcomes. We analyze second and third order polynomials in our robustness checks and all our results are insensitive
to the choice of functional form of the running variable.
    14
       See Hvidtfeldt et al. (2018) for more information on the process and waiting times in the Danish asylum system.


                                                             12
on either side of the cutoff. Figure 2 shows the raw distribution of admissions by month from January

1, 1997 to February 28, 2001 in Panel a. Then, in order to account for seasonality and time trends in

refugee admissions, we show, for each month, the share of annual admissions in deviation from the

mean share for that month over the four years in Panel b.15 A value of zero in the observations shown

in Panel b implies that the admissions that month equal the average for that month over the time period

shown. More applications were approved in December 1998 compared to January 1999 (Panel a), but

January is right at the mean for this month and December is slightly below (-0.03 percentage points)

its typical share of annual admissions (Panel b). The most unusual months (out of the 50 months we

show) are April 2000 (-0.05), April 1997 (0.04) and May 1998 (0.04). We conclude that the density

of applications is smooth around the cut-off date and nothing indicates that the approval process was

slowed or accelerated around the cutoff.16

    A second possibility is that case workers continued to process a uniform number of cases around

the cutoff but were being selective about which cases to allow into the new policy regime. Moreover,

there was also a change in the resettlement process, starting on January 1, 1999, which could have

generated differential sorting of refugees in specific locations after the cutoff date. Table 1 shows the

summary statistics of predetermined individual characteristics available in our data (Panel a) and the

characteristics of their first municipality of residence (Panel b), and each column shows a different

statistic. We first report the sample mean and standard deviation of these variables. Then the difference

around the RD threshold for the individual variables and initial municipality characteristics, and the

confidence interval for testing the hypothesis that the discontinuity is equal to 0. These are checks of

our identifying assumption that the distribution of individual characteristics and of characteristics of

the first assigned municipalities are random around the discontinuity.17 The average age of refugees

at admission in the selected sample was 31.5 years (we have excluded individuals older than 49 as we

follow individuals for 18 years). The typical refugee is married, male and the average number of children

is slightly above one at the time of admission. The single most important country of origin around the

reform was Iraq, representing 44 percent of our sample (all Iraqi refugees in the sample arrived to

Denmark before the beginning of the Iraq war). 16 percent of refugees were from Afghanistan, and


    15
       The admission data are only available from January 1997. Our full sample includes refugees arriving within a four year
window around the reform as explained in section 5. Figure 2 includes two additional months to illustrate better the seasonality
around New Year.
    16
       Besides evidence of no manipulation, even if refugees could manipulate the date, it was not clear ex-ante that they would
want to qualify for the new policy. While it increased language training, it was combined with sanctions for non-participation
and a reduction in the level of welfare benefits.
    17
       We use local linear regressions with the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019)
in order to test the discontinuity. Appendix Figure A.2 illustrates the balancing tests for each of the variables in the Table 2.


                                                              13
the rest come from a range of smaller origin categories (see section 5 for a thorough description of our

sample and data.).

     We find no evidence of differences in composition and characteristics of refugees between those who

arrived before and those who arrived after January 1, 1999. They are of similar age, equally likely to be

married and have the same number of children. The refugees could not be employed upon arrival and we

do not have information on education received in their country of origin. Instead we use the assignment

to language training as a rough indicator of skills. The language training facilities place refugees into

Danish 1, 2 or 3 based on their skills at arrival. Those with primary schooling or less are typically

assigned to the lowest level, Danish 1. Tertiary educated refugees are most often assigned to Danish 3,

and Danish 2 is an intermediate group. Using this measure of educational attainment the tests in Table 1

show no differences in the skills around the cutoff. Finally, we see from the summary statistics that 35

percent of the admitted refugees spoke Arabic as their mother tongue, while 9 percent reported Dari as

their first language. These are the most widespread languages in Iraq and Afghanistan.

     33 percent of refugees were placed in urban municipalities (Table 1 Panel b). The RD estimate is

0.11. Although not significant, this is a relatively large difference. However, it turns out that it is driven

by municipalities on the margin of being classified as urban. Despite the fact that 17 percent of our

sample is placed in one of the five largest cities in Denmark, there is no difference across January 1,

1999 in this variable (RD estimate 0.01 and standard error 0.05).18 So there is no evidence of selective

placement in the largest cities. Furthermore, the treated and the control groups are distributed in mu-

nicipalities with similar employment and unemployment rates, similar income and similar numbers of

co-nationals.



5        Data

Our analysis is based on Danish administrative register data, which are hosted by and made available

to us through Statistics Denmark. The Integrated Database for Labor Market Research ("IDA"), the

Income Register as well as databases on enrollment in and completion of schooling and a database

on convictions for criminal activities are merged and used to construct the main outcomes. We link

these longitudinal data to the Population Register and to the information on admission class and date of

receipt of residency from the Admission Register, which includes all refugees admitted to Denmark. The

combined data provide key demographic variables, such as age, gender, address, and allow identification


    18
         The five largest cities are Copenhagen (incl. Frederiksberg), Aarhus, Aalborg, Odense and Esbjerg.


                                                                14
of refugees, their spouses and children as well as their characteristics and outcomes. The main summary

statistics of the demographic and geographical variables are shown in Table 1. The Migration Register

includes the country of origin and date of settlement in a Danish municipality for each refugee. Finally,

we link each individual to the Register for Labor Market Policy Measures ("AMFORA"), which includes

the services received in the municipality of settlement, and to additional information on the refugee from

the language training facilities, such as his/her mother tongue and their initial assignment to language

training track 1, 2 or 3, which is a proxy of their schooling level at arrival. Specifically, those with

primary schooling or less and those who do not know the Latin alphabet are typically assigned to Danish

1. Tertiary educated refugees are typically assigned to Danish 3, which is regarded as a fast-learner

track and the exams that mark the completion of Danish 3 are at the highest level. Danish 2 is for the

intermediate group and the Danish level upon completion lies in between the two other tracks. Survey

evidence on education level of refugees, covering roughly half of our sample, shows that the refugees are

less educated than natives. This implies that our group appears typical of most cases of resettled refugees

(Brell, Dustmann, and Preston, 2020; Capps et al., 2015). Specifically, 41 percent of refugees have only

basic schooling upon arrival in Denmark while this is the case for 30 percent of natives in 1999 in the

same age range. We also report the percentage of refugees admitted under different channels, such as the

Geneva convention, UN quota refugees and family-reunification with existing refugees. The majority,

53 percent, are granted refugee status under supplementary Danish laws.

    In order to take advantage of the discontinuity in policy treatment around January 1, 1999, the

sample we focus on includes all refugees and family-members reunified with existing refugees who

were admitted in a four year window around that date.19 We restrict our attention to individuals who

were between 18 and 49 years old at the time of being granted asylum (or being reunfied to an existing

refugee) in Denmark and we follow them until 2016, spanning a full 18 years after the reform. The

age range is chosen to include individuals who were old enough to be employed and to be included in

the program at the time of arrival, still young enough to be of working age (usually below 65 at this

time) during the period analyzed so that we could follow their labor market outcomes for the whole

period. As in some specifications we control (and check) for the geographic distribution of refugees and

municipality characteristics, we drop a few individuals for whom no address could be found within the

first two years of arrival. These steps leave us with a sample of 8,558 individuals who were admitted to

Denmark between January 1, 1997 and December 31, 2000. We refer to them as the "refugee sample".

    19
       Somali refugees are excluded from our analysis due to some irregularities in the processing of asylum applications for
this particular group in the last months of 1998. The family-reunified in our sample are members of the immediate family
(spouse and children) of a refugee in Denmark.


                                                            15
    These 8,558 refugees can be linked to 16,598 children, of whom, 45 percent (7,436) were born

before arrival in Denmark and 14 percent (2,294) were born after arrival but before 2003. In order

to observe schooling and social outcomes for these children, given that our sample ends in 2018, we

restrict the "children sample" to those 9,730 born in 1986 to 2002. This allows us to observe schooling

outcomes into secondary school and outcomes in teenage years for most of these children. In particular,

we observe graduation from lower primary school for everyone who is in the correct grade for age, and

we also observe early measures of juvenile crime for the 16+ year olds.

    In our empirical analysis, we consider several labor market outcomes for the adult refugees as well

as other outcomes.20 The summary statistics of the main outcome variables are shown in Table 2.

We measure employment as the fraction of a full-time working year. This measure takes the value

one if the worker was a full time-employee during the whole year. The fraction is less than one and

measures the share of a full-time equivalent if the individual was either a part-time employee or not

employed in some periods throughout the year. Notice from the summary statistics of Table 2 that the

average annual employment in the sample of refugees is only 0.2, implying substantial non-employment

or under-employment for this group throughout the sample period. The group of refugees begins its

stay in Denmark without a job, as refugees were not allowed to work while waiting for their status

decision. In the year 1999 only 3 percent of them were employed. Then in the following 18 years their

average employment rate steadily rises to about 30 percent in 2009 and then it decreases a bit (with the

recession of 2010) and stabilizes at around 20 percent. This profile implies that refugees are very far

from participation rates similar to natives (equal to 81 percent in 1999 and 87 percent in 2016). This low

average employment rate is also useful for putting the impact estimated in this analysis into perspective.

    A second outcome we analyze is the annual gross earnings measured in US Dollars and deflated

using the consumer price index from Statistics Denmark using the year 2000 as the base year. Employ-

ment and earnings can be calculated for the entire sample and these are the main economic outcomes

we analyze. If no information on earnings or employment was provided in the registers, we assigned

no employment and zero income to the observation. A considerable share of refugees have no earned

income or employment and so the average annual income is a very modest USD 8,600. In our empirical

analysis we report the impact of the reform on outcomes in levels and translate them into percentage

effects (relative to the pre-reform mean at the cutoff point) using  from equation (1).

    Additionally, we analyze a number of other outcomes to understand potential mechanisms behind

    20
       The Integrated Database for Labor Market Research (IDA) that we rely on to construct outcomes for the parent sample
is available from Statistics Denmark with a few year lag. This is the reason why we only follow the refugees until 2016 while
we can follow the educational and crime outcomes of their children until 2018.


                                                            16
our main results and also to have a more complete picture of the intended and potentially unintended

consequences of the policy change. These outcomes include residential mobility, namely changes in

municipality of residence relative to the one of settlement, human capital upgrading measured by com-

pletion of education programs in Denmark, occupational changes and criminal convictions. The sum-

mary statistics in Table 2 show that 57 percent of refugees were not living in the same municipality of

settlement by 2016, and 55 percent of them were living in an urban municipality. An important part of

the economic effects of the policy may occur through occupational change, as better language training

enabled refugees to access more complex and language intensive jobs. In order to characterize occupa-

tions according to their "task content" we define "task upgrading" as the use of communication relative

to manual tasks in a job.21 We measure the manual and communication task content of occupations for

those who were employed at the end of November each year.

    For criminal outcomes, we use data on the number and type of criminal charges and convictions. Our

main measure of criminal behavior is whether the individual has been convicted of a crime, a property

crime and, more specifically, of shoplifting in a supermarket, which is the most common criminal activity

in our sample. The probability of being convicted of a crime for a refugee in the first year in Denmark

is about 5 percent, and the probability of ever being convicted of a crime in the period we analyze is

24 percent. Among those, property crimes are the more common, with 17 percent of the sample ever

convicted of it and, in particular, shoplifting is the most common single crime with eight percent of

refugees ever being convicted of it. As comparison, 13.7 percent of natives aged 18-49 in 1999, were

ever convicted of a crime. If we focus only on natives with primary education or less, the percentage is

25.8 percent. Overall there is a larger probability that refugees committed a crime relative to natives.22

    Finally, for the children of refugees born before 2003 we analyze two types of outcomes. The first

is schooling outcomes; specifically, exams at the end of lower secondary school, graduation from lower

secondary school, and enrollment in upper secondary education. The second is criminal outcomes,

namely being charged with some crime as a juvenile including the type and severity of the crime.




   21
       The task outcomes use information from the O*NET database (US Bureau of Labor Statistics) merged to Danish register
data via the International Standard Classification of Occupation.
    22
       Notice, however, that the conviction rates for this group of refugees decreased steadily over time, so that the early years
were those with highest conviction rates for them (around 5 percent), while after 10 years in the country, the yearly conviction
rate was less than two percent. Furthermore, education levels need to be compared with caution across native born and refugees
since the source is different and potential downgrading of their skills reduces their earning ability.


                                                               17
6      Estimated Effects on Refugees

6.1     Main Labor Market Effects

Figures 3 and 4 show the main results for labor market outcomes. They represent the RD point estimates

and the 95-percent confidence intervals of the impact of the reform on the employment rate and gross

earnings of refugees for each year from 1999 (year 1) to 2016 (year 18). The two top panels (a and b)

show the average estimates for the whole group of refugees, while the two bottom panels (c and d) show

separately the effects every fourth year for refugees aged 18-24 with no dependents (children), who were

only subject to the increased language treatment, and those above 25 who also had a reduction in benefits

in year one (as explained in section 3).23 Panel a plots the estimated impact in each specific year, while

Panel b plots the average cumulative impact on the employment rate (in Figure 3) or on earnings (in

Figure 4).

      Looking first at the average effects over time, in Panels a and b, two features emerge clearly both

for employment (Figure 3) and labor market earnings (Figure 4). First, while we see small to no labor

market effects in years 1 to 4, when the refugees were attending the extra training in language classes,

we see positive effects on the treated group from year five on, when the classes were completed. The

magnitude of the employment effect is in the order of 7-8 percentage points of a full working year in

years 6 to 8 after the reform, then there is a decline in the effect, corresponding to the recession in 2009-

10. The second fact emerging from the graphs is that the long-term effect stabilizes around 4 percentage

points with a dip during the recession.24

      The profile and time pattern of the treatment effects on earnings (Figure 4) are very similar to those

on employment, with annual earnings approximately USD 3,100 higher for the treated group 6 to 8

years after admission to Denmark. As labor income is the main source of earnings of refugees, this

seems logical. These are large effects due to the low baseline of employment among refugees. Fromr 6

to 7 years after the reform, annual employment was about 38-56 percent higher for the treated group and

annual earnings about 42-50 percent higher. Over 18 years this accumulated into a total of 0.76 years

(9 months) of extra employment, corresponding to a 4 percentage point higher employment rate in each

    23
       We exclude from the 18-24 year old group 518 individuals (30.6 percent) with children present because all individuals
with a child present experienced a reduction in benefits to 75 percent of the previous level. To keep the group of 18-24 as
untreated by the reduction in welfare, we include the 18-24 with children in others. Effects by finer age groups and excluding
children at both sides of the cutoff are shown in Appendix Figure A.3.
    24
       Employment is measured as a fraction of a full working year. Hence, annual outcomes can be interpreted as a fraction of
one year full-time equivalents and cumulative outcomes may be interpreted as a fraction of years of employment. Effects are
more noisy if we split employment into intensive and extensive margins, but we similarly find relatively small coefficients in
the first couple of years (more on this below, in Figure A.5).


                                                             18
year for the treated. In terms of earnings, the treated group accumulated USD 45,267 higher income

from employment (measured in 2000-prices) over 18 years which corresponded to an average of USD

2,510 higher earnings per year. Relative to the baseline these are large effects equal to 23.0 and 33.7

percent rise in employment and earnings, respectively.25

    Notice that in the first 2 to 3 years after the policy is enacted, there is a precisely estimated zero

difference in employment and earnings between the treated and the non-treated. This is very consistent

with a genuine language skill acquisition effect that accrues over time. During the first 3 to 4 years

refugees are learning and this produces an impact on labor market outcomes in the following years.

Panels c and d of Figures 3 and 4 separate individuals who are aged 18-24 without children from the rest

as the first group had no change in welfare in the first year while the others experienced a drop in welfare

for one year. Panels c and d show the dynamic effects every four years for the younger group (in blue)

and the older group (in red) separately. While the effect on the young is estimated with a significant

error due to the small sample, there are no significant differences in the effects between the two groups.

The average accumulated effects, in particular, show very similar estimates in the two groups, both

for employment and earnings. In the yearly effects we actually see a larger (positive) impact for the

young group, while the other group shows a very precise zero effect estimated even for the first four

years. This suggests that the early one-year reduction of benefits did not have any work-incentive effects

for newcomers, and did not generate any early earnings. Probably this is because very few refugees

were able to supplement the welfare benefits with income from work in the very early years, which

is consistent with the finding in the report by the Ministry of Interior Affairs (1999) that led to the

abandonment of the benefit reduction. This is in line with the idea that the early hurdle to employment

for newly arrived refugees was a lack of skills, and language skills among them, rather than a lack of

willingness and incentives to be employed. Overall the effects by age are quite similar and we can never

rule out homogeneous effects on earnings and employment across the two groups or even across a finer

partition of workers into six-year age groups (Appendix Figure A.3). While it is possible that the zero

effect of the drop in welfare benefits is due to the fact that this was a small drop, or to the fact that our

sample size is not large enough to precisely identify small effects, the evidence from these results is

also consistent with the idea that there is no quick fix to increase employment of refugees in early years.

However, improving their language skills through increased training pays off after 4-5 years when they

can use those skills in the labor market.

    25
       The baseline is 0.15-0.19 average years worked (annual) and 6,159-7,371 USD average yearly salary (annual) 6-7 years
after the reform, and 3.3 worked years (cumulative) and USD 134,378 (cumulative) by 18 years after the reform for employment
and earnings, respectively.


                                                            19
    Figure 5 presents a series of robustness checks for the main results captured by the coefficient on

the average cumulative employment and earnings 18 years after the reform. This coefficient summarizes

whether there is a persistent long-run effect and its magnitude in terms of gains in employment rate and

earnings per year. The first two panels (a and b) show that the estimated magnitude and significance of

the effects are very robust to the choice of bandwidth. Only with an extremely small bandwidth of 30

days around the cutoff is the estimate imprecise and not significant, but from bandwidths of 60 days to

360 (including the optimal bandwidth which is 216 for employment and 277 for earnings) the obtained

estimate is significant and stable. In Panels c and d we show the estimates obtained at arbitrary cutoff

dates before and after the actual cutoff date. The red line shows the estimate of the impact at the actual

discontinuity. In most cases at arbitrary cutoff points we estimate very small and non-significant effects.

Occasionally some significant effects are estimated. Since the reform was implemented on January 1,

1999, it is also reassuring that there is no effect of January 1998 (-365) or January 2000 (+365), ruling

out that some structural reoccurring seasonal events related to the new year are driving our results (three

out of four point estimates are zero and the last one has the opposite sign to our results). In Panels

e and f we see that the estimates are not sensitive to a series of additional checks. First we include

control variables, then we use second or third order polynomials instead of local linear regressions. In

the "donut" specification we exclude refugees admitted in the two year window around New Year 1999.

Finally, we also show the estimates from a simple OLS regression where the time to cutoff is a linear

variable and obtain a similar estimate of the discontinuity effect. One can also read the stability of

the estimated long-run effect with respect to bandwidth as well as the "donut" estimates as showing

that the impact on those arriving right after January 1999, who were exposed to a full year of welfare

benefits reduction, is not different from the impact on those arriving after one year and who experienced

almost no welfare reduction at all (as the benefit reduction was discontinued in February 2000). For

later admissions, the time with lower income is shorter and for those towards the right end of the range

shown in Figure 5, Panels a and b, the marginal admissions have the exact same benefit level as the

control group. This is another piece of evidence that is consistent with no employment effect from the

welfare cuts.26 So, overall, the results are rather insensitive to the inclusion of controls and to the change

in bandwidth, suggesting that the cutoff was indeed random. Using other functional forms and a simple

OLS estimator one would also get a similar, although slightly larger, estimate (Panels e and f).

    Figure A.5 in the Appendix investigates the margins of the employment and of the earnings re-

   26
      Appendix Figure A.4 shows the sample means of the outcomes 18 years after the reform by one-month bins around the
cutoff and a linearly fitted regression line. These graphs confirm that there is a discontinuity in the outcomes around the reform
and clear level difference before and after.


                                                               20
sponses. We find no evidence that employment time varies with treatment for employed individuals,

which is the intensive margin of employment responses. Panel a shows that conditional on working

(employment larger than zero) there is no effect on employment measured as a fraction of a full working

year. Panel b then shows that there is no effect on the share working full time, also conditional on work-

ing. Turning instead to extensive margin responses, we do see a tendency for the treated group to have

higher probability of working, starting 5 to 6 years after the beginning of the treatment period (Panel c).

The annual effects are rarely significant. If we instead measure the effect on having ever been employed,

which is a measure of the extreme extensive margin, treated refugees are 7.8 percentage points (not sta-

tistically different from zero) more likely to have had a job by the end of the analysis window. Panel d

shows that earnings of the employed rise, revealing that earnings effects are not driven solely by higher

employment but also by higher earnings among the employed.


6.2       Effects on Schooling, Occupations and Mobility

As we showed in the previous section, overall, the reform increased employment gradually starting after

4 to 5 years from the beginning of the treatment, which corresponds to the early post-program period.

Then higher earnings, conditional on employment, seemed to occur later in the analysis period, also

suggesting some form of upgrading/improvement in job type. Figure 6 analyzes some outcomes that

can be potential mechanisms that help to explain the observed labor market dynamics. Panel a of the

figure shows that treated refugees were also more likely to pursue additional education in Denmark. The

average effect emerges 8 to 9 years after the beginning of treatment, and 4 to 5 years after the end of

the language training. When separating the young (under 25) from the older in Panel c, we see that the

effect is driven exclusively by the young. This group is more likely to obtain lower secondary education

(significant) and a subgroup of them may also obtain academic education in Denmark (insignificant)

early on (Appendix Figure A.6, Panels b and f). By far the largest skill upgrading effect is vocational

education programs, which lasts for 2 to 4 years and can be attended while working and earning (Ap-

pendix Figure A.6, Panel d).27 Interestingly, this effect arises much later and is only significant from

around 9 to 10 years after 1999. This is consistent with the increased enrollment after the recession hit

and the employment effect on the treated declined for a while. Plausibly, the refugees who spoke better

Danish, and were employed may have reduced their employment during the recession and used this time

to further qualify themselves with formal education so as to consolidate their permanent strengths in the

Danish labor market (Appendix Figure A.6, Panels a, c and e show enrollment). This transition to more

   27
        Paid work-based learning is part of the vocational training programs.


                                                                21
education is what likely allowed them to obtain better paid jobs after The Great Recession.

      Panels b and d of Figure 6 show that treated refugees tended to upgrade their occupations towards

jobs with higher communication (and less manual) content. The transition towards more communication

intensive jobs begins already three years after 1999, when refugees finish their language training and is

significant in most periods after 8 years. Panel d shows that both young and old refugees experienced this

occupational upgrading in the early years after completion of the training, with a potentially stronger

long-run effect for older refugees. While the younger group may have mainly benefited from better

language training by adding some formal vocational schooling, the older group simply transitioned to

less manual-task intensive occupations.

      Finally, in Figure 7 we analyze whether the language training treatment affected refugees' geograph-

ical mobility. Panels a and c show the impact on the probability of having moved from (not living in) the

municipality of initial resettlement each year after treatment. As usual Panel a shows the average yearly

effects and Panel c shows the effect by age group every four years. The pattern is very interesting, and it

reveals a lower probability that treated refugees move out of the municipality in the early years, but then

no substantial difference in the probability of moving in the long-run. Essentially, such a pattern reveals

a delay in the probability of moving from the settlement municipality, lasting until 5 to 6 years after

1999. This seems consistent with a significant rate of overall mobility of refugees from their initial mu-

nicipality of resettlement, and with the incentives of the treated group to stay for the years of language

training, but then leave, potentially to pursue jobs, further education and upgrading of their economic

status. The lower mobility effects appear a bit stronger for the young group who may have stayed longer

in the original municipality to find a first job. Panels b and d reveal no differential tendency of treated

refugees to be in or move to urban areas, neither soon after the treatment nor in the long run.


6.3     Effects on Adult Crime

Labor market success and economic integration are very desirable and important goals for refugees.

Achieving them would improve their material and psychological well-being, would increase local ben-

efits from hosting them and would improve the opinion of natives about them (Bansak, Hainmueller,

and Hangartner, 2016). In terms of affecting the opinion of citizens, however, there is an even more

important dimension related to potential criminal activities of refugees. Either as a consequence of their

marginalization, trauma or disenfranchisement, there is a diffused perception that refugees are more

likely to commit crimes and several statistics show higher crime rates for refugees than for natives in




                                                    22
several European countries.28 For Denmark, Andersen, Dustmann, and Landersøe (2016) report that the

refugee crime rate is about double that of similar natives, and most of this difference is due to property

crime, mainly shoplifting. Our summary statistics confirm these orders of magnitudes for the group of

refugees considered in this paper.

    Therefore it is interesting to analyze whether the language training and/or the reduced welfare treat-

ment analyzed in this paper had any impact on the probability that refugees commit crime. Figure 8

shows the impact on the average probability of being convicted of any crime for the whole group of

refugees every year (Panel a) and then divided by being subject to a welfare cut or not (splitting under

25s without dependents and over 25s or with children) every four years (Panel c). Then, Panels b and d

show the same figures, but for the probability of being convicted of a shoplifting crime, which is by far

the largest property crime committed. Panel a shows that the probability of being convicted of a crime is

11 percentage points higher for the treated group in the first year after the reform only (Panels a and d).

Already in year two and in all following years, the difference from the non-treated group is very small

and insignificant (or of negative sign). Panel b shows the same pattern specifically for the shoplifting

crime, with an increase by 7 percentage points in the first year and no effect subsequently. As the first

year after 1999 is also the period in which the subgroup over 25 years experienced reduced welfare

benefits, it is interesting to analyze whether this is also the group experiencing an increase in criminal

convictions. This is exactly what is shown by Panels c and d. The older group of treated refugees shows

a higher propensity to be convicted in the first year, but in all the subsequent periods there is no sig-

nificant effect of language treatment. It would appear, therefore, that language training has no long or

short run impact on the crime rates of refugees. However, the reduction in welfare payment early on

seems to be associated with higher shoplifting by the group subject to that measure. While the effect is

precisely estimated, we do not want to overemphasize it due to the very short period (one year only) in

which this policy was in place. Nevertheless, this finding is consistent with what Andersen, Dustmann,

and Landersøe (2016) find in response to the re-introduction of lower welfare benefits to immigrants in

2002. The treated group under 25 without children never shows any difference in criminal convictions,

suggesting that there is no significant effect of language training on this dimension of the refugees' social

integration.




   28
    Several German politicians and newspapers linked an increase in crime in 2015 to the arrival of an exceptionally high
number of refugees and asylum seekers (see BBC News, 2018).


                                                           23
7        Effects on Fertility and on the Second Generation

The statistically significant and economically important effects of language training on employment and

earnings of refugees may have generated consequences that propagate to family life, social integration

and, possibly, to the next generation. First, as treated refugees are more likely to be employed and

to have obtained education in Denmark, they have a more direct connection with the Danish culture,

and this may have an impact on marriage, family choices and fertility. Second, their better economic

situation and higher degree of integration in the Danish society may have affected investment in their

children and the outcomes of the second generation. We analyze these two aspects in turn.


7.1      Marriage and Fertility

In this section we analyze whether the better language training (and possibly the ensuing economic suc-

cess) affected marriage outcomes and the probability of having children, their number and their timing

(i.e. the age of the mother at birth). If better language skills (and/or working and earning higher income)

imply better assimilation into the Danish culture, this may result in the modification of preferences to-

wards marrying (outside of their ethnic group) or having fewer children (as average fertility of native

Danish women is significantly lower than that in the countries of origin of refugees).

      We first look at inter-ethnic marriage, namely the probability of marrying a Danish or a person

of nationality different from theirs. Intermarriage is often a strong sign of social integration. The RD

estimates (available upon request) do not show any significant effect of treatment on these two outcomes.

We then analyze several outcomes related to fertility. Figure 9 shows four graphs illustrating the effect

of treatment on four different indicators. Panel a shows the average number of children at completed

fertility for refugees grouped by monthly bins and spanning two years before and after the cutoff date

of arrival. The panel shows that number of children born after admission is the same on the two sides

of the cutoff and no discontinuity is visible in a simple local linear approximation at the cutoff. The

control as well as the treatment group both have a little more than one child after arrival. We also find no

systematic differences in the timing of child births after admission. The treated and non-treated group

both have a similar probability of having a child in most years, from one to eighteen, after admission

(Panel b), be it the first or a later child (Panels c and d).29 These insignificant effects on inter-marriage

and on the fertility rates of the treated group imply that the language training did not change in any

significant way the structure, size and composition of the families of the refugees. This implies that
    29
      The graphs look similar if we study fertility from 9 months after admission such that we only capture fertility decisions
after admission status is known.


                                                             24
effects on their children, if present, are likely arising from the better skills, economic conditions and

education of their parents rather than from changed size-type of family. We analyze children's outcomes

in the next section.


7.2     Children of Refugees

In order to study the effect of parents' treatment on children we need to choose whether the treatment

affects at least one parent, or specifically the father or the mother, or if both parents are treated. This

choice will also determine who constitutes the control sample. As the father was admitted before the

mother in 57.3 percent of the children sample, and in 19 percent of the cases the two were admitted

together, choosing the treatment of the father implies, in two thirds of the cases, that both parents were

treated. We consider the admission of the first parent (which implies that both parents were treated)

as our main specification in column 1 of Table 3. In this case the control group includes children with

zero or one treated parent. We also consider, as an alternative, having the father treated and we show

the results in column 2. Alternatively, we consider admission of the last parent as the assignment to

treatment (column 3) or the treatment of the mother (column 4). Both of these cases imply that it is more

likely that these children have only the mother treated while the father, who arrived earlier, is untreated.

Moreover, in measuring children's outcomes, in Table 3 we distinguish between boys (columns 1 to 4)

and girls (columns 5 to 8).

      We select all children born before 2003 as our sample, and we analyze five outcomes for them up to

2018. These outcomes are: taking the tests at the end of the lower secondary school, completing lower

secondary education, enrollment in upper secondary education and criminal charges and convictions.

The younger of the children considered in this sample were turning 16 in 2018, the last year of our

sample, the oldest were thirty-two years old in 2018.

      Children born after admission and before 2003 were typically born while their parents were attending

the three-year language program and they would be of school age after their parents completed the

program. Children born before admission, on the other hand, were on average 6 to 7 years old (based

on the admission date of the first parent) when their parents were attending the three-year integration

program.30 The estimates of column 1 of Table 3 show that boys of treated parents were 16 percentage

points more likely to reach the final exams of lower secondary education (9th grade graduation exams),

11 percentage points more likely to graduate and 16 percentage points less likely to be charged with a


   30
     Table A.2 shows descriptive statistics for children born before 2003, split into children born after admission of the last
parent in Panel a and children born before admission of the last parent in Panel b.


                                                             25
crime by 2018, relative to similar children of non-treated refugees. No significant effects on enrolling in

upper secondary education are found. The estimates on crime are weaker and smaller when we consider

as treated those children with only the second parent (or the mother) treated (see columns 3 and 4).

The treatment of both parents, and specifically of the father, seems to be associated with stronger and

more significant crime reduction for boys. Looking at columns 5 to 8 in the table, which show the

coefficient on girls' outcomes, we find very small point estimates and no significant coefficient on any

of the variables. A large body of literature emphasizes how boys' basic school outcomes may be more

sensitive to the family conditions and especially to the presence and role played by the father (see for

instance DiPrete and Buchmann, 2013). In our case, if the father of the boy had acquired better Danish

language skills, was possibly more integrated in Danish society and more likely to value the education

of his children, boys may have been strongly affected by that. Figure A.8 shows a series of robustness

checks for the main outcomes for which we find a significant effect on boys, namely attending exams in

lower secondary school and being charged with a crime.31 The point estimates are mostly statistically

significant but vary in size across the robustness checks we perform. In general, Panels e and f of Figure

A.8 show that methods that place lower weight on observations close to the cutoff and use a wider range

of the data to estimate the impact produce smaller and more credible results. There are a few outlier

observations near the cutoff that affect the estimates. Higher order polynomials, allowing a close fit at

the cutoff, produce even more extreme observations, while OLS and a "donut" approach to RDD (leaving

out two weeks on either side of the cutoff) produce smaller estimates. In most cases the estimates are

negative and significant for criminal charges for boys.



8     Discussion, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Concluding Remarks

In this paper we analyze the impact that an expansion of language training for refugees in Denmark had

on their employment, earnings, education and other important social outcomes. The sudden introduction

of this provision that was only applicable to refugees who obtained refugee status on or after January 1,

1999 and the arbitrariness of refugees admitted on either side of the cutoff date allows a causal estimation

of its effect. After eighteen years, refugees who got more and better language training had accumulated

three-quarters of a year additional employment and were (permanently) about four percentage points

more likely to be employed (a 23 percent rise relative to the baseline) and earned USD 2,500 more (a


    31
       Using being convicted or being charged with a crime as the outcome variable in the analysis show similar patterns. Effects
on charges are higher and more often significant and we only report charges here. Similarly, we leave out girls in the robustness
checks for brevity, as no significant effects are found for them.


                                                              26
34 percent rise relative to the baseline) than the control group. As these effects appear to be permanent,

and present after 18 years, this implies a great success. It is interesting, however, to make a cost-benefit

analysis of the government's investment in these language courses.

    We conduct a simple cost-benefit analysis calculated as the discounted stream of benefits minus the

discounted stream of costs. We include three types of costs and benefits in the base scenario. The main

benefit is the increase in annual earnings. This was estimated above. The main cost is the operating costs

of the extension of the language course. This is approximated by the monthly activity-based payment for

integration services during the extended time spent in the language course. The language course lasted

for about 18 months prior to the reform and the reform raised the resources for the language course by

30 percent, so we assume that the time in the language course increased by 6 months, taking place in the

second and the third year of the program. The third component in the cost-benefit analysis is the changes

to the deadweight cost of taxation. This is calculated as the impact of the reform on the fiscal budget

multiplied by a tax distortion rate. The impact on the fiscal budget is the sum of the operating costs of

the extended program and the effects on tax revenue and savings on welfare benefits. The savings on

welfare benefits are estimated (available upon request), and the effects on tax revenue are estimated by

an average tax rate times the effect on earnings estimated in section 6.1. We use a societal discount rate

of 3 percent and a tax distortion rate of 50 percent in the base scenario (see e.g. Heckman et al., 2010,

for a similar approach). The time horizon is the 18 years over which outcomes are measured.

    The results of this cost-benefit analysis are shown in Table 4. In the base scenario, shown in the

first row, the extended language course has a net present value of USD 40,000 per participant and the

benefit-cost ratio is 15 with break-even after 5 years. The next four rows of Table 4 show the results

when we vary central assumptions in the analysis. First, "Alternative price" is based on data from 2008

on prices per module instead of prices stated in the law we analyze (Act on Integration, section 45(5),

45(6) and 45(7) and section 59(3) and 59(4)). Second, we use a discount rate of 7 percent instead of

3 percent in the baseline. Third, we set the tax distortion rate to 0 instead of 50 percent. Finally, we

include the cost of additional education obtained among the young.32 The net present value is above

22,000 USD, the benefit-cost ratio ranges from 10 to 15 without the cost of formal education but drops

to 2 if we include the cost of the additional formal education obtained among the treated. The time to

break-even does not exceed 6 years. The reform has similarly large gains for the government due to

income tax savings on social welfare payments and added tax payments from the increase in earnings.

This also holds when we include the added costs of further education (Appendix Table B.1).

   32
        Section B in the Appendix describes and discusses the assumptions in more detail.


                                                              27
    A second finding of the paper is that the temporary (small) reduction in welfare payments to refugees

older than 25 in 1999 did not increase their propensity to work or their labor earnings, but instead may

have increased their propensity to commit crimes, especially shoplifting. In this case, while there were

some savings from welfare, those should, in principle, be compared with the costs of crime. However,

since the major part of the increase in crime comes from increases in shoplifting, the costs are sufficiently

small to be negligible.33

    The data is more noisy and the sample is smaller when we consider the effects on the next generation.

Being able, however, to establish an effect that passes onto the next generation is very powerful as it

would mean a very long-lasting impact. There are two main reasons why estimated impacts on children

are more noisy and uncertain. First, it seems to matter whether one or both parents were treated and,

in particular, whether the father received the Danish training too, or only the mother. Second, effects

vary by the gender of the child. Boys seem much more sensitive to parents' treatment and possibly

especially to treatment of the father in their criminal outcomes. Other researchers focusing on economic

disadvantages have found that unfavorable family backgrounds are especially harmful for boys (Bertrand

and Pan, 2013; Chetty et al., 2016; Autor et al., 2019; Andersen, Dustmann, and Landersøe, 2016). Our

results broadly confirm this, but we acknowledge that the estimates are noisy in this small sample and

somewhat sensitive to outliers close to the cutoff. Hence, we should be more cautious when interpreting

the magnitude of the impact on the second generation. The sign and significance is clear, however.

Across estimates, we consistently find that better language skills and labor market integration of the

parents improve boys' progress in school and reduce their crime rates. Girls, instead, perhaps because

they are at lower risk of performing badly on these margins, do not seem to show any effect.

    Our results suggest that investing in the language skills of refugees upon settlement in the host

country puts the refugees on a better trajectory with higher human capital (a large share use the acquired

language proficiency to further upgrade their qualifications), higher earnings and more employment.

Furthermore, the positive results extend beyond the first generation. Children of treated parents do

better in school and are less likely to enter into a criminal career. From a societal and public finance

perspective, this is expensive during the first years but pays off in less than a decade.




   33
        Further details on the cost of crime are found in Section B in the Appendix.


                                                                28
                                                  Figure 1: Cumulative Service Provision Over the First Three Years After Settlement

                                                  (a) Integration Services                                                  (b) Employment Services
29




                                                  (c) Integration Services                                                  (d) Employment Services




     Notes: The dots correspond to sample means by one-month bins. Bins with fewer than 5 observations are excluded. Panels a and b show the share ever participating, while Panels c and d show the
     cumulative hours. The lines are fitted by estimating linear regressions using the triangular kernel and a bandwidth of 24 months.
                             Figure 2: Refugees by Month of Receiving Residency

                                            (a) Distribution of Admissions




                                (b) Demeaned Monthly Share of Annual Admissions




Notes: Admissions from January 1997 to February 2001. Panel a shows the density and Panel b shows the share of refugees in
each month demeaned by the average monthly share of annual admissions, excluding the 6 months before and after the reform.




                                                           30
                            Table 1: Summary Statistics and Balancing Tests

                                             Mean         S.D.     RD Estimate        Confidence Interval
                                               (1)         (2)             (3)                        (4)
                            Panel a. Individual Characteristics
       Age                        31.50      7.68          -0.39                             [-1.71 ; 0.92]
       Married                     0.67      0.47           0.05                             [-0.04 ; 0.13]
       Female                      0.42      0.49           0.04                             [-0.04 ; 0.13]
       No. Children < 3y           0.19      0.43           0.03                             [-0.05 ; 0.10]
       No. Children 3-17y          1.00      1.51          -0.04                             [-0.42 ; 0.34]
       Iraq                        0.44      0.50          -0.03                             [-0.14 ; 0.08]
       Afghanistan                 0.16      0.36          -0.02                             [-0.11 ; 0.07]
       Other Country               0.40      0.49           0.03                             [-0.10 ; 0.15]
       Speaks Arabic               0.35      0.48          -0.04                             [-0.13 ; 0.05]
       Speaks Dari                 0.09      0.29          -0.01                             [-0.05 ; 0.03]
       Danish 1                    0.22      0.42          -0.07                             [-0.19 ; 0.05]
       Danish 2                    0.35      0.48          -0.00                             [-0.09 ; 0.08]
       Danish 3                    0.32      0.46           0.05                             [-0.04 ; 0.15]
       Quota Refugee               0.10      0.30          -0.03                             [-0.08 ; 0.02]
       Convention Refugee          0.18      0.38          -0.08                             [-0.19 ; 0.02]
       Family-Reunified            0.19      0.40           0.03                             [-0.07 ; 0.13]
       Other Refugee               0.53      0.50           0.01                             [-0.13 ; 0.14]
       Wait Time Asylum (Days) 404.33 348.11               16.58                         [-72.41 ; 105.56]

                             Panel b. Municipality Characteristics
       Urban Municipality             0.33    0.47            0.11                           [-0.01 ; 0.24]
       Five Largest Cities            0.17    0.37            0.01                           [-0.08 ; 0.10]
       Employment Rate 1996           0.74    0.04           -0.00                           [-0.01 ; 0.01]
       Unemployment Rate 1996         0.09    0.02            0.00                           [-0.00 ; 0.01]
       Avg. Labor Income 1996       28.52     3.69            0.43                           [-0.37 ; 1.23]
       Number of Co-Nationals      222.09 679.63           -23.55                       [-180.01 ; 132.91]
       Share of Co-Nationals          0.00    0.00            0.00                           [-0.00 ; 0.00]
Notes: Summary statistics (columns 1-2) and placebo tests (columns 3-4) of the impact of the reform on predetermined
variables for refugees obtaining refugee status in Denmark between January 1997 and December 2000. Age, marital status
and the number of children are measured at date of immigration. Danish 1 to 3 refer to the language track the individual
was initially placed on. Wait time for asylum is the number of days between application and admission, and it is calculated
for refugees (excluding quota refugees). Municipality characteristics refer to the municipality the refugee is placed in
after admission. Average income in municipality is measured in 1,000 USD (2000 level). The number of observations is
8,558, except for waiting time which is calculated for 5,956 refugees (not applicable for family-reunification or UN quota
refugees).




                                                         31
                               Table 2: Summary Statistics of Outcomes

                                                                            Mean         S.D.
                                                                              (1)         (2)
                 Annual Employment                                           0.20       0.26
                 Annual Earnings                                             8.60      12.41
                 Cumulative Employment Year 9                                1.49       2.08
                 Cumulative Employment Year 18                               3.61       4.64
                 Cumulative Earnings Year 9                                 57.71      86.90
                 Cumulative Earnings Year 18                               152.41     220.28
                 Not Living in Initial Municipality Year 18                  0.57       0.49
                 Living in Urban Municipality Year 18                        0.55       0.50
                 Obtained Education in Denmark                               0.13       0.33
                 Convicted of a Crime Year 1                                 0.05       0.21
                 Convicted of a Property Crime Year 1                        0.04       0.20
                 Convicted of Shoplifting (Supermarket) Year 1               0.02       0.15
                 Ever Convicted of a Crime                                   0.24       0.43
                 Ever Convicted of a Property Crime                          0.17       0.37
                 Ever Convicted of Shoplifting (Supermarket)                 0.08       0.28
Notes: Earnings are measured in 1,000 USD (2000 level). Annual employment and earnings are the averages of annual
employment and earnings in 1999-2016. The number of observations of 8,558, except for criminal convictions in year 1
where the number is 5,656.




                                                      32
                                                                                  Figure 3: Employment Effects

                                                                                                                             (b) Average Cumulative
                                                         (a) Annual
33




                                                (c) Annual by Age Groups                                            (d) Average Cumulative by Age Groups




     Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). Panels b and d
     show cumulative employment divided by the number of years since the reform.
                                                                                     Figure 4: Earnings Effects

                                                                                                                             (b) Average Cumulative
                                                         (a) Annual
34




                                                (c) Annual by Age Groups                                            (d) Average Cumulative by Age Groups




     Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). Panels b and d
     show cumulative earnings divided by the number of years since the reform.
               Figure 5: Robustness Checks, Average Cumulative Employment and Earnings

        (a) Bandwidth, Avg. Cumulative Employment                   (b) Bandwidth, Avg. Cumulative Earnings




     (c) Placebo Cutoffs, Avg. Cumulative Employment (d) Placebo Cutoffs, Avg. Cumulative Earnings




               (e) Avg. Cumulative Employment                              (f) Avg. Cumulative Earnings




Notes: The red dot and bar are the estimate and 95-percent confidence interval from year 18 in Panel b of Figures 3 and 4 using
the optimal bandwidth from Calonico et al. (2019). Panels a and b show the sensitivity to the choice of bandwidth. Panel c
and d examine estimates at made-up cutoff points (red horizontal line is the estimate from Panel b of Figures 3 and 4). Panels
e and f compare the main specification to estimates including control variables, using 2nd or 3rd order polynomials or OLS,
and excluding refugees admitted in the four weeks immediately around the cutoff ("donut"). Control variables are age, age
squared, unmarried, female, number of children between 0-2 years old and 3-17 years old, Iraq, Afghanistan, speaks Arabic,
speaks Dari, Danish 1, 2 or 3 (unknown level is the reference), quota refugee, family-reunified or other refugee (convention
refugee is the reference).




                                                             35
                                                             Figure 6: Mechanisms Behind Employment and Earnings Effects

                                           (a) Obtained Education in Denmark                                     (b) Communicative Relative to Manual Tasks
36




                                   (c) Obtained Education in Denmark by Age Groups                       (d) Communicative Relative to Manual Tasks by Age Groups




     Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). Panels a and b
     show, respectively, the impact on obtaining education in Denmark and on the log(communicative tasks)-log(manual tasks). Panels c and d show the same outcomes by age groups.
                                                                                     Figure 7: Mobility Effects

                                           (a) Not Living in Initial Municipality                                       (b) Living in Urban Municipality
37




                                  (c) Not Living in Initial Municipality by Age Groups                         (d) Living in Urban Municipality by Age Groups




     Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). Panels a and b
     show the share not living in their initial municipality and the share living in an urban municipality. Panels c and d show the same outcomes by age groups.
                                                               Figure 8: Impact on Annual Criminal Convictions

                                               (a) All Crimes                                                    (b) Shoplifting in Supermarkets
38




                                      (c) All Crimes, by Age Groups                                     (d) Shoplifting in Supermarkets, by Age Groups




     Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019).
                                                                                           Figure 9: Fertility

                                      (a) Number of Children Born after Admission                                                  (b) Child Born
39




                                                        (c) First Child                                                          (d) Later Children




     Notes: Panel a shows the total number of children born after admission. Panels b to d show post admission fertility RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions
     using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019).
                                                                  Table 3: Education and Criminal Outcomes of Children

                                                                                                      Boys                                                      Girls
                                                                                (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)

             Took Any Exam in Lower Secondary School                         0.163          0.137         0.238           0.162           0.073         0.024        -0.020        -0.006
                                                                             (0.071)        (0.082)        (0.059)         (0.056)       (0.045)       (0.049)      (0.055)       (0.050)

             Graduated Lower Secondary School                                0.113          0.094          0.103          0.178           0.008         -0.037       0.010         -0.009
                                                                             (0.055)        (0.047)        (0.059)         (0.066)       (0.075)       (0.071)      (0.061)       (0.063)

             Enrolled in Upper Secondary Education                            0.066          0.015          0.068          0.089         -0.027         -0.015       -0.062        -0.081
                                                                             (0.053)        (0.054)        (0.051)         (0.053)       (0.073)       (0.072)      (0.060)       (0.064)

             Charged with a Crime                                            -0.159        -0.236          -0.061          -0.025         0.001         -0.046       -0.013        0.023
40




                                                                             (0.096)        (0.101)        (0.079)         (0.074)       (0.050)       (0.039)      (0.039)       (0.044)

             Convicted of a Crime                                            -0.111          -0.163        -0.049          -0.003        -0.028         -0.054       -0.025       -0.016
                                                                             (0.093)        (0.102)        (0.071)         (0.067)       (0.042)       (0.037)      (0.034)       (0.036)
             N                                                                5,542          4,834          5,542           5,140         4,188         3,698        4,188         3,865
     Notes: p = 0.10,   p = 0.05,   p = 0.01. RD estimates from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). Children
     of refugees born before 2003. (1) uses the admission date of the first parent. (2) uses the admission date of the father. (3) uses the admission date of the last parent. (4) uses the admission date
     of the mother.
                                Table 4: Societal Cost-Benefit Analysis

                                                                                         Years Before
                                  B        C     DW L      NPV           (B + DW L)/C      NPV > 0
                                 (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)                   (5)            (6)
  Base scenario                35.2      -2.8        7.7      40.1                15.4             5
  Alternative price            35.2      -3.9        7.2      38.4                10.8             6
  Discount rate 7%             23.0      -2.8        5.0      25.3                10.1             5
  Tax distortion rate          35.2      -2.8        0.0      32.4                12.6             5
  With cost of education       35.2     -16.0        3.1      22.3                 2.4             6
Notes: Columns 1 to 5 are measured in 1,000 USD and column 6 is years.




                                                     41
References
Agersnap, Ole, Amalie Sofie Jensen, and Henrik Kleven. 2019. "The Welfare Magnet Hypothesis:
  Evidence From an Immigrant Welfare Scheme in Denmark." NBER Working Paper No. 26454.

Andersen, Lars Højsgaard, Christian Dustmann, and Rasmus Landersøe. 2016. "Lowering Welfare Ben-
  efits: Intended and Unintended Consequences for Migrants and their Families." CReAM Discussion
  Paper (05/19).

Arendt, Jacob Nielsen. 2018. "Integration and Permanent Residence Policies ­ A Comparative Pilot
  Study." Study Paper No. 130, The Rockwool Foundation's Research Unit.

------. 2019. "Employment Effects of a Job-First Policy for Refugees." Study Paper No. 139, The
  Rockwool Foundation's Research Unit.
°
Aslund, Oluf and Per Johansson. 2011. "Virtues of SIN: Can Itensified Public Efforts Help Disadvan-
  taged Immigrants?" Evaluation Review 35 (4):399­427.

Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman. 2019. "Family
  Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes." American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 11 (3):338­381.

Bansak, Kirk, Jens Hainmueller, and Dominik Hangartner. 2016. "How Economic, Humanitarian, and
  Religious Concerns Shape European Attitudes Toward Asylum Seekers." Science 354 (6309):217­
  222.

BBC News. 2018. "Reality Check: Are migrants driving crime in Germany?" URL https://www.
 bbc.com/news/world-europe-45419466.

Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan. 2013. "The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender
  Gap in Disruptive Behavior." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1):32­64.

Bloemraad, Irene and Els De Graauw. 2012. "Immigrant Integration and Policy in the United States: A
  Loosely Stitched Patchwork." International Perspectives: Integration and Inclusion :205­232.

Borjas, George. 1985. "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality and the Earnings of Immigrants."
  Journal of Labor Economics 3 (4):463­489.

Borjas, George J. 1994.     "The Economics of Immigration."       Journal of Economic Literature,
  XXXII:1667­1717.

Bratsberg, Bernt, Oddbjørn Raaum, and Knut Røed. 2017. "Immigrant Labor Market Integration Across
  Admission Classes." Nordic Economic Policy Review :17­54.

Brell, Courtney, Christian Dustmann, and Ian Preston. 2020. "The Labor Market Integration of Refugee
  Migrants in High-Income Countries." CEPR Discussion Paper 14296.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, Max H. Farrell, and Roco Titiunik. 2019. "Regression Dis-
  continuity Designs Using Covariates." The Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (3):442­451.

Capps, Randy, Kathleen Newland, Susan Fratzke, Susanna Groves, Gregory Auclair, Michael Fix, and
  Margie McHugh. 2015. "The Integration Outcomes of U.S. Refugees: Successes and Challenges." .

Card, David, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber. 2010. "What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active
  Labor Market Program Evaluations." Journal of the European Economic Association 16 (3):452­477.

------. 2018. "Active Labor Market Program Evaluations: A Meta-Analysis." The Economic Journal
  120 (November):894­931.

                                                42
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Frina Lin, Jeremy Maherovitz, and Benjamin Scuderi. 2016. "Child-
  hood Environment and Gender Gaps in Adulthood." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceed-
  ings 106 (5):282­288.

Chiswick, Barry R. 1978. "The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-Born Men."
  Journal of Political Economy 86 (5):897­921.

------. 1991. "Speaking, Reading, and Earnings Among Low-Skilled Immigrants." Journal of Labor
  Economics 9:149­170.

Chiswick, Barry R. and P. W. Miller. 1995. "The Endogeneity between Language and Earnings: Inter-
  national Analyses." Journal of Labor Economics 13 (3):246­288.

Clausen, Jens, Eskil Heinesen, Hans Hummelgaard, Leif Husted, and Michael Rosholm. 2009. "The
  Effect of Integration Policies on the Time Until Regular Employment of Newly Arrived Immigrants:
  Evidence from Denmark." Labour Economics 16 (4):409­417.

DiPrete, Thomas A and Claudia Buchmann. 2013. The Rise of Women: The Growing Gender Gap in
  Education and What It Means for American Schools. Russell Sage Foundation.

Dustmann, Christian. 1994. "Speaking Fluency, Writing Fluency and Earnings of Migrants." Journal of
  Population Economics 7 (2):133­156.

Dustmann, Christian, Francesco Fasani, Tommaso Frattini, Luigi Minale, and Uta Sch¨ onberg. 2017.
  "On the Economics and Politics of Refugee Migration." Economic Policy 32 (91):497­550.

Fasani, Francesco, Tommaso Frattini, and Luigi Minale. 2018. "(The Struggle for) Refugee Integration
  into the Labour Market: Evidence from Europe." IZA Discussion Paper (11333).

Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz. 2010.
  "The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program." Journal of Public Economics
  94 (1-2):114­128.

Heinesen, Eskil, Leif Husted, and Michael Rosholm. 2013. "The Effects of Active Labour Market
  Policies for Immigrants Receiving Social Assistance in Denmark." IZA Journal of Migration 2 (15):1­
  22.

H¨
 ubschmann, Zuzanna. 2015. "Migrant Integration Programs: The Case of Germany." The Graduate
  Institute of International and Development Studies, Global Migration Centre .

Hvidtfeldt, Camilla, Marie Louise Schultz-Nielsen, Erdal Tekin, and Mogens Fosgerau. 2018. "An Esti-
  mate of the Effect of Waiting Time in the Danish Asylum System on Post-Resettlement Employment
  Among Refugees: Separating the Pure Delay Effect from the Effects of the Conditions Under which
  Refugees are Waiting." PLoS ONE (13):1­14.

Joona, Pernilla Andersson and Lena Nekby. 2012. "Intensive Coaching of New Immigrants: An Evalua-
  tion Based on Random Program Assignment." The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 114 (2):575­
  600.

Joyce, Patrick. 2017. "Inspiration f¨  or integration­en ESO-rapport om arbetsmarknadspolitik f¨
                                                                                               or
  nyanl¨
       anda i fem l¨
                   ander." Rapport till Expertgruppen f¨
                                                       or Studier i Offentlig Ekonomi (ESO) 7.

Lochmann, Alexia, Hillel Rapoport, and Biagio Speciale. 2019. "The Effect of Language Training
  on Immigrants' Economic Integration: Empirical Evidence from France." 113:165­296. European
  Economic Review.



                                                 43
Martin, Iv´
          an, Albert Arcarons, Jutta Aum¨  uller, Pieter Bevelander, Henrik Emilsson, Sona Kalan-
 taryan, Alastair MacIver, Isilda Mara, Giulia Scalettaris, Alessandra Venturini, H Vidovic, I Welle,
 M Windish, R Wolffberg, and A Zorlu. 2016. "From Refugees to Workers: Mapping Labour Market
 Integration Support Measures for Asylum-seekers and Refugees in EU Member States." Volume II:
 Literature review and country case studies .

Ministry of Interior Affairs. 1999. "Rapport om resultaterne af Indenrigsministeriets sagsbaserede eval-
 uering af integrationsloven." .

Rambøll and the Danish Center for Social Science Research. 2013. "Samfundsøkonomisk analyse
  af metoder. Hjemløsestrategien." Appendix 3 (Report for the Danish Ministry of Social Affairs
  and the Interior). URL https://socialstyrelsen.dk/filer/voksne/hjemloshed/
  samfundsoekonomisk_analyse.pdf.

Rosholm, Michael and Rune Vejlin. 2010. "Reducing Income Transfers to Refugee Immigrants: Does
  Start-Help Help you Start?" Labour Economics 17 (1):258­275.

Sarvim¨
      aki, Matti and Kari H¨
                           am¨
                             al¨
                               ainen. 2016. "Integrating Immigrants: The Impact of Restructuring
  Active Labor Market Programs." Journal of Labor Economics 34 (2):479­508.

Schultz-Nielsen, Marie Louise. 2017. "Labor Market Integration of Refugees in Denmark." Nordic
  Economic Policy Review :55 ­ 90.

Williamson, Abigail Fisher. 2018. Welcoming New Americans? Local Governments and Immigrant
 Incorporation. University of Chicago Press.




                                                  44
A      Appendix: Additional Tables and Figures

             Table A.1: Service Provision Over the First Three Years After Arrival, Treatment

                            0.5 Year        1 Year       1.5 Years       2 Years         2.5 Years        3 Years
                                                         (a) Share Ever Participating
 Total                      0.316          0.309          0.265         0.253            0.201            0.142
                             (0.052)        (0.060)        (0.060)       (0.038)          (0.040)          (0.051)
 Integration Services       0.331          0.419          0.463         0.509            0.526            0.540
                             (0.042)        (0.047)        (0.050)       (0.050)          (0.049)          (0.050)
 Employment Services        0.102          0.080            0.029        -0.038           -0.066           -0.081
                             (0.048)        (0.039)        (0.067)       (0.065)          (0.063)          (0.064)
 N                            8,558          8,558          8,558         8,558            8,558            8,558

                                                             (b) Cumulative Hours
 Total                       -166.354     322.636       557.090        949.190          1,156.244      1,480.112
                            (102.465)      (83.882)      (118.520)      (131.735)         (175.006)      (191.919)
 Integration Services      186.886        466.413       735.749 1,024.134               1,254.709      1,505.645
                             (30.188)      (54.807)       (69.222)       (91.399)         (115.661)      (134.303)
 Employment Services       -340.585       -128.438        -136.104        -77.769          -63.613        -41.269
                            (100.664)      (73.026)       (97.409)      (100.435)         (135.303)      (151.996)
 N                             3,940         4,629          5,169          5,618            6,029          6,353
     Notes: p = 0.10,   p = 0.05,   p = 0.01. Panel a shows RD estimates for the share ever participating after 0.5-3
     years. Panel b shows RD estimates for the cumulative hours conditional on participation.


                   Figure A.1: Language Learning Provision and Attendance, Treatment




Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence limits from linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal
bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019).




                                                          45
                        Figure A.2: Predetermined Covariates by Month of Admission

            (a) Age                     (b) Married                    (c) Female             (d) No. of Children < 3y




  (e) No. of Children 3-17y                (f) Iraq                  (g) Afghanistan              (h) Other Country




      (i) Speaks Arabic               (j) Speaks Dari             (k) Family-Reunified            (l) Quota Refugees




  (m) Convention Refugee            (n) Other Refugees             (o) Danish Level 1             (p) Danish Level 2




      (q) Danish Level 3          (r) Wait Time Asylum           (s) Urban Municipality         (t) Five Largest Cities




    (u) Employment Rate           (v) Avg. Labor Income        (w) Number Co-Nationals         (x) Share Co-Nationals




Notes: The graphs show predetermined covariates for refugees. The dots correspond to sample means by one-month bins.
Bins with less than 5 observations are excluded. Panels o to q show the Danish language training track in which a refugee was
initially placed, this is a rough measure of skills from abroad (see main text).




                                                            46
                                       Figure A.3: Impacts by Age Groups

                   (a) Annual Employment                            (b) Average Cumulative Employment




                      (c) Annual Earnings                             (d) Average Cumulative Earnings




Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the
optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). Estimates are shown for refugees without dependents for the 18-24
year age group.




                 Figure A.4: Sample Means of Average Annual Employment and Earnings

               (a) Average Annual Employment                            (b) Average Annual Earnings




Notes: The graphs show sample means of average annual employment and average annual earnings over an 18-year-period by
month of admission. Bins with less than 5 observations are excluded.




                                                           47
                                                                 Figure A.5: Margins of Employment on Earnings Responses

                                                  (a) Annual Employment, Intensive Margin                           (b) Full Time Employment




                                                 (c) Annual Employment, Extensive Margin               (d) Annual Earnings, Conditional on Employment
48




     Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). Panel a shows the
     intensive margin response (fraction of a full time year worked conditional on working). Panel b shows the impact on full time employment relative to less than full time employment, conditional
     on working. Panel c shows the extensive margin employment response and Panel d the impacts on annual earnings for those who work.
                                  Figure A.6: Education Impacts by Age Groups

        (a) Ever Enrolled in Lower Secondary School                  (b) Completed Lower Secondary School




          (c) Ever Enrolled in Vocational Education                    (d) Completed Vocational Education




           (e) Ever Enrolled in Academic Education                     (f) Completed Academic Education




Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence limits from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal
bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019). The results are shown for refugees younger than 25 years without dependents
at immigration and others.




                                                             49
                                                                Figure A.7: Impact on Annual Criminal Charges

                                               (a) All Crimes                                                    (b) Shoplifting in Supermarkets
50




                                      (c) All Crimes, by Age Groups                                     (d) Shoplifting in Supermarkets, by Age Groups




     Notes: RD estimates and 95-percent confidence intervals from local linear regressions using the triangular kernel and the optimal bandwidth selector from Calonico et al. (2019).
                                                              Table A.2: Summary Statistics for Children of Refugees

                                                                                  Panel a. Born After Admission           Panel b. Born Before Admission
                                                                                  Mean      S.D.                     N    Mean      S.D.                      N
                             Male                                                  0.52     0.50                2,294       0.59    0.49                  7,436
                             Year of Birth                                        2000      1.33                2,294      1992     3.69                  7,436
                             Age Mother at Childbirth                             28.45     5.30                2,013     25.48     5.37                  6,992
                             Age Father at Childbirth                             33.12     5.55                1,991     29.93     5.72                  6,535
                             All Parents Refugees or Family-Reunified              0.85     0.36                2,294       0.96    0.19                  7,436
                             Parents Admitted on Same Day                          0.20     0.40                2,294       0.25    0.43                  7,436
                             Parents Admitted Before Reform                        0.39     0.49                2,294       0.64    0.48                  7,436
                             One Parent Admitted Before Reform                     0.17     0.38                2,294       0.07    0.25                  7,436
                             Parents Admitted After Reform                         0.44     0.50                2,294       0.29    0.45                  7,436
     Notes: Panel a shows summary statistics for children born between 1997-2002 after their last refugee parent was admitted. Panel b shows the same statistics for children of refugees born
     before their parents were admitted.
51
                                        Figure A.8: Robustness Checks, Boys

     (a) Bandwidth, Took Any Exam in Lower Sec-
                                                                       (b) Bandwidth, Charged with a Crime
     ondary School




     (c) Placebo Cutoffs, Took Any Exam in Lower Sec-
                                                                    (d) Placebo Cutoffs, Charged with a Crime
     ondary School




       (e) Took Any Exam in Lower Secondary School                            (f) Charged with a Crime




Notes: The red dots and bars show the estimate and 95-percent confidence interval from column 1 of Table 3 using the
optimal bandwidth from Calonico et al. (2019). The sample is boys born before 2003 using the first parental admission date as
assignment to treatment. Panels a and b show the sensitivity to the choice of bandwidth. Panels c and d examine estimates at
made-up cutoff points. The red solid line shows the estimates at the true cutoff. Panels e and f compare the main specification
(red) to estimates including parental control variables, using 2nd or 3rd order polynomials or OLS, and excluding refugees
admitted in the four weeks immediately around the cutoff ("donut"). Control variables are age, age squared, unmarried,
female, number of children between 0-2 years old and 3-17 years old, Iraq, Afghanistan, speaks Arabic, Danish 1, 2 or 3
(unknown level is the reference), quota refugee, family-reunification or other refugee (convention refugee is the reference).




                                                             52
B        Appendix: Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Language Training Expansion



We calculate the net present value (N P V ) of the expansion of language training as:

                                                                 18
                                                                       bi - dwli - ci
                               N P V = B - DW L - C =
                                                                          (1 + r)i
                                                                 i=1


     Where B are the benefits, C are the costs, and r is the societal discount rate. DW L is the deadweight

loss (or gain) from changes in the distortion of taxation as a result of the impact on the fiscal budget. We

also calculate the benefit-cost ratio, and the time needed before the N P V is positive.

     We include gross earnings as the only benefit. They are estimated directly in section 6.1. It implies

that any positive impacts on the offspring are neglected. The costs of the additional hours provided in

the language course is measured by the operating costs described in section 3 and taken directly from

the law we analyze (Act on Integration, section 45(5), 45(6) and 45(7) and section 59(3) and 59(4)). In

addition to these costs and benefits, we include the deadweight loss to society resulting from the impact

on the fiscal budget. In the main analysis we assume a tax distortion rate of 50 percent (see e.g. Heckman

et al., 2010, for a similar approach).

     We calculate the net present value of the change in the fiscal budget as the sum of the changes in tax

revenue, savings on welfare benefits and the added costs of the program. Here we assume an average

income tax rate of 32 percent for workers and of 26 percent for the unemployed.34 The savings on

welfare benefits are not counted as a benefit in the cost-benefit analysis for society, as it is a transfer

(redistribution). All Danish prices are converted to Danish price levels in 2000 using the consumer price

index and to USD using an exchange rate of 6.6 DKK/USD.35

     Hence, in the base scenario (in the first row of Table 4 in the main text) we make the following

assumptions:

    1. The reform extends the previous language learning provision by 30 percent (430 hours) and in-

         creases the maximum duration of the program from 18 months to 3 years (see section 3 in the

         main text). We assume the additional language instruction is equal to 6 months (0.3 × 18 months

         = 6 months), and assume that the operating costs per month equal the activity-based payment of

         DKK 3,300 to the municipality. We split the costs equally between the second and third year of
    34
      This is based on mean average tax payments for the employed and unemployed in a report by Rambøll and the Danish
Center for Social Science Research (2013), the best estimates of the relevant average tax rates we are aware of.
   35
      These conversions are applied to all nominal variables throughout the paper.


                                                         53
        the program.

   2. The discount rate is 3 percent.

   3. The tax distortion rate is 50 percent.

    We conduct simple sensitivity analyses for each of the items above and add an additional cost through

the impact on education (in row two to four of Table 4 in the main text):

   1. Use the earliest operating costs with direct information on prices per module available (www.

        integrationsbarometer.dk). This is from 2008 and the price is deflated to 2000 prices.

        The average pay per module in 2008 was DKK 33,735, 20,064 and 17,394 for a participant in

        Danish course 1, 2 and 3, respectively. We use a weighted average with the share of participants

        at each course level in 1999 (0.32, 0.35, 0.33; Table 2). We assume one module is one sixth of the

        total hours (1, 830/6 = 340 hours), so the extra hours amount to 1.4 modules.36

   2. Discount rate is 7 percent.

   3. The tax distortion rate is 0 percent (this is the worst case since it enters as savings in the net costs).

   4. Include the costs of additional education for the population below 25 (Appendix Figure A.6).37

        They constitute 13.7 percent of the sample. The price is approximated by the public expenditure

        per pupil for basic, vocational and academic education. We use the simple average across types

        of education, and hence not weighted by uptake of immigrants. It is assumed that basic schooling

        completion takes two years, vocational education takes four years and academic education takes

        five years. The earliest year for which we have information on prices is 2014 for basic and voca-

        tional education and from 2007 for academic education. They are deflated to 2000 prices using the

        consumer price index. The added cost of education is not included in the base scenario because

        educational attainment takes time, and we are therefore not seeing all the benefits that comes from

        it.

    We neglect the cost of crime because it is assessed to be very small. This is based on the following:

The welfare reduction raised criminal convictions in the first year by 10 percent, arising mainly from

an increase in shoplifting. The sentence for shoplifting is a small fine in Denmark, so the costs consist
   36
      The total hours is 1,830 after the reform and there are six modules after the reform. This structure did not exist before.
This approach gives as a higher estimate of the operating costs of the program compared to our baseline.
   37
      For basic schooling and vocational training:              https://www.uvm.dk/institutioner-og-drift/
oekonomi-og-drift/regulerede-institutioner/takstkatalog-og-finanslov/takstkatalog
and for academic education: https://ufm.dk/uddannelse/videregaende-uddannelse/universiteter/
okonomi/uddannelsestilskud (accessed December 12, 2019).


                                                              54
of resources spent by the police, the court, the defence and the prosecution. Using previous estimates

of these costs, an estimate of the cost of such a crime is USD 200. Results of the societal cost-benefit

analysis are shown in Table 4 and discussed in section 8.

    The impact on the fiscal budget is shown in Table B.1 below. Income tax and savings on social

welfare payments are positive for the public coffers and the operating costs are the costs for the public

coffers.38

    Although we do not provide estimates of the uncertainty of the numbers in Table B.1, they are

all sufficiently large to support the conclusion that the additional investment in language training was

beneficial to the society and the government. The net monetary benefit for the refugee is simply the sum

of the impact on the difference in post-tax earnings and benefits because the program is free of charge

for the participants. This difference is also large and positive, effectively ruling out that the net benefit

for the recipient, which could include mental costs of attending the course, is negative.

                                        Table B.1: Fiscal Cost-Benefit Analysis

                                      Income Tax and          Operating                             Years Before
             Government               Welfare Savings            Costs        NPV         B/C         NPV > 0
                                                  (1)               (2)         (3)        (4)               (5)
             Base scenario                           18.0            -2.6        15.4       7.0                   6
             Alternative price                       18.0            -3.6        14.4       5.0                   6
             Discount rate 7%                        12.4            -2.4        10.0       5.3                   6
             With education                          18.0           -12.0         6.3       1.5                   6
    Notes: The rows are the different scenarios described in the text. Columns 1 to 4 are measured in 1,000 USD and column
    5 is years.




   38
     Note a change in the deadweight loss from distortionary taxation is only a cost (or benefit in our case) from the perspective
of society and is therefore not part of the fiscal cost-benefit analysis.


                                                               55
