                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   A QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF DISTORTIONS IN MANAGERIAL FORECASTS

                                          Yueran Ma
                                        Tiziano Ropele
                                         David Sraer
                                        David Thesmar

                                      Working Paper 26830
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26830


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank seminar participants at ASSA, Princeton University, UIUC, UC Berkeley, Boston
College, Brandeis, Chicago, Dartmouth, MIT, UCLA and SITE for their insightful comments.
The views expressed here should not be interpreted as representing the views of the Bank of Italy
or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Yueran Ma, Tiziano Ropele, David Sraer, and David Thesmar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Quantitative Analysis of Distortions in Managerial Forecasts
Yueran Ma, Tiziano Ropele, David Sraer, and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 26830
March 2020
JEL No. E03,E22,E7,E70,E71,G02,G3,G31

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper quantifies the economic costs of distortions in managerial forecasts. We match a
unique managerial survey run by the Bank of Italy with administrative data on firm balance
sheets and income statements. The resulting dataset allows us to observe a long panel of
managerial forecast errors for a sample of firms representative of the Italian economy. We show
that managerial forecast errors are positively and significantly autocorrelated. This
persistence in forecast error is consistent with managerial underreaction to new information. To
quantify the economic significance of this forecasting bias, we estimate a dynamic equilibrium
model with heterogeneous firms and distorted expectations. The estimated model matches not
only the persistence of forecast errors, but the empirical link between investment and managerial
forecasts. Relative to a counterfactual with rational expectations, we find that managers exhibit
large forecasting biases, which lead to significant distortions in firm-level investment. These
distortions, however, imply limited loss in firm value. In general equilibrium, the estimated
model leads to negligible aggregate efficiency losses from distorted forecasts.

Yueran Ma                                       David Sraer
The University of Chicago                       Haas School of Business
Booth School of Business                        University of California, Berkeley
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.                           545 Student Services Building
Chicago, IL 60637                               Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
United States                                   and NBER
Yueran.Ma@chicagobooth.edu                      sraer@berkeley.edu

Tiziano Ropele                                  David Thesmar
Bank of Italy                                   MIT Sloan
Economic Research Unit, Milano Branch           100 main street
Via Cordusio, 5                                 02478 Cambridge MA
20123 Milano                                    thesmar@mit.edu
Italy
tiziano.ropele@bancaditalia.it
1    Introduction
This paper quantifies the effect of biases in managerial forecasts on corporate invest-
ment, firm value and aggregate efficiency. Several studies have convincingly docu-
mented the existence of systematic biases in managerial decision-making. In a large
sample of newly-created French firms, Landier and Thesmar (2009) show that man-
agerial optimism correlates with short-term leverage. In a different context, Mal-
mendier and Tate (2005) analyze a sample of publicly traded US firms and estab-
lish that overconfident managers overpay for acquisitions and find a strong positive
relation between the sensitivity of investment to cash flow and executive overcon-
fidence. Similarly, Hirshleifer et al. (2012) document that overconfident managers
invest more in innovation and achieve greater innovative success for given R&D ex-
penditures. A nascent, related, literature emphasizes the importance of systematic
errors in managerial forecasting. Using a survey of large public US firms, Ben-David
et al. (2013) provide evidence that CEOs exhibit miscalibrated expectations of ag-
gregate stock market returns, and that, in the cross-section of firms, CEO overconfi-
dence measures correlate with investment and leverage. Using US CFO survey data,
Gennaioli et al. (2016) document that managerial expectations tend to be extrapola-
tive, and that expectations have strong explanatory power for firm investment. While
these papers establish a statistically significant relationship between systematic fore-
cast errors and managerial decisions, our paper asks whether such forecasting biases
matter quantitatively. Do they create significant distortions in firm-level decisions?
Do they contribute significantly to aggregate inefficiency?
    Our paper answers these questions in two steps. First, we introduce new, high
quality data to study managerial expectations. We use a representative, annual busi-
ness survey run by the Bank of Italy that asks firms about their forecasts of one-year
ahead sales. Since 2002, the sample contains about 4,000 firms per year with at
least 20 employees. We match this sample with administrative data on firms' balance
sheets and income statements. The resulting dataset allows us to analyze the deter-
minants of (sales) forecast errors and their connection with actual corporate behav-
ior. Second, we combine reduced-form empirical evidence and a structural dynamic
model to quantify the economic implications of distortions in managerial forecasts.
As discussed above, standard analyses in the literature usually provide reduced-form
evidence showing that biases in managerial forecasts affect firm-level decisions, e.g.,
financing or investment. These analyses are, however, mostly silent on how much
these distortions impair firm value or aggregate economic efficiency. In contrast, our


                                           2
structural approach builds on such reduced-form evidence and allows us to compare
the economy we observe in the data ­ which potentially features distorted beliefs ­
with a counterfactual economy where agents hold rational expectations.
    Our analysis starts with reduced-form evidence of systematic biases in manage-
rial forecasts. Our approach is similar to recent contributions in the macroeconomics
and finance literature that investigates the dynamics of beliefs using survey data.1
In particular, we show that, in our representative panel of Italian firms, managerial
forecasting errors are highly persistent. The autocorrelation coefficient of sales fore-
cast errors is .32 in our preferred specification and is strongly statistically significant.
This persistence in forecast errors holds even when controlling for firm fixed-effects
and is stable across firm size quintiles and across industries. This result is consis-
tent with the hypothesis that managers underreact to news about their own sales.
Intuitively, in period t a positive shock about a firm's sales generates a positive fore-
cast error in the same period. If the manager underreacts to this news and sales are
persistent, the t + 1 forecast will be too low on average, giving rise to another posi-
tive forecast error in the next period. Thus, underreaction to news leads to positive
autocorrelation of forecast errors.
    We then develop an economic framework to quantify the effect of forecasting bi-
ases. We start from a standard neoclassical model of investment with heterogeneous
firms, similar to David and Venkateswaran (2019) with the addition that managers
may not process information efficiently. Production takes place through a standard
Cobb-Douglas technology that combines labor and capital. Firm-level productivity
follows an AR(1) process. Every period, managers observe the realization of produc-
tivity and a private signal informative about next-period productivity. Firms face a
one period time-to-build for capital investment, so that current capital expenditures
decisions depend on managerial forecasts about future productivity. In contrast to
the standard neoclassical model, these forecasts need not be rational. We extend the
formulation of belief formation in Bordalo et al. (2017) to accommodate both over- and
underreaction to news about firms' productivity: managers can either extrapolate the
news contained in the current innovation to productivity (the belief distortion empha-
sized in Bordalo et al. (2017)), or instead fail to fully account for its news content.2
  1
     See, for instance, the recent works by Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), Bordalo et al. (2017),
Bordalo et al. (2019), Malmendier and Nagel (2016), Bouchaud et al. (2018).
   2
     We emphasize a behavioral interpretation of the persistence in forecast errors. Another interpre-
tation could rely on noisy information models (e.g., Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015)). However, in
our context, we know that managers observe their firm's realized sales, making this interpretation less
appealing.



                                                  3
In addition to time-to-build, our model make two additional assumptions: (1) firms
face quadratic adjustment costs to capital, and (2) forecasts may be observed with
measurement error. We introduce these ingredients in the model to account for an
important feature of the data. With a Cobb-Douglas production function and no ad-
justment costs, the elasticity of capital to sales forecast is equal to 1. In the data,
this elasticity is about .4. Both adjustment costs and measurement error in the fore-
cast have the potential to break the unit elasticity, and allow the model to match the
empirical relationship between news and corporate actions.
    We estimate the model using a simulated method of moment. Our estimation
targets three key features of the data. The first set of moments relates to firm-level
production. We match the productivity process observed in the production data, as
well as the autocorrelation of investment to identify capital adjustment costs. The
second set of moments characterizes managerial expectations. The estimation targets
the persistence in sales forecast errors that we document in the first part of the paper.
It also targets the variance of sales forecast errors to measure private information,
a key driver of empirical managerial forecasts that our model seeks to account for.
The final moment we use is the elasticity of capital to sales forecasts, which allows
to pin down the "noise" in empirical forecasts, which our model also accounts for.
Consistent with the reduced-form evidence, our estimated structural model indicates
the presence of large distortions in forecasting compared to the rational expectations
benchmark. When forecasting date t + 1 productivity, we estimate that managers
assign a weight on date t productivity shock that is less than half of that for a rational
manager. Relative to the rational expectations benchmark, we find that the estimated
underreaction leads to an increase in the variance of sales forecast errors of 14.63 %.
    This underreaction to news about productivity leads to significant distortions in
firm-level investment. For a productivity shock at the 75th percentile of the distribu-
tion, the average manager in the data under-invests by 10.01 % relative to the ratio-
nal expectation counterfactual. Symmetrically, for a productivity shock at the 25th
percentile, the inattentive manager over-invest by 16.72 % relative to the rational
manager. These large distortions on investment lead, however, to limited reduction
in firm value: in the counterfactual where managers hold rational expectations, firm
value is only 0.65 % larger. This result emanates in part because, in our model, firms
select their capital stock to optimize their value without any additional constraints.
As a result, at the optimum, first-order deviations in investment only have second-
order effects on firm value.3 The effect of distorted forecasts is further dampened in
  3
      This finding remains, of course, a quantitative result: larger distortions in forecasts than the ones


                                                     4
general equilibrium, as equilibrium prices mediate the inefficiencies induced by be-
lief distortions: in a rational equilibrium counterfactual, aggregate TFP is only 0.08
% higher than in the data. While statistically significant, and economically sizable
when focusing on investment, the managerial underreaction we document in the data
has almost negligible effects in terms of aggregate efficiency.

    Our paper builds on a recent literature that uses forecast data to test rationality.
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) show that past revisions positively predict fore-
cast errors in consensus macroeconomic forecasts. They argue that this predictability
arises from informational frictions. Bouchaud et al. (2018) document underreaction
among stock analysts. Also looking at stock analysts, Bordalo et al. (2019) show that
forecast errors on long-term EPS growth forecasts are positively correlated with past
growth, suggesting overreaction. Bordalo et al. (2018) find overreaction in macro and
financial variables at the individual level among professional forecasters. Bloom et
al. (2017) show that 15% of plant managers cannot form and express subjective prob-
ability distributions. Using data on household expectations of inflation, Malmendier
and Nagel (2016) find evidence consistent with "experience effects": heavy discount-
ing of pre-birth data combined with recency bias. We contribute to this literature
by documenting significant underreaction to new information in managerial forecast
data. More importantly, our paper provides a tractable framework to quantify the eco-
nomic effects of this forecasting bias. We incorporate non-rational forecasts into an
otherwise standard neoclassical model of investment with heterogeneous firms. The
structural approach is necessary to construct a rational expectation counterfactual.
    Through its aggregation approach, our paper also relates to a small number of
papers that investigate the impact of managerial information on long-term output
in steady state models. On the theory side, Akerlov and Yellen (1985) show that, in
most equilibrium settings, near-rational behavior can have first-order aggregate con-
sequences, even when it has second-order individual effects. Hassan and Mertens
(2017) build on Akerlov and Yellen (1985) and show that near-rational errors lead to
first-order distortions in household savings decisions. On the empirical side, David
et al. (2016) develop a steady-state production model similar to ours, but use it to
quantify aggregate efficiency improvements that result from a well-developed stock
market. David and Venkateswaran (2019) employ a similar model to investigate the
effect of information frictions (imperfect information about future productivity). No-
tably, these last two papers do not use forecast data and instead assume rationality.
we estimate in the data could definitely result in large distortions in firm value.



                                                    5
We find that, in addition to information frictions, expectations feature underreaction
to news, which our model matches and quantifies. In parallel work, Barrero (2018)
uses expectation survey data to calibrate the economic effect of managerial forecasts
biases that he identifies in the data. Also related to our paper is Giglio et al. (2019),
who analyze the relationship between stock market returns forecasts and the risky
share in investors' portfolios. They find a positive and statistically significant rela-
tionship, but the magnitude is smaller than what one would expect in a frictionless
model. In our sample of firms, we find the relationship between sales expectations
and investment to be significant, but also much smaller than what one would expect
in a frictionless model.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follow. Section 2 presents reduced-form ev-
idence of persistence in managerial forecast errors. Section 3 builds a production
framework with heterogeneous firms and distorted expectations, provides a struc-
tural estimation of the model, and quantifies a number of partial equilibrium coun-
terfactuals. Section 4 provides aggregation results. Section 7 concludes.


2        Evidence on Managerial Biases

2.1        Data and Summary Statistics
Sample
   Our main data come from the Survey on Industrial and Service Firms (INVIND,
henceforth), which is a large annual business survey conducted by the Bank of Italy
on a representative sample of firms. Since 2002, the reference universe in INVIND
consists of firms with at least 20 employees operating in industrial sectors (man-
ufacturing, energy, and extractive industries) and in non-financial private services,
with administrative headquarters in Italy.4 The survey adopts a one-stage stratified
sample design. The strata are combinations of branch of activity (according to an
11-sector classification), size class (in terms of number of employees classified in 7
buckets), and region in which the firm's head office is located. In recent years each
wave has around 4,000 firms (3,000 industrial firms and 1,000 service firms).
   The data are collected by the Bank of Italy's local branches between February and
April every year. Among other things, the survey asks firms to report their sales,
investment, and employment in three periods: the fiscal year that just ended (pre-
liminary results), the previous fiscal year (final results), and the current fiscal year
    4
        A methodological note about the survey can be found at https://tinyurl.com/v6unt8n.


                                                     6
(forecasts). Throughout the paper, we define firm i's empirical log-sales forecast er-
rors as the difference between the log of firm i's actual sales and the log of firm i's
sales forecast:
                          F E it = log salesit - log Fi,t-1 salesit

where salesit is total sales of year t and Fi,t-1 salesit is sales forecast reported in Febru-
ary to April of year t.
   To compute the firm-specific log-sales forecast error, we measure actual sales (salesit )
using firm balance sheet data from Company Accounts Data System (CADS), which is
managed by the Cerved Group and covers all Italian limited liability companies. We
do not use the self-reported sales data in INVIND to measure actual sales (i.e. final
result for previous fiscal year) as this information might be subject to self-reporting
biases.
   Our Italian survey-account sample runs from 2002 through 2017, and contains
about 37,000 total firm-year observations. We keep firms that report at least 5 sales
forecasts. We winsorize all variables at the median +/- 5 times the interquartile range.

Summary Statistics
    Table 1 provides summary statistics for our working sample. Panel A focuses on
firms for which forecast data are available. Panel B provides descriptive statistics
for the universe in order to make a comparison. Log-sales forecast errors as defined
above have a mean of -.01. That the mean log-sales forecast is negative is expected as
a result of Jensen's inequality. Log-sales forecast errors have a standard deviation of
18%. Figure 1 reports a histogram of log-sales forecast error. This figure shows that
the log-sales forecast error is close to normally distributed.


2.2   Forecast Informativeness
We now verify the informativeness of managerial sales forecasts in our data. One
possible concern is that these reported forecasts are only weakly correlated with man-
agers' true forecasts, for instance because managers put little effort in answering the
survey. In Table 2, we show that sales forecasts are highly informative about actual
future sales. To this end, we estimate the following simple linear regression:

                             salesit      Fi,t-1 salesit
                                       =+                +    it ,
                           assetsi,t-1     assetsi,t-1
where salesit and Fi,t-1 salesit represent respectively firm i's actual and forecasted sales
as defined above and assetsi,t-1 denotes firm i's value of assets at the end of period

                                             7
t - 1. Standard errors are clustered by both firm and time. Table 2, column (1) shows
that the coefficient estimate for  is .97 with a standard error of .007. The R2 of
this regression is 90% without any fixed effect. Column (2) to (6) augment this re-
gression by successively adding control variables (beginning-of-year log assets and
log sales), year fixed-effect, industry fixed-effect, industry-year fixed-effect, firm and
year fixed-effects. These specifications are consistent with the finding in Column (1)
that managerial forecasts reported in the survey data strongly forecasts future real-
ized sales. In Column (7) to (10), we confirm these results using a slightly different
specifications: we use the log of realized sales as our main dependent variable and
regress it against the log-sales forecast (log (Fi,t-1 salesit )) and a host of control vari-
ables. These regressions show that our data on managerial forecasts have useful
empirical content. However, they do not prove that the reported sales forecasts are
free of measurement error. As a result, we will include in our model measurement
error in reported sales forecast. We will identify such measurement error through a
combination of two moments: the variance of sales forecast errors and the relation-
ship between sales forecasts and capital investment decisions.


2.3   Forecasts and Capital Investment
We now show that sales expectations are linked to firms' capital investment decisions
at the time they are formed. To this end, we regress the log of firm i capital stock for
fiscal year t on log-sales forecasts issued at the beginning of year t:

                    log kit = i + t + log(k)/ log(F) log Fi,t-1 salesit +   it ,


where kit is measured as the capital stock (net fixed tangible assets) at the end of
year t - 1: when there is a one period time to build, this is the capital stock that
is used in production in year t. Fi,t-1 salesit is the forecast of sales in year t made
at the beginning of the year and i and t denote respectively firm and year fixed
effects. Table 3 reports estimates of the coefficient log(k)/ log(F) using manufacturing
firms only (see Column (1)) and all firms in the sample (see Column (2)). In both
cases, the estimated elasticity is statistically significant and about equal to .4: within
a firm, a 10% increase in sales forecasts is associated with a 4% increase in the capital
stock. As explained below, in a simple model with Cobb-Douglas production, noiseless
forecasts and no capital friction, this elasticity turns out to be 1. Our Italian data
suggest however a smaller response of investment to changes in sales forecasts than
the benchmark frictionless model. This is why our model will feature both a real

                                               8
friction (adjustment cost in capital accumulation) and a measurement friction (noise
in reported forecasts) to accommodate this empirical finding.


2.4   Persistence of Forecast Errors
Under rational expectations, managerial forecast errors should not be predictable
using variables in the manager's information set, which presumably includes past
sales and past forecasts. We document instead that managerial forecasts errors are
persistent, and positively predictable by previous forecast errors. As hinted in the
Introduction, this feature is consistent with underreaction to new information.
   Figure 2 provides a binned scatter plot of the relationship between past log-sales
forecast errors (defined as F E it-1 above) and current log-sales forecast errors (F E it ).
To construct this figure, we split the sample in vigintiles of lagged log-sales forecast
error (x-axis) and represent, on the y-axis, the average current log-sales forecast error.
As shown, the relationship between lagged and current log-sales forecast error is
increasing and close to linear.
   We confirm this finding by estimating the following model:

                            F E it =  + t + F E F E i,t-1 +   it ,                       (1)

where t denotes year fixed effects and  is just a constant. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm and year level.
    Table 4 reports the estimates of coefficient F E . Column (1) uses only manufactur-
ing firms and finds an estimate of F E of .29. Column (3) uses all firms in the sample
and reports an estimated F E of .32. In both cases, the estimated F E is highly signifi-
cant. Columns (2) and (4) add firm fixed effects to equation (1) for manufacturing and
all firms respectively. These fixed effects allow firms to exhibit an average bias in their
forecast over the sample period (either over-optimism or over-pessimism). It is obvi-
ously challenging to disentangle the persistence of forecast errors from a firm-specific
constant since our panel dataset contains a finite time length (at most 16 years). In
particular, this augmented model cannot be estimated consistently using OLS given
the short time period in our sample (Nickell (1981)). As a result, we further restrict
the sample to firms with at least 9 forecasts and estimate the model using dynamic
panel GMM (Arellano and Bover (1995)). This augmented model leads to an estimate
of F E of .17 for all firms (.159 for manufacturing), significant at the 1% level.
    The results in Table 4 are consistent with the hypothesis that managers underre-
act to sales-related news. A positive news at date t about date t sales (e.g., a positive

                                             9
productivity shock) implies a positive forecast error at date t. If productivity is persis-
tent, and the manager is slow to incorporate this news into her forecast for date t + 1
sales, then this manager is too pessimistic at date t about date t + 1 sales, which leads
her to exhibit, on average, a positive forecast error at date t + 1. Hence, the positive
autocorrelation of forecast errors is consistent with underreaction.
    A possible concern about the relevance of the finding in Table 4 is that the per-
sistence in forecast error is mostly a phenomenon among small firms. We split the
entire sample of firms into 5 size groups based on the firm's number of employees.
For each of these groups, we re-run regression (1) separately, both with and without
firm fixed effects. We report results in Table 5. Across size groups, the point estimate
for F E is strongly significant and ranges from .28 to .42 without firm fixed effects and
between .143 and .211 when including firm fixed effects. A similar pattern emerges
for manufacturing firms as seen in column (3) and (4). If anything, the persistence
in forecast errors seems to be slightly increasing with firm size, although given the
confidence intervals, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the estimated autore-
gressive coefficients are constant across size groups. As a result, we feel comfortable
assuming that firms are homogeneous in terms of F E in our quantitative exercise.
    Taken together, the results in Table 4 and Table 5 reject the null hypothesis that
managers process information efficiently. However, we cannot directly interpret these
point estimates from an economic standpoint. What do they imply for the firm's in-
vestment policy and firm value? To answer this question one would need a structural
model in order to "shut down" the forecasting biases that we observe in the data and
construct appropriate counterfactuals. This is what we do in Section 3.


3     Structural Model

3.1     Model Setup
We start from a standard neoclassical model of investment augmented with two types
of frictions: (1) real capital frictions (one-period time-to-build and quadratic adjust-
ment costs), and (2) distorted beliefs.


3.1.1   Economy

Time is discrete. At date t, firm i combines capital (kit ) and labor (lit ) to generate sales
(pit yit ) with a Cobb-Douglas technology:


                                             10
                                                         1-       
                                        pit yit = Aeit kit lit       ,

where it is revenue-based log-productivity,  is the capital share, and  captures
decreasing returns to scale in revenues, which may arise from technology or market
power. A is a positive constant. Input markets are competitive. w is the wage rate
in the labor market and r is the safe rate of return in this economy.5 At date t, firms
hire lit employees after observing it . We assume an AR(1) process for it :


                                                                             2
                                                                     0           0                2
it = (1 - )Vi + it-1 + it + it with (it , it )  N                        ,            & Vi  N (0, V )
                                                                                 2
                                                                     0       0   
                                                                                 (2)
where Vi is the long-run mean of firm i's productivity. Furthermore, it is a shock
realized at date t whereas it denotes a private signal observed by the manager at
date t - 1 (but not by the econometrician). Our model thus allows for managerial
private information about future productivity, as in David and Venkateswaran (2019).
   At date t, the firm chooses labor demand lit , given current productivity it and
installed capital kit , to maximize operating profits:

                                                (1-)                     
                              max Aeit kit
                                        
                                           lit           - wlit = e  it kit
                                                                         
                                                                                                  (3)
                                lit

                                                                1-
                                                                         
                                                         (1-)    
where          1-(1-)
                     and   (1 - (1 - ))                 A  .
                                                           w
    We assume a one-period time-to-build in capital: firms invest in the capital stock
kit before it is realized. As a result, before investing managers need to form expec-
tations about next-period productivity. The next section describes our model of belief
formation.


3.1.2     Distorted Expectations

Managers may exhibit distorted expectations about future productivity. In the spirit
of Bordalo et al. (2017), we assume that managers use the following conditional den-
sity:
                                                                                           
                                                                  h(it |it-1 , it )           1
            hs
             t-1 (it |it-1 , it ) = h(it |it-1 , it )                                             (4)
                                                         h(it |it-1 = it-2 + it-1 , it )      Z
  5
      We omit the time subscript for w and r, as we only consider steady-state economies.



                                                        11
where Z is a normalization coefficient. The subjective density hs depends on two
terms. The first term, h, is the objective conditional distribution of it , conditional on
the information available at the beginning of date t, it-1 and it . The second term
corresponds to the over- or underreaction to the surprise realization it-1 . The "di-
agnosticity" is large when the past realization of productivity is high compared to its
rational expectation. Those states are overweighted when  > 0 (representativeness
bias in Bordalo et al. (2017)). They are underweighted when  < 0. A negative 
can be rationalized as a lack of attention: large surprises are less representative of
potential realization and therefore more likely to be overlooked. From a psychologi-
cal standpoint, such a bias can be related to the "conservatism" bias emphasized in
Edwards (1968).
   Given our parametric assumptions on the distribution of  and  , it is straight-
forward to show that the formulation of beliefs in Equation (4) leads the manager to
believe in the following conditional distribution for it :
                                                                               
                                                                             2
                   it  N (1 - )Vi + it-1 + it +               it-1         ,                  (5)
                                                          over/underreaction

   Note that when  = 0, this formulation boils down to the rational expectation.
When  > 0 (resp. < 0), managers overreact (resp. underreact) to the date t - 1
innovation in productivity it-1 . This formulation is similar to Bordalo et al. (2017),
but extends it to underreaction by allowing  to be negative, which will turn out to be
the case in our estimation.
   The final feature of reported managerial forecasts in our model is that they may
contain noise. Such noise can help explaining the low elasticity of capital to manage-
rial forecast we document in Table 3, and is a reasonable assumption when dealing
with survey data (Giglio et al., 2019). More precisely, we assume that reported log-
sales forecasts are described by:

                                                                                    2
             log Fi,t-1 [pit yit ] = log (Fi,t-1 [pit yit ]) + it , where: it  N 0,           (6)


where log Fi,t-1 [pit yit ] is the observed sales forecast and log (Fi,t-1 [pit yit ]) is the true
forecast on which the manager bases her investment decisions.
   Sales forecasts are not structural objects but depend on endogenous employment
decisions by managers. We assume that there is a one-period time to build in capital
so that sales forecasts take the capital decision as given. But labor is expected to
be ex-post chosen optimally. With the formulation of forecasts in Equation (5), the

                                                12
empirical log-sales forecast error (F E it ) then admits a simple expression:

                      F E it = log(pit yit ) - log(Ft-1 [pit yit ]) - it
                                                                          2
                                            1                                 2
                            = - it-1 + it -                                     - it            (7)
                                            2                      
                                                                                 Noise
                               Belief distortions   Rational expectation error


    Log-sales forecast errors are first driven by the bias parameter  . Past positive
productivity shocks will lead to larger future forecast errors if  < 0. This will induce
persistence in forecast errors, as we find in the data. The rational expectation error
is negative on average, due to Jensen's inequality. Forecast errors also include the
expectation noise it . However, private information is not part of forecast errors, as
should be expected. This will help identification as we discuss below.


3.1.3   Investment

Capital kit is selected at t - 1 and depreciates at the constant rate  . When invest-
ing, we assume that the firm faces quadratic adjustment cost to capital (Hayashi,
1982). Specifically, starting from capital kit-1 , installing capital kit costs the firm
           - )kit-1 )2
ck (kit -(1
          kit-1
                       , in addition to the actual capital expenditures. As discussed above,
in addition to the measurement error on sales forecast, this feature of the model is
useful to rationalize the low elasticity of capital to sales forecast observed in the data
(Table 3).
     These adjustment costs imply that the firm's manager faces a dynamic optimiza-
tion problem. This problem can be represented by a Bellman equation with four state
variables. The endogenous state variable is the capital stock installed in the previous
period, k . The three exogenous state variables are (1) the current level of productivity
 , (2) the private information about next period productivity  , and (3) the current
shock  . In particular,  is a state variable because the manager bases her forecast
on the subjective distribution described in Equation (5), so that she does not process
the news about  efficiently.6
     Since we consider a steady-state economy with no aggregate risk, the firm dis-
counts future profits at the safe rate of return. As a result, for a firm with long term
productivity Vi , the dynamic optimization problem admits the following Bellman rep-
  6
   For a rational manager, at date t, it and it+1 are sufficient to make an efficient forecast about
it+1 .




                                                    13
resentation:

  i                                         
                                                                                     (kit+1 - (1 -  )kit )2
V (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) = max e          it   kit   - (kit+1 - (1 -  )kit ) - ck
                               kit+1                                                          kit
                                             1
                                        +       Fit V i (kit+1 ; it+1 , it+1 , it+2 )|(it , it , it+1 )
                                            1+r

with:

                                                                        2 2
   it+1      F         (1 - )Vi + it + it + it+1                                                    F  2
            N                                                       ,   2 2
                                                                                       and it+2  N (0,   )
   it+1                            0                                      


   As shown formally in Appendix A.1, we can simplify the previous problem by ex-
pressing its solution as a function of another Bellman equation that does not depend
on long-term productivity. Consider the following Bellman equation:

                                                                                     (kit+1 - (1 -  )kit )2
 V (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) = max e  it kit - (kit+1 - (1 -  )kit ) - ck
                               kit+1                                                          kit
                                             1
(8)                                     +       Fit [V (kit+1 ; it+1 , it+1 , it+2 )|(it , it , it+1 )]
                                            1+r

with:

                                                                 2 2
        it+1      F         it + it + it+1                                                  F  2
                 N                                           ,   2 2
                                                                               and it+2  N (0,   )
        it+1                     0                                 

    Then, let k  (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) be the optimal policy function of this Bellman prob-
lem and let V (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) be its optimal value. It is straightforward to show that
the optimal policy function k i, (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) and the value function V i (kit ; (it , it , it+1 ))
of a firm with long-term productivity Vi can be expressed as:

                                                              kit
                                                   Vi
                i,                                1- × k  (
              k    (k   ; (    ,    ,       ) = e              Vi ; (it - Vi , it , it+1 ))
                     it     it   it   it +1
             
                                                            e 1-                                (9)
                 i
                                                  Vi        kit
             V (kit ; (it , it , it+1 ) = e           × V ( Vi ; (kit ; (it - Vi , it , it+1 ))
                                                 1- 

                                                           e 1-
   We can therefore solve the problem of a firm with long-term productivity Vi by
simply solving the Bellman problem (8) and then applying Equation (9) to its value
and policy function.




                                                        14
3.2    Model Identification
In our baseline estimation, we calibrate four parameters: , the capital share, is cali-
brated to be 33; , the decreasing returns to scale in revenue, is .8;  , the depreciation
rate of capital is set to 10%; finally, the risk-free rate, r, is calibrated to 5%. In Section
6 below, we show that our main findings are robust to alternative calibration of  and
.
   We estimate the key parameters of the model via a Simulated Method of Moments
(SMM). We look for the set of parameters  = (,  ,  , ,  , ck , V ) such that model-
generated moments m() on simulated data fit a predetermined set of data moments
m. We use indirect inference because we cannot solve the model analytically (but
we solve a particular case analytically below in order to build intuition). Our SMM
estimation is done in two steps:

   1. For a given set of parameters, we solve the Bellman equation (8) numerically
      and obtain the optimal policy function k i, . We use policy function iteration on a
      discrete grid for the state space (k ; (, ,  ))

   2. Our parameter estimates minimize the distance from simulated to data mo-
      ments,
                        ^ = argmin ((m - m()) (m - m()))

       where the weighting matrix  is the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix
       of empirical moments. Standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping on the
       estimation sample using a block bootstrap at the firm-level.

    We now describe the set of moments we use in our estimation. We follow David
et al. (2016) and construct revenue-based productivity using our calibration for  and
. For firm i at date t, we compute its productivity as   ^it = 
                                                                 (log(V Ait ) -  log(kit ))),
                                                             7
where V Ait denotes firm i's value added for fiscal year t and kit is the stock of net
fixed tangible assets at the end of year t - 1.8 Both variables are taken from CADS.
    We then estimate three moments that capture the dynamic process followed by
                                                                               it -
                                                                           Var(^   ^it-2 )
firms' productivity as posited in Equation (2). The first moment is  = Var(^   it -^it-1 )
                                                                                           - 1.
If ^it follows an AR(1) process with a persistent component, then  is an unbiased
   7
     Note that our model does not have intermediary inputs, so that value added is equal to total sales.
The model can be extended to include intermediary inputs by assuming a Cobb-Douglas production
function in inputs, labor and capital. Value added is then simply a constant share of total sales and all
our analysis carries through.
   8
     In the model, kit is determined at date t - 1 but can only be used for production in period t. PPE
observed in year t - 1 includes the capital expenditures made in year t - 1 and thus corresponds to our
definition of kit in the model.


                                                   15
estimate of  in the model, even in small sample (Lo and MacKinlay (1988)). We
                      1   T   ^it -
                                    ^it-1
then compute Vi = T       t=1     1-
                                          and then estimate its cross-sectional variance:
 2
V = Vari (Vi ) . In the model, Vi depends on the long-term productivity of firm i, Vi
                                                                 1    T   (it +it )
and the within-firm average of TFP innovations: Vi = (Vi + T          t=1   1-
                                                                                    ). Finally,
                                                  2
we estimate the variance of TFP residuals  = Var (^       it -   ^it-1 - (1 - )Vi ), which
                                                                                         2    2
provides an estimate of the variance of innovations to the productivity process (          + 
in the model).
   More specifically, our estimation targets the following seven empirical moments,
which include the three moments pertaining to firms' productivity process just de-
scribed as well as four additional moments relating to managerial forecasts and in-
vestment:
                                                        2
  1. Variance of the estimated productivity innovations   . This estimate has a di-
                                     2   2    2
     rect counterpart in the model:  =  +  , a combination of the true innovation
     in the TFP process and the information about TFP innovations privately known
     by the manager a period in advance.

  2. Estimated persistence of productivity process . In the model, this estimate cor-
     responds directly to the persistence parameter  in Equation (2).

  3. The cross-sectional variance of Vi : as explained above, Vi corresponds in the
     model to the persistent component in TFP Vi , plus the within-firm average of
                       1   T   (it +it )
     TFP innovations T     t=1   1-
                                         ). We target the cross-sectional variance of Vi :
      2
     V = Vari (Vi ) .

  4. Persistence of sales forecast errors. Given the closed-form expression for log-
     sales forecast error in Equation (7), it is possible to show that (see Appendix
     A.2):
                                               2      2
                                              
                                                   
                                     F E = -     2
                                                        ,
                                                F  E
           2
     where F E is the variance of log-sales forecast errors.

     As discussed in the empirical Section, Table 4 presents the empirical estimates
     for F E . We use Columns (1) and (3). These specifications do not include firm
     fixed-effects, since our model does not allow for systematic optimism/pessimism
     bias. Intuitively, this moment helps identify the structural parameter  , which
     governs the degree of over- or underreaction. Under rational expectations ( =
     0), forecast errors should be i.i.d. over time and F E should be 0. As explained


                                              16
     in Section 2.4, persistent forecast errors (F E > 0) are consistent with underre-
     action ( < 0).

  5. Variance of log-sales forecast errors (net of year fixed effects) (F E 2 ). In Ap-
     pendix A.2, we show that this variance can be derived from Equation (7):
                                                      2
                               2         2        
                               F E   =       +            (1 +  2 2 )2
                                                  

                                                                                22
     The variance of forecast errors contains the rational forecast error,         , and
                                                2
     two extra terms: the expectation noise  and the additional effect of forecast-
                   2 2 2 2
     ing biases          . As usual in expectations studies, expectations biases
     increase the variance of forecast errors whether biases consist of over- or under-
     reaction, since the rational expectation is the minimum MSE estimate.

  6. Autocorrelation of firm investment rate, capex . In the data we estimate this co-
     efficient through a simple linear model (with time fixed-effects):

                     kit+1 - (1 -  )kit            kit - (1 -  )kit-1
                                        =  + capex                    +   it         (10)
                            kit                           kit-1

     Intuitively, capex captures the extent of quadratic adjustment costs ck , and is a
     moment classically used to pin down capital adjustment cost (e.g. Cooper and
     Haltiwanger (2006)).

  7. Elasticity of the capital stock to sales forecast. As explained above, in a friction-
     less model with Cobb-Douglas production function, this elasticity should be one,
     whether expectations are rational or not. Intuitively, this elasticity will be lower
     than one in the presence of capital adjustment costs (ck ) and the variance of noise
                             2
     in the sales forecast (   ). We do not have a closed form solution for this moment
     to match with the estimates reported in Table 3, but we build intuition with a
     model without adjustment costs in the next Section.

    To illustrate how the model is identified, Figure 3 shows numerical comparative
statics for the estimated model. To construct this figure, we start from the set of pa-
rameters estimated in Section 3.4 below. We then vary one of the parameters around
its estimated value and re-compute the simulated moments with this alternative set
of parameters. Figure 3 reports the parameter/moment pairs for which a variation
in the parameter leads to a significant variation in the simulated moment. Figure
3 highlights a number of intuitive relationships in the data. Adjustment costs ck

                                                 17
increase the persistence of investment and decrease the elasticity of capital to fore-
cast. The noise in managerial forecasts,  , increases the variance of forecast errors,
but decrease the persistence of forecast errors and the elasticity of capital to forecast
(attenuation bias). A more persistent TFP process () leads to a higher estimated per-
sistence of TFP residuals    ^, but also to a larger variance of forecast errors, a larger
persistence of forecast errors, a larger persistence of investment and a larger elastic-
ity of capital to forecast. An increase in inattention, i.e., a lower  , mostly leads to an
increase in the variance of forecast errors, and an increase in the persistence of fore-
cast errors. An increase in the dispersion of the true TFP innovations,  , leads to an
increase in the variance of forecast errors, an increase in the persistence of forecast
                                                                     2
errors, an increase in the variance of total TFP innovations (         ), an increase in the
cross-sectional variance of Vi , and an increase in both the persistence of investment
and the elasticity of capital to forecasts. Symmetrically, an increase in the private
information component of TFP innovations,  , leads to a decrease in both the per-
sistence of investment and the elasticity of capital to forecasts. Identification in our
model is obtained through the combination of these relationships between simulated
moments and structural parameters. In the next section, we build further intuitions
by considering a simplified version of our model.


3.3   Building Intuition
In this section, we build a number of intuitions for the estimation by exploring a
simpler version of the model that features no adjustment costs to capital (ck = 0) and
no measurement error in reported sales forecast ( = 0).
   In this simplified version of the model, the optimal capital stock admits a closed-
form solution. In the absence of adjustment costs, the user cost of capital is R = r +  ,
and the firm selects its optimal capital stock at date t - 1 to maximize date t profits,
that is:
                                            
                             max Fit-1 e  it kit  
                                                   - Rkit
                                 kit

which then yields
                                            1
                                                                          1
                                           1-       1              
                                                                         1-
                         kit =                     1-    Fit-1 e    it        .
                                       R
   Using our formula for distorted expectations, it is straightforward to show that




                                                    18
the optimal log-capital stock is:

                                                                                                            2
                 1                                                                   1                          2
log (kit ) =             log          +    ((1 - )Vi + (it-1 + it-1 ) + (1 + )it ) +                            
                1-              R                                                    2                

   In particular, in this simple model, the first-order condition in capital implies a
unit elasticity of capital to forecast:

                                                    
                                  log(kit ) = log           + log(Ft-1 [pit yit ])
                                                    R

    This model is obviously unable to account for the finding in Table 3: in the data,
this elasticity is around .4. The data thus calls for an additional ingredient to break
this unit elasticity. The first ingredient we consider is measurement error in the re-
                                                                                        2
ported forecast: log Fi,t-1 [pit yit ] = log (Fi,t-1 [pit yit ]) + it , where it  N 0,    . The
noise term  serves as classical measurement error for the log-sales forecast and
therefore biases downwards the coefficient of a regression of log(kit ) on log(Ft-1 [pit yit ]).
    However, having measurement error only is unlikely to fully account for the low
elasticity in Table 3. In the data, the variance of log(Ft-1 [pit yit ]) net of firm and year
fixed-effects9 is about .083. As a result, measurement error as specified above would
                                        2
induce a downward bias of about .083      . On the other hand, we also know that measure-
ment errors are bounded by the variance of forecast errors, which is .03. Therefore,
even if managers had perfect foresight and forecast errors only came from noise, the
resulting downward bias would lead to an elasticity of  1 - ..083             03
                                                                                  .64, which is
still much larger than the elasticity in the data. This result explains why we also
introduce quadratic adjustment costs to capital as another mechanism to lower the
response of capital to sales forecasts.


3.4        Model Estimation
Table 6 reports the results of our structural estimation. Panel A shows the estimation
results using only firms in manufacturing. Panel B shows the estimation results using
all firms in the sample. Each panel reports the parameter estimates, as well as the
empirical moments and their model counterparts.
    We first discuss the parameter estimates. Since the results across the two samples
are similar, we focus our discussion on Panel B, which uses all firms in the sample.
    9
        For obvious identification reasons, we include firm and year fixed-effects in the regressions in Table
3


                                                       19
We estimate  at -.56. This coefficient estimate implies significant underreaction to
the realization of productivity innovation it when forecasting date t + 1 productivity.
A rational manager's date t forecast for date t + 1 productivity is: (1 - )Vi + it + it-1 .
In the model, the manager instead forecasts (1 - )Vi + (it + it ) + it-1 . A  of -.56
implies a weight of it in date t forecast of about half that of a rational manager.
    We also find that  and  have approximately the same volatility (respectively
7.4% and 8.7%). In other words, about half of the variance of observed productiv-
ity innovations is driven by managerial private information ( ). The remaining half
comes from the true innovation  . Overall, however, both shocks are relatively small:
                                                                                 2
this is because the variance of TFP innovations in the data is itself limited (    = .013).
This low volatility of  limits the potential of mistakes due to forecasting biases. In
the data, the variance of log-sales forecast errors is .03. The variance of log-sales fore-
                                         2 2 2 2
cast errors due to underreaction is             .0036 and therefore only accounts
for about 12% of the total variance of log-sales forecast errors. Our estimation also
reveals limited noise in the managerial sales forecast: in our estimation,  accounts
only for 3% of the overall variance of log-sales forecast error. Overall, the variance
of the rational forecast error represents about 85% of the total variance of log-sales
forecast error.
    Finally, the estimation uncovers significant adjustment costs to capital: ck  .35.
Relative to Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), our estimate is larger: in their specifica-
tion with only quadratic adjustment costs, they estimate a ck of about .22 (see Table
4 in Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), where their  parameter corresponds to 2 × ck ).
However, Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) work with plant-level data, which typically
exhibit a lower persistence of investment (in their dataset, the autocorrelation of in-
vestment at the plant-level is .058 relative to .483 in our sample). This is because
investment at the plant level is lumpier.
    Table 6 also compares the empirical moments targeted in the estimation with their
model counterparts. The model manages to match all moments accurately except for
the persistence of the productivity process: in the data, the persistence is estimated
at .81 while the model needs a lower persistence of .68 to match all the other moments
well. Apart from this persistence, the model can closely replicate three key moments
of the data: (1) the persistence of log-sales forecast errors, which characterizes the
degree of underreaction  , (2) the variance of log-sales forecast errors, and (3) the
relationship between changes in the capital stock and changes in sales forecast, which
characterizes the link between observed forecasts in the data and real decisions by the
firm. The model also matches closely the persistence in investment rates.


                                            20
3.5   Partial equilibrium counterfactual
In this section, we use our structural estimates to quantitatively compare average
corporate behavior for firms with rational managers (i.e. assuming  = 0) relative
to firms with managers that use distorted forecasts (i.e. assuming  = -.56). To
begin with, we do this in partial equilibrium, i.e. without clearing product and labor
markets.

   Investment conditional on TFP shocks

    In Figure 4, we first consider the case of capital expenditures. We start by simu-
lating a large dataset from the estimation obtained in Panel B of Table 6 (which uses
the entire set of firms in the sample). We then simulate a second dataset with the
same history of productivity shocks, but where managers are rational ( = 0) instead
of exhibiting underreaction. We then split each simulated sample into 20 vingitiles
of productivity innovations (it ) and report, for each of these bins, the average in-
vestment ratio kit+1 - (1- )kit
                      kit
                                for firms with rational managers (grey stars) and firms
with non-rational managers (dark circles). The role of underreaction is evident in
Figure 4: managers with distorted forecasts clearly underinvest when the productiv-
ity innovation it is large and overinvest when it is low. Quantitatively, this effect is
sizeable. For a productivity shock at the 75th percentile of the distribution, the av-
erage manager in the data underinvest by 10.01 % relative to a rational expectation
counterfactual. Symmetrically, for a productivity shock at the 25th percentile, the
inattentive manager overinvests by 16.72 % relative to a rational manager.

   Firm value conditional on TFP shocks

    While the distortions on investment policy observed in Figure 4 appear economi-
cally significant, we find smaller effect on firm value. Figure 5 repeats the exercise
in Figure 4, but computes average firm value instead of average investment ratios.
As expected, for a given productivity innovation it , the value of a firm with rational
forecasts is strictly larger than the value of a firm whose manager exhibits distorted
forecasts. However, this difference is quantitatively limited: on average, the value
of the rational firm is only 0.65 % larger than the value of the firm with distorted
forecasts. This finding remains similar whether or not we condition on the realized
TFP innovation (it ).
    A natural interpretation is that, in our setting, firms select their capital stock to
optimize their value without any additional constraints. As a result, at the optimum,


                                           21
first-order deviations in investment only have second-order effects on firm value. This
finding remains, of course, a quantitative result: larger distortions in forecasts (i.e. a
smaller  ) or more volatile productivity innovations (a larger  ) could well have re-
sulted in large implications for firm value. However, given the estimated parameters,
the effect is modest.


4     Aggregation
We nest the firm-level investment model of Section 3 into a general equilibrium
framework. This allows us to explore the aggregate cost induced by managers' dis-
torted forecasts.


4.1   Aggregation Setup
We consider a simple market structure following Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). There is
a continuum of intermediate input producers: at date t, firm i is a monopolist and
produces quantity yit of an intermediary input at price pit . These inputs are used in
the production of a final good. The final good market is perfectly competitive, and
aggregates intermediate inputs with a CES technology:
                                                             1
                                                             
                                                     
                                        Yt =        yit di       .                                   (11)
                                                i


The price of the final good is normalized to 1. Profit maximization in the final good
                                                                                        1-
                                                                    Yt
market implies that the demand for product i is given by: pit = y    it
                                                                          , where Yt
represents the aggregate level of output. There is a single labor market from which
all firms hire workers at the wage rate wt , which firms take as given. Households
                                                                                            1+ 1
                                                                                        w0 lt
have GHH preferences over leisure and consumption: u(ct , lt ) =                 ct -    1
                                                                                           1+ 1
                                                                                                   . As a
                                                                                        L0
                             wt
result, labor supply is L0   w0
                                    where is the constant labor supply elasticity.

    The firm-level model of investment of Section 3 can be nested into this framework.
Assume firm i production combines labor and capital with a Cobb-Douglas technology:
              1-
yit = Bezit kit lit . Log-productivity zit is stochastic and follows an AR(1) process:

                                                                     0       2   0
             zit = zit-1 +   it   + it with: ( it , it )  N              ,              ,
                                                                                 2
                                                                     0       0   


                                               22
where it is privately observed by the manager in period t - 1. In particular, we
assume no aggregate uncertainty so that aggregate output is constant Yt = Y and
the equilibrium wage on the labor market is also constant wt = w. Given that input
producers are monopolists, profit maximization with respect to pricing decisions (pit )
implies that firms' revenue exhibit decreasing returns to scale:

                                                     1-        
                               pit yit = Y 1- ezit kit lit        .
                                           =A   =eit


   Therefore, this model is equivalent to the baseline firm-level model discussed in
Section 3: A = Y 1- B  , it = zit , it =  it and it = it .

Definition 1. An equilibrium in this economy is defined by a pair (w, Y ) such that:
                                                          w
  1. The labor market is in equilibrium: Ls = L0          w0
                                                                  =        l di
                                                                          i it
                                                                                    = Ld .

  2. Total output is the sum of firm-level output: Y =            i
                                                                      pit yit di.

   Given a general equilibrium, aggregate TFP in this economy admits a simple ex-
pression:
                                           Y
                                 T F P =  1- .
                                         K L

4.2   Building Intuitions
Consider first the simplified setting of Section 3.3. There are no adjustment costs
(ck = 0) and no measurement error in sales forecast ( = 0). With these assumptions,
it is straightforward to show that aggregate TFP depends solely on the variance of
forecast errors:

                                                      
                         log(T F P ) = -        1+         Var [F Eit ]                      (12)
                                           2         1-
Proof. See Appendix A.3.

    This formula for aggregate TFP is reminiscent of Hsieh and Klenow (2009). In this
setting without adjustment costs, forecast errors made when investing are formally
equivalent to a wedge between the user cost of capital and the marginal productivity
of capital  pit yit
              kit
                    . When the log-sales forecast error turns out to be positive, the firm's
capital stock is too large relative to a completely frictionless benchmark where there
is no information friction, i.e. one where the firm is rational and observes productivity
when investing.

                                                23
   The productivity loss has two sources: the information friction (time to build) and
the deviation from rationality. It follows directly from Equation (12) that, in this
simple framework without adjustment costs, aggregate TFP losses due to distorted
forecasts depend solely on the increase in the variance of the log-sales forecast errors
due to the forecasting bias:

                                                       
 log T F P rational - log(T F P actual ) =       1+                  actual
                                                              Var F Eit              rational
                                                                            - Var F Eit
                                             2        1-
                                                                                   (13)
which is positive as the forecast error with bias has a bigger variance than the ratio-
nal forecast error. This comes from the fact that rational forecasts have the lowest
MSE.
   In particular, this last expression provides a natural bound for TFP losses due to
distorted forecasts:

      log T F P rational - log(T F P actual ) < log T F P perfect foresight - log(T F P actual )
                                                                             actual
                                                    1+             Var F Eit
                                                 2      1-

This bound is useful since it does not require the structural estimates in Table 6.
Given a variance of log-sales forecast error of .03, and our calibration for  and , we
see that, in this frictionless benchmark, TFP losses due to distorted forecasts can be
at most .38 × .03  1.15%. Given the relatively low variance of log-sales forecast errors
in the data, this frictionless benchmark already informs us about the limited scope
that distorted forecasts may exert on aggregate efficiency. The structural estimation
allows us to obtain a precise estimate.


4.3    TFP losses due to distorted forecasts
As we explained in Section 3.3, results in Table 3 reject the null hypothesis of no
adjustment costs. As a result, aggregate efficiency losses due to the forecasting bias
observed in the data need to be inferred from the model that includes quadratic ad-
justment costs to capital. Since this model does not admit closed-form solutions, we
proceed numerically. In Appendix A.4, we show a simple methodology to compute the
difference in aggregate log-TFP between the actual economy and the counterfactual
economy with rational expectations. In a first step, we can calculate the average cap-
ital stock (K  ) and the average sales Y  in an economy where w = Y = 1 and firms
long-term productivity is 0 (for all i, Vi = 0): this is easily done by simulating the


                                                 24
solution to the Bellman problem in Equation 8. In a second step, we can calculate the
same quantities for an economy where again, w = Y = 1 and Vi = 0 for all firms, but
                                                                            
where managers hold rational expectations: denote these quantities by (K0    , Y0 ). As
we show in Appendix A.4, aggregate TFP losses due to distorted forecasts are then
given by:


                                                            1 - (1 - )
    log(T F P0 ) - log(T F P ) = (log(K  ) - log(K0
                                                  
                                                    )) +               (log(Y0 ) - log(Y  )) (14)
                                                                  

     Quantitatively, we find that TFP losses due to biases in managerial forecasts are:

                           log(T F P rational ) - log(T F P actual ) = 0.10%

    These TFP losses are an order of magnitude smaller than the partial equilibrium
loss in value discussed in Section 3.5. Unsurprisingly, general equilibrium forces
dampen the effect of forecasting biases observed in partial equilibrium. Quantita-
tively, these general equilibrium effects are large and lead us to conclude that the
significant distortion on forecasting estimated in Table 6 have negligible implications
for aggregate efficiency.


5      Alternative calibration for  and 
In this section, we explore the robustness of our findings to alternative specification
of , the capital share in production, and , the price elasticity of demand. In our
baseline estimation,  is set to .33 and  is set to .8. We consider two sensitivity
analyses. First, we set  to .8, but let  vary from .2 to .5. Second, we set  to .33, but
let  vary from .6 to .9. For each alternative calibration, we re-estimate our model.
Note that a different calibration for  and  changes the model, but also the empirical
moments related to TFP: an alternative calibration leads to a different set of TFP
residuals, and therefore different estimates for   ^,  and V . Once the model are
re-estimated, we compute the partial equilibrium value loss from distorted forecasts,
in a similar fashion to what we did in Section 3.5. We also compute the general
equilibrium TFP losses from distorted forecasts, as we did in Section 4.3.
    We present the results graphically in Figure 6. The upper panel shows the partial
equilibrium value losses for alternative calibration of  and . As expected, these
value losses increase with , the share in production of the distorted inputs, and ,


                                                 25
the decreasing returns to scale in revenues. However, we also see that the magnitudes
of the estimated losses remain quantitatively similar to our baseline estimate. In our
baseline estimate, we estimated value losses of 0.54 %and TFP losses of 0.08 %. When
 is calibrated at .5 (large capital share), value losses are about 1% and TFP losses
about .15%. When  is calibrated at .9 (high degree of substitution across inputs in
final good production), value losses are about 2% and TFP losses about .12%.


6    Optimism, Pessimism and Underreaction
Column (1) and (3) of Table 4 documents strong persistence in log-sales forecast er-
rors. Our interpretation of this finding so far is that managers underrreact to news
about future TFP. However, this persistence could originate from a constant bias in
beliefs. Some managers may be over-optimistic, while others may be over-pessimistic
(e.g., Malmendier and Tate (2005), Landier and Thesmar (2009) or Ben-David et al.
(2013)). We entertain this possibility in Column (2) and (4) of Table 4. In these specifi-
cations, we control for firm fixed-effect. To avoid well-known biases in the estimation
of persistence in the presence of individual fixed-effects and small T (Nickell (1981)),
we restrict the sample to firms for which we observe at least 9 forecast errors and use
dynamic panel GMM (e.g. Arellano and Bover (1995)). The estimated AR(1) coeffi-
cient for log-sales forecast error remains statistically significant, but its magnitude
drop from about .3 to about .15. The estimation implies a volatility of fixed-effects in
managerial forecast errors of 7.6%.

   To estimate the economic magnitude of these findings, we augment the model in-
troduced in Section 3 to allow for a pessimism / optimism bias. Precisely, we assume
                                                                                     2
that firm i's manager perceives her long-term productivity to be bi , with bi  N (0, b )
and bi and Vi are assumed to be independent. The manager therefore perceives the
dynamics of  to be:
                                                                             
                 F                                                         2
              it  N (1 - ) (Vi + bi ) + it-1 + it +         it-1         ,           (15)
                                                        over/underreaction


   Introducing optimism / pessimism bi is formally equivalent to increasing the firm's
(perceived) long-term productivity by bi . As a result, the value and optimal invest-
ment policy of a manager with a fixed bias bi and long-term productivity Vi derives
directly from the value and investment policy of a firm with no bias (bi = 0) and a


                                           26
long-term productivity of 0 (Vi = 0). Let k  (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) be the optimal policy
function in this case and V (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) its optimal value. The optimal policy
function k i, (kit ; (it , it , it+1 )) of a firm with long-term productivity Vi and optimism /
pessimism bi can be expressed as:

                                               Vi +bi              kit
           k i, (kit ; (it , it , it+1 ) = e    1-      × k(       Vi +bi   ; (it - (Vi + bi ), it , it+1 ))   (16)
                                                               e    1-



    We use this equation to simulate data from a model where firms may have long-
                                      2                                                     2
term productivity Vi  N (0, V           ) and fixed pessimism / optimism bias bi  N (0, b     ).
Appendix A.5 shows precisely how to solve the model in this case.
    We take the extended model to the data. Our estimation procedure is similar
to the estimation described in Section 3.2, with two modifications. First, we use
             F Eit -F Eit-2 )
F E = Var(
         Var(F Eit -F Eit-1 )
                              to identify the persistence of log-sales forecast errors in the
presence of fixed belief biases. Second, we calculate VFE the variance of F Eit -    FE F Eit-1
                                                                                    1-F E
to identify the variance of the belief fixed-effects bi . We match these two moments, as
well the other six moments described in Section 3.2. Given the estimated parameters,
Appendix A.5 also shows how to compute aggregate TFP in this economy. Aggregate
TFP losses from distorted forecasts are then simply calculated by comparing aggre-
gate TFP in this economy with aggregate TFP in an economy with  = b = 0.
    Table 7 presents the results. The estimated structural parameters are mostly sim-
ilar to the ones estimated in Table 6, with one exception: the estimated  is now -.29
as opposed to -.56 in Panel B of Table 6. This result is not surprising: the estimated
persistence in forecast errors is smaller when we allow for firm fixed-effects (Table
4) so that the model naturally finds less under-reaction. However, the smaller esti-
mated value for  implies a large and significant dispersion for the variance of bi , the
pessimism/optimism bias that managers exhibit: the estimate for b is .049, which
implies that about 10% of the variance in forecast errors can be attributed to fixed
optimism/pessimism bias.
    The last line in Table 7 reports the TFP losses due to distortions in forecast in this
economy. We find that, relative to a rational expectation counterfactual (b = 0 =  ),
TFP in the actual economy is lower by .14%. This aggregate efficiency loss is close
to what we report in Table 6, Panel B (0.10 %): on the one hand, in this economy
with optimism/pessimism bias, managers exhibit under-react less to news about TFP,
which reduces the potential efficiency gains of rational expectations; on the other
hand, the existence of fixed biases in beliefs increase the distortions generated by
non-rational expectations. Overall, the potential aggregate TFP gains in this economy


                                                         27
have the same order of magnitude than in the economy where all the belief distortions
emanate from under-reaction.


7    Conclusion
This paper leverages unique survey data on managerial forecasts to explore the real
consequences of biases in managerial beliefs. We make three contributions. First, we
document pervasive and significant persistence in managerial forecast errors, consis-
tent with managerial inattention. Second, we estimate a quantitative model of firm
dynamics that accounts jointly for: (1) the dynamics of beliefs, and in particular, the
variance and persistence of forecast errors (2) the dynamics of productivity (3) the
link between investment and beliefs. The estimated model implies large deviations
from rational expectations and significant distortions in firm-level investment. How-
ever, the effect on firm value is limited. Finally, we nest this model in a standard
general equilibrium framework to assess the contribution of distortions in manage-
rial forecasts to aggregate inefficiency. Our quantitative analysis implies negligible
aggregate losses, despite significant distortions in firm-level forecasts.




                                          28
References
Akerlov, George and Janet Yellen, "Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make
 Significant Differences to EconomicEquilibria?," American Economic Review, 1985,
 75, 708­720.

Arellano, Manuel and Olympia Bover, "Another look at the instrumental variable
 estimation of error-components models," Journal of Econometrics, July 1995, 68 (1),
 29­51.

Barrero, Jose Maria, "The Micro and Macro Implications of Managers' Subjective
 Beliefs," Technical Report, Stanford 2018.

Ben-David, Itzhak, John Graham, and Campbell Harvey, "Managerial Miscali-
 bration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128, 1547­1584.

Bloom, Nicholas, Steven J. Davis, Lucia Foster, Brian Lucking, Scott
  Ohlmacher, and Itay Saporta-Eksten, "Business-Level Expectations and Un-
  certainty," Technical Report, Stanford December 2017.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, "Diagnostic expecta-
 tions and credit cycles," Journal of Finance, 2017.

  , , Rafael LaPorta, and Andrei Shleifer, "Diagnostic Expectations and Stock
  Returns," Journal of Finance, 2019, Forthcoming.

  , , Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, "Overreaction in Macroeconomic Expec-
  tations," Technical Report 2018.

Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, Philipp Krueger, Augustin Landier, and David
 Thesmar, "Sticky Expectations and the Profitability Anomaly," Forthcoming Jour-
 nal of Finance, 2018.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, "Information Rigidity and the Ex-
 pectations Formation Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts," American
 Economic Review, 2015.

Cooper, Russell W. and John C. Haltiwanger, "On the Nature of Capital Adjust-
 ment Costs," The Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (3), 611­633.

David, Joel and Venky Venkateswaran, "The Sources of Capital Misallocation,"
 American Economic Review, 2019.

                                        29
  , Hugo Hopenhayn, and Venky Venkateswaran, "Information, Misallocation,
  and Aggregate Productivity," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131, 943­1005.

Dixit, Avinash K and Joseph E Stiglitz, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
 Product Diversity," American Economic Review, June 1977, 67 (3), 297­308.

Edwards, W, "Conservatism in Human Information Processing," in B. Kleinmuntz
 (ed.), ed., Formal Representation of Human Judgment, Wiley, New York, 1968,
 pp. 17­52.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, "Expectations and invest-
 ment," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2016, 30 (1), 379­431.

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Steven Utkus,
 "Five Facts About Beliefs and Portfolios," Technical Report 2019.

Hassan, Tarek and Thomas Mertens, "The Social Cost of Near-Rational Invest-
 ment," American Economic Review, 2017, 107, 1059­1103.

Hayashi, Fumio, "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,"
 Econometrica, January 1982, 50 (1), 213­224.

Hirshleifer, David, Angie Low, and Siew-Hong Teoh, "Are Overconfident CEOs
 Better Innovators?," The Journal of Finance, 2012, 67 (4), 1457­1498.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
 China and India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009.

Landier, Augustin and David Thesmar, "Financial Contracting with Optimistic
 Entrepreneurs: Theory and Evidence," Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22, 117­
 150.

Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, "Stock Market Prices do not Follow Ran-
 dom Walks: Evidence from a Simple Specification Test," The Review of Financial
 Studies, 1988, 1 (1), 41­66.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoffrey Tate, "CEO Overconfidence and Corporate In-
 vestment," Journal of Finance, 2005, 60, 2661­2700.

   and Stefan Nagel, "Learning from Inflation Experiences," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2016, 131, 53­87.


                                        30
Nickell, Stephen, "Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects," Econometrica,
 1981, 49 (6), 1417­26.




                                     31
                                   FIGURES

                        Figure 1: Forecast Errors: Histogram




Note: This figure plots the distribution of log-sales forecast errors. The log-sales
forecast error is computed as the difference between realized sales in fiscal year t and
sales forecast for year t issued at the beginning of year t.



              Figure 2: Forecast Error Persistence: Binned Scatter Plot




Note: This figure is a binscatter plot of year t log-sales forecast error on year t - 1
log-sales forecast error.




                                          32
Figure 3: Numerical Comparative statics




                  33
                Figure 3: Numerical Comparative statics (continued)




Note: This table provides numerical comparative statics for our simulated model. For
                                                              2
each of the seven estimated parameters (ck , ,, , , , V         ), we compute the seven
                         2       2  2
simulated moments (, ,FE , FE ,V ,capex ,log(k)/ log(F) ) for values of the parameters
in the neighborhood of their estimated values (vertical dashed line). We report only
the parameter-moment pair for which variations in the parameter lead to non-zero
variations in simulated moments.




                                          34
          Figure 4: Firm Investment with Rational vs. Distorted Forecasts




Note: This figure uses the estimation of Table 6 to simulate investment for managers
using rational forecast (grey stars) or distorted forecasts (dark circles). We construct
20 vingitiles of date t TFP innovations (it ) and compute, for each of these bins, the
average investment ratio for both managers with rational forecasts ( = 0) and man-
agers with distorted forecasts ( set at its estimated value).




                                          35
             Figure 5: Firm Value with Rational vs. Distorted forecasts




Note: This figure uses the estimation of Table 6 to simulate firm value for managers
using distorted forecasts ( at its estimated value) relative to managers using ratio-
nal forecasts ( = 0). We construct 20 vingitiles of date t TFP innovations (it ) and
compute, for each of these bins, the average firm value of rational managers (white
triangles) and managers with distorted forecasts (grey circles).




                                         36
         Figure 6: TFP losses and Value Losses with alternative calibration




Note: the top panel computes value losses from distorted managerial forecasts for al-
ternative calibration of  and . The methodology to compute these losses is described
in Section 3.5. The bottom panel computes aggregate TFP losses from distorted man-
agerial forecasts for alternative calibration of  and . The methodology to compute
these losses is described in Section 4.3.




                                         37
                                                                    TABLES

                                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics
                Variable                                                             mean      p25     p50     p75      sd         N
                Panel A. Italian merged survey and accounts
                Firm forecast error (log actual sales(t) - log forecast(t--t-1))     -0.01    -0.09   -0.01    0.07    0.18     39,721
                Log sales                                                            10.07     8.95    9.88   11.04    1.57     39,721
                Log assets                                                           10.12     9.02    9.91   11.06    1.58     39,721
                Sales/l.assets                                                        1.14     0.71    1.02    1.42    0.66     39,285
                Capex/l.assets                                                        0.03     0.01    0.02    0.04    0.04     38,640
                Cash flow/l.assets                                                    0.07     0.03    0.06    0.10    0.07     38,791
                Panel B. Italian accounting data
                Log sales                                                             6.16    5.00    6.20     7.36    1.90   7,350,380
                Log assets                                                            6.09    4.93    6.10     7.28    1.86   8,261,704
                Sales/lassets                                                         1.24    0.34    1.00     1.73    1.21   8,164,493




38
                Capex/lassets                                                         0.02    0.00    0.01     0.03    0.03   7,650,925
                Cash flow/lassets                                                     0.05    0.00    0.04     0.10    0.12   7,953,679

     Note: Summary statistics. Panel A focuses on Italian firms for which sales forecasts were available from the Bank of Italy. Panel B produces
     the same descriptive statistics for the universe of Italian firms present in the Company Accounts Data System. Firm forecast error is the log
     difference between actual sales of fiscal year t and sales forecast at the beginning of year t. All variables are winsorized at the median +/- 5
     times the interquartile range.
                                                           Table 2: Predicting Actual Sales


                                                       salesit /assetsi,t-1                                                       log(salesit )
                               (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)             (9)                  (10)

                 salesit
      Fi,t-1   assetsi,t-1   0.974***    0.862***    0.854***    0.836***     0.822***      0.664***
                              (0.007)     (0.017)     (0.016)      (0.018)      (0.016)      (0.020)
      Log(Salesit-1 )                    0.139***    0.147***     0.159***     0.175***     0.141***
                                          (0.018)     (0.017)      (0.021)      (0.017)      (0.028)
      Log(Assetsit-1 )                  -0.136***   -0.145***    -0.158***    -0.173***    -0.289***
                                          (0.018)     (0.016)      (0.021)      (0.017)      (0.023)
      log(Ft-1 (Salest ))                                                                                0.999***      0.839***        0.564***          0.539***
                                                                                                          (0.001)       (0.015)         (0.039)           (0.030)
      log(Salest-1 )                                                                                                                   0.437***          0.461***
                                                                                                                                        (0.040)           (0.030)
      log(kt-1 )                                                                                                                         0.001             0.001
                                                                                                                                        (0.001)           (0.001)




39
      Fixed effects            No          No         Year       Industry     Ind-Year    Firm&Year        Year      Year&Firm      Industry,Year     Industry× Year
      Observations           37,317      37,315      37,315       37,315       37,153       37,261        39,721       39,667          35,682             35,552
      Adj R2                  0.90        0.90        0.91         0.91         0.91         0.93          0.99         0.99            0.99               0.99



     Note: This table presents regressions: salesit /assetsi,t-1 =  + Fi,t-1 [salesit /assetsi,t-1 ] + controlsi,t-1 + it , where salesit is sales of firm i
     in fiscal year t, Fi,t-1 salesit is beginning-of-year forecast of fiscal year t sales (normalized by lagged assets). Industry dummies are 2-digit
     industry dummies in Italian data. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year. ***, ** and * means statistically significant at the
     1%, 5% and 10% confidence level.
                       Table 3: Sales Forecasts and Capital Investment

                                                               Log kit

                                                   Manufacturing           All
                                                      Only                Firms
                                                       (1)                 (2)

                            log(Ft-1 (Salesit ))     0.366***            0.410***
                                                      (0.034)             (0.034)


                            Fixed effects           Firm & Year      Firm & Year

                            Observations              24,891             36,996
                            Adj R2                     0.92               0.93



Note: This table presents estimates of the following linear model: log kit = i + t +
log(k)/ log(F) log Fit-1 salesit + it . The dependent variable log kit is the log of capital (net tangible fixed
assts) at the end of year t while log Fi,t-1 salesit is the log of beginning-of-year forecast of fiscal year t
sales. Column (1) estimates log(k)/ log(F) on the sample of manufacturing firms. Column (2) estimates
log(k)/ log(F) for all firms in the sample. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year. ***, **
and * means statistically significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence level.




                                                      40
                             Table 4: Persistence of Forecast Errors
                                              Log-sales forecast error (F E it )
                                          Manufacturing              All firms
                                          (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)
                      F E it-1         0.289***     0.159***    0.321***     0.176***
                                        (0.021)      (0.015)     (0.017)      (0.014)


                      Year FE             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
                      Firm FE             No           Yes         No           Yes

                      Observations      23,458       14,255      34,001       19,744
                      Adj R2             0.11                     0.12



Note: This table presents estimation results for the following linear regression model: F E it = t +
F E F E it-1 + it , where F E it is the log-sales forecast error (log actual sales minus log sales forecast
made in first quarter of fiscal year t). Columns (1) and (3) only includes year fixed-effects. Columns
(2) and (4) add firm fixed-effects, and are estimated using dynamic panel GMM (Arellano and Bover
(1995)) on the sample of firms with at least 9 sales forecasts. Standard errors are double clustered by
firm and year. ***, ** and * means statistically significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence level.




                                                    41
                    Table 5: Persistence of Forecast Errors: by Firm Size

                                                                   Forecast error
                                                         Manufacturing           All firms
                                                         (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)

        Panel A: Firms with 20-49 employees
        Forecast error(t-1)                          0.265***    0.133***    0.284***    0.142***
                                                      (0.031)     (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.022)

        Observations                                     7,526     3,973      11,030       5,718
        Adj R2                                           0.09                  0.09

        Panel B: Firms with 50-99 employees
        Forecast error(t-1)                          0.296***    0.136***    0.308***    0.162***
                                                      (0.029)     (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.027)

        Observations                                     5,320     3,270       7,397       4,339
        Adj R2                                           0.11                  0.12

        Panel C: Firms with 100-199 employees
        Forecast error(t-1)                          0.312***    0.199***    0.336***    0.207***
                                                      (0.024)     (0.035)     (0.024)     (0.034)

        Observations                                     4,440     2,953       6,071       3,738
        Adj R2                                           0.14                  0.14

        Panel D: Firms with 200-500 employees
        Forecast error(t-1)                          0.303***    0.176***    0.356***    0.200***
                                                      (0.029)     (0.040)     (0.028)     (0.034)

        Observations                                     3,605     2,265       5,227       3,179
        Adj R2                                           0.14                  0.16

        Panel E: Firms with 501- employees
        Forecast error(t-1)                          0.312***    0.121***    0.407***    0.187***
                                                      (0.069)     (0.036)     (0.047)     (0.043)

        Observations                                     2,567     1,794       4,276       2,770
        Adj R2                                           0.15                  0.19

        Firm FE                                          No         Yes         No          Yes
        Year FE                                          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes


Note: This table presents estimation results for the following linear regression model: F E it = t +
 F E it-1 + it . Columns (1), (3) only includes year fixed-effects. Columns (2), (4) add firm fixed-effects,
and are estimated using dynamic panel GMM (Arellano and Bover (1995)) on the sample of firms with
at least 9 sales forecasts. Standard errors are double clustered by firm and year. Panel A (resp. B, C,
D, and E) estimates the model using only firms with 20-49 employees (resp. 50-99, 100-199, 200-500,
and more than 500). ***, ** and * means statistically significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence
levels.



                                                    42
                       Table 6: Structural Estimation: baseline estimate


 Panel A: Manufacturing firms
 Estimates:

                               ck                                                                            V

                             0.387        0.031        0.649      -0.509        0.077        0.091         0.515
                           ( 0.037)     ( 0.110)     ( 0.025)    ( 0.149)     ( 0.012)     ( 0.010)      ( 0.020)

 Moments:

                                           2                        2            2
                                                       FE           FE           V          capex      log(k)/ log(F)

 Data                       0.762         0.013       0.289        0.031        0.275        0.461        0.366
 Model                      0.650         0.013       0.289        0.031        0.284        0.476        0.400
 Difference                 0.112        -0.000      -0.000        0.000       -0.009       -0.015        -0.034

 Implied TFP loss:                                                  0.08 %

 Panel B: All firms
 Estimates:

                               ck                                                                            V

                             0.351        0.029        0.679      -0.563        0.074        0.087         0.591
                           ( 0.025)     ( 0.062)     ( 0.021)    ( 0.096)     ( 0.007)     ( 0.006)      ( 0.027)

 Moments:

                                           2                        2            2
                                                       FE           FE           V          capex      log(k)/ log(F)

 Data                       0.812         0.012       0.321        0.030        0.358        0.483        0.410
 Model                      0.681         0.012       0.324        0.030        0.372        0.498        0.448
 Difference                 0.131        -0.000      -0.003        0.000       -0.014       -0.016        -0.038

 Implied TFP loss:                                                  0.10 %


Note: Panel A focuses on firms in the manufacturing sector; Panel B uses all firms in the sample.  is
               it -
defined as Var(^
               it -
           Var(^
                   ^it-2 )
                   ^it-1 ) - 1, where 
                                                                                    2
                                      ^it is the TFP residual for firm i in year t. V is defined as Vari (Vi ) ,
              1   T   ^it -
                            ^it-1   2
where Vi = T      t=1     1-      .                      it - 
                                      is defined as Var (^     ^it-1 - (1 - )Vi ). F E is the persistence in
log-sales forecast error estimated in Column (1) and (3) of Table 4. F E 2 corresponds to the variance
of log-sales forecast errors net of year fixed-effects. capex corresponds to the autocorrelation coefficient
of investment ratios and is estimated using Equation (10). log(k)/ log(F) corresponds to the elasticity of
capital to sales forecast with firm fixed-effects and 43is estimated in Table 3. Standard error are com-
puted with the delta method, where we use the inverse of the covariance matrix of empirical moments,
clustered at the firm-level, as a weighting matrix.
                                    Table 7: Structural Estimation: including optimism/pessimism bias

                 Estimates:

                                                 ck                                                                                       V                  b

                                                0.366        0.030          0.697        -0.293           0.060        0.097            0.582             0.049
                                              ( 0.025)     ( 0.124)       ( 0.022)      ( 0.141)        ( 0.015)     ( 0.010)         ( 0.026)          ( 0.001)

                 Moments:

                                                               2                           2               2
                                                                            FE             FE              V           capex         log(k)/ log(F)         VFE

                 Data                          0.812         0.012         0.230          0.030           0.358        0.483           0.410              0.013
                 Model                         0.697         0.012         0.229          0.035           0.359        0.496           0.450              0.018
                 Difference                    0.115        -0.000         0.001         -0.005          -0.001       -0.014           -0.040            -0.005




44
                 Implied TFP loss:                                                                0.14 %


                                                                                     Var(^
                                                                                         it -^it-2 )                                                            2
     Note: The estimation uses all firms in the sample.  is defined as               Var(^
                                                                                         it -^it-1 )   - 1, where ^it is the TFP residual for firm i in year t. V is
                                          1     T   ^it - ^it-1     2                                                                                 Var(F Eit -F Eit-2 )
     defined as Vari (Vi ) , where Vi =   T     t=1     1-      .     is defined as Var (^
                                                                                         it - ^it-1 - (1 - )Vi ). F E is defined as                   Var(F Eit -F Eit-1 ) ,   where
                                                                                                               F Eit -FE F Eit-1
     F Eit is the log-sales forecast error of firm i in year t. VFE is the empirical variance of                                 .
                                                                                                                   F E 2 corresponds to the variance of
                                                                                                                     1-F E
     log-sales forecast errors net of year fixed-effects. capex corresponds to the autocorrelation coefficient of investment ratios and is estimated
     using Equation (10). log(k)/ log(F) corresponds to the elasticity of capital to sales forecast with firm fixed-effects and is estimated in Table 3.
     Standard error are computed with the delta method, where we use the inverse of the covariance matrix of empirical moments, clustered at
     the firm-level, as a weighting matrix.
         APPENDIX ­ FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION




A       Proofs
A.1     Proof for optimal investment decision
To simplify notations, we drop the (i,t) subscripts and simply use prime superscript for next period
variables. The Bellman problem of a firm with a long term productivity of 0 admits the following
representation:
                                                                                                2
                                                                              (k - (1 -  )k )
                 V (k ; , ,  )      =   max e   k  - (k - (1 -  )k ) - ck
                                         k                                           k
                                                     1
(17)                                            +       F [V (k ;  ,  ,  )|(, ,  )]
                                                    1+r

with:
                                                              2    2
                           F             +  +                                         F 2
                           N                             ,    2    2       and:   N (0,   )
                                           0                       
    Let k  (k ; , ,  ) be the optimal policy and V (k ; , ,  ) the resulting value.
    Consider now the Bellman problem for a firm with a persistent component Vi in productivity:

                                             z = (1 - )Vi + z +  + 

Let V i be the bellman value for this firm. This value admits the following representation:

                                                                                                 2
                                                                               (k - (1 -  )k )
                 V i (k ; z, ,  )   =   max e  z k  - (k - (1 -  )k ) - ck
                                         k                                            k
                                                     1
(18)                                            +       F V i (k ; z ,  ,  )|(z, ,  )
                                                    1+r

with:
                                                                   2   2
             z      F          (1 - )Vi + z +  +                                          F  2
                    N                                          ,   2   2        and:   N (0,   )
                                          0                            
    Define  = z - Vi . We can rewrite the Bellman problem for firm i as a function of  instead of z :
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                    (k - (1 -  )k )
           V i (k ;  + Vi , ,  )    =   max e  ( +Vi ) k  - (k - (1 -  )k ) - ck
                                         k                                                 k
                                                     1
(19)                                            +       F V i (k ;  + Vi ,  ,  )|(, ,  )
                                                    1+r

with:
                                                              2    2
                           F             +  +                                         F 2
                           N                             ,    2    2       and:   N (0,   )
                                           0                       

                                                         45
    We can rewrite this previous problem in a simpler fashion:
                                                                                    
                                             Vi                          k                            k                           k
V i (k ;  + Vi , ,  )       =   max e 1-               e                  Vi           -               Vi        - (1 -  )        Vi
                                k
                                                                     e   1-                       e   1-                     e 1-
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                  
                                                               k                                  k
                                                               Vi       - (1 -  )                  Vi
                                                            e 1-                                e 1-
                                                                                                                   1
                                             -ck                                                                 +    F V i (k ;  + Vi ,  ,  )|(, ,  )
                                                                                                                 
                                                                               k                                  1+r
                                                                               Vi
                                                                              e 1-

with:
                                                                                         2           2
                                F              +  +                                                                           F2
                                N                                               ,        2           2            and:   N (0,   )
                                                 0                                                   
    This last representation is equivalent to:
                                                                                
  V i (k ;  + Vi , ,  )                                                 k                            k                        k
               Vi               =      max         e                     Vi          -                Vi        - (1 -  )     Vi
                                         k
          e   1-                                                    e   1-                       e   1-                      e 1-
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                             
                                                       k                                   k
                                                       Vi          - (1 -  )               Vi
                                                   e 1-                                e 1-
                                                                                                               1              V i (k ;  + Vi ,  ,  )
                                       -ck                                                                   +                                                 |(, ,  )
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                  F                           Vi
                                                                         k                                    1+r                         e 1-
                                                                         Vi
                                                                     e 1-

with:
                                                                                         2           2
                                F              +  +                                                                           F2
                                N                                               ,        2           2            and:   N (0,   )
                                                 0                                                   
    It is clear from the previous equation that:
                                    Vi                 k                                                                          Vi           k
    Vi (k ;  + Vi , ,  ) = e 1- × V (                   Vi   ; , ,  ) and: ki
                                                                              (k ;  + Vi , ,  ) = e 1- × k (                                   Vi   ; , ,  )
                                                   e   1-                                                                                  e 1-
    Consider a history of shock (0 , 1 , 1 , 2 . . . , T , T +1 ). Let k (t = 0), k (t = 1), . . . , k (t = T ) be
the optimal sequence of capital for a firm with no long-term mean productivity Vi = 0. We show by
                  Vi               Vi                     Vi
induction that e 1- k (t = 0), e 1- k (t = 1), . . . , e 1- k (t = T ) is the optimal sequence of capital for the
firm with Vi .
                                    Vi
                     i
    Assume that: k     (t = 0) = e 1- k (t = 0). At date 1, the firm with Vi has exogenous state variables
                                                                                                 Vi                                                 Vi
                                         i            i
(1 + Vi , 1 , 2+1 ) at date 1, so that: k  (t = 1) = k  (e 1- k (t = 0); 1 + Vi , 1 , 2 ) = e 1- k (k (t =
                       Vi
0); 1 , 1 , 2 ) = e k (t = 1).
                      1-

    This result is useful for simulation purposes. To simulate the model in the presence of a long-
run component in TFP, we just need to simulate the optimal capital from the Bellman problem of a
firm with Vi = 0 and we can then simply calculate the optimal capital stock of a firm facing a similar
                                                          Vi
sequence of shocks by multiplying the capital stock by e 1-


A.2      Derivation of model moments
Our formulation of distorted expectations implies that:
                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                        1                                              
                    log Fit-1 e  it           =     ((1 - )Vi + (it-1 + it-1 ) + it ) +                                                       2
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                        2                                              




                                                                                46
Since kit is purchased at date t - 1, the date t-1 true forecast for date-t sales is:
                                                                           
                                   Fit-1 [pit yit ] =                           
                                                                   Fit-1 e  it kit
                                                        1 - (1 - )

So that the true log-sales forecast error at date t is:

                             F Eit      = log(pit yit ) - log (Fit-1 [pit yit ])
                                                                    
                                        =    it - log Fit-1 e  it
                                          
                                                                                            2
                                                                           1                    2
                                        = -    (it-1 ) +           it -                         
                                                                           2 

        1      22                                                
 it   -2          corresponds to rational expectation errors.-     (it-1 ) corresponds to expectation
errors due to managers' distorted forecasts.
    Accounting for mis-reporting of true forecasts, observed forecast errors are given by:

                          F E it    =    log(pit yit ) - log Fit-1 [pit yit ]
                                    =    log(pit yit ) - log (Fit-1 [pit yit ]) - it
                                                                                       2
                                                             1                             2
                                    = -      (it-1 ) +  it -                                 - it ,
                                                             2                   

where it is the "noise" introduced by managers in their reported forecasts.
   The variance of log-sales forecast errors in the data is therefore given by:
                                                                  2
                                                   2         
                                    Var[F E it ] =   +                (1 +  2 2 )2
                                                             
    The covariance of date-t and date-t-1 reported log-sales forecast errors writes:
                                                                             2
                                                                                 2
                                      Cov F E it , F E it-1 = -                  
                                                                        

    Distorted beliefs lead to persistence in forecast errors. An unusually large innovation it-1 implies
a positive forecast error today. For an agent over-weighting such unusually large realization (i.e.  > 0),
this large innovation means a high forecast for date t sales, which leads, on average, to a negative
forecast error at date t.
    A regression of reported log-sales forecast errors at date t on reported log-sales forecast errors at
date t - 1 leads to a regression coefficient F E :
                                                              2      2
                                                                 
                                        F E = -
                                                    2+       2
                                                               ((1 +  2 2 )2)



A.3     Proof of Equation 12
We first take capital as given, and maximize profit with respect to labor given wage. We obtain:
                                                                                                1-
                                                                                                  
                                                                  zit       (1 - )
                          EBITit = (1 - (1 - ))Y 1- e                   k
                                                                               w
    In the absence of adjustment costs to capital, the firm selects its capital stock kit at date t - 1 to




                                                            47
maximize date t profits. Given a user cost of capital R = r +  , this leads to the first-order condition:
                                                                
                                                             z
                                                          e it
                                                                                   
                                              pit yit                              
                                                      = R       zit
                                                                                   
                                               kit        Ft-1 e 
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                                                        1+it

    Time to build acts like a wedge it between the effective cost of capital and the frictionless cost of
capital. This wedge has a rational and a bias component. Given that the mean of z is zero and that the
TFP shocks z are normally distributed, the log-wedge is given by:
                                                 
                  log(1 + it ) =zit - ln Ft-1 e  zit = ln(pit yit ) - ln (Ft-1 [pit yit ]) = F Eit
                              
    In other words, the log-sales forecast error acts as a capital wedge for the firm. Based on this
observation, we know from Hsieh and Klenow (2009) that aggregate TFP depends solely on the wedge
dispersion, i.e. on the dispersion of the log-sales forecast errors.


A.4        Formulas for computing aggregate output and TFP
Write K  = i ki  
                  di the average capital in an economy with w = 1, Y = 1 and Vi = 0 for all i. Similarly,
let Y = i pi yi di be the average sale in this economy. K  and Y  can be found by solving the firm-level
      

problem described in Equation 17 assuming that A = w = 1.
     Recall that, in our general equilibrium model, the sale of firm i in an economy with aggregate
output Y is given by:10
                                                              1- 
                                        pit yit = Y 1- eit (kit lit ) ,
where it is the revenue productivity in our firm-level model. After labor optimization, given a wage w
on the labor market, firm i's sales at date t is simply:
                                                                                      
                             1-    Y (1-)                    e  Vi Y (1-)                                1-     
   pit yit = (1 - (1 - ))      
                                     1-      e  it kit
                                                    
                                                       =                 1-               (1 - (1 - ))        e  (it -Vi ) kit
                                                                                                                            
                                    w                                   w 
                                                                             
                                                                        =e  i

     Using the same proof as in Section A.1, it is direct to show that, for a firm with long-term produc-
tivity Vi and in an economy with aggregate output Y and wage w, the optimal capital stock for a firm i
is simply given by:
                                                       i
                                                           
                                              kit = e 1- kit ,
       
where kit is the capital stock chosen by a firm with a similar history of shocks (,  ) , a long-term
                                                                              Vi
                                                             i
                                                                             e 1- Y
productivity of Vi = 0 and w = Y = 1. Recall that e 1- =                  (1-)        .
                                                                         w 1-
                         
       Therefore, since kit is orthogonal to Vi , the aggregate capital stock is given by:

                                                     Y                  Vi
                                          K=         (1-)
                                                                     e 1- di K 
                                                 w     1-        i

    In a similar way, we can relate the sales of firm i, with long-term productivity Vi in the actual
economy (w, Y ), to the sales of a firm with a similar history of shocks (,  ), with long-term productivity
  10
       We omit the constant B for convenience, without loss of generality.




                                                            48
0 and in an economy with w = Y = 1:
                                                                       
                                       pit yit = e  i × e 1- i p    
                                                                it yit
                                                                  i
                                                            =e 1-

Therefore, since p    
                  it yit is orthogonal to Vi , we obtain a simple expression for the equilibrium wage:

                                             (1-)                     Vi
                                         w     1-   =             e 1- di Y 
                                                              i

    In the actual economy, firm i labor demand is simply:

                                                    (1 - )
                                          lit =                                pit yit
                                                       w

    Therefore, aggregate labor demand writes:

                                                        (1 - )
                                             Ld =                                Y
                                                           w

In equilibrium, labor supply equals labor demand:
                                             L0 1+
                                                w  = (1 - )Y
                                             w0

By substituting the equilibrium wage, one can derive an expression for aggregate output as a function
of Y  :                                                               -
                                                             (1+ ) (11
                                      L0             Vi              -)
                              Y =                 e 1- di Y 
                                  (1 - )w0      i

    We can similarly relate aggregate TFP to K  and Y  :
                                                                            
                                                             Vi            1-             1-(1-)
                                             1-
                        T F P = ((1 - ))                e   1-    di              (Y  )            (K  )-
                                                    i

                   ,0
    Let K0  = i ki    di be the average capital stock for rational firms with w = Y = 1 and Vi = 0, for all
                            ,0 ,0
i. Similarly, let Y0 = i pi   yi di be the average sales in this economy with rational firms. Aggregate
TFP in general equilibrium with rational firms is simply given by:
                                                                            
                                                             Vi            1-             1-(1-)
                                             1-
                        T F P0 = ((1 - ))               e   1-    di              (Y0 )               -
                                                                                                   (K0 )
                                                    i

    Therefore, the TFP loss due to distortion in forecasts can simply be expressed as:

                                                                                   1 - (1 - )
           log(T F P0 ) - log(T F P ) = (log(K  ) - log(K0
                                                         
                                                           )) +                               (log(Y0 ) - log(Y  ))
                                                                                         

A.5     Optimism / pessimism bias
Consider a firm with a fixed belief bi and a long-term productivity Vi , so that:
                                                                           F      2
             it = it-1 + (1 - )Vi + it + it and: it  N it-1 + (1 - ) (Vi + bi ) , 

    The firm's optimization problem admits the following Bellman representation:




                                                            49
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                    (k - (1 -  )k )
                  V i (k ; z, ,  )   =     max e  z k  - (k - (1 -  )k ) - ck
                                            k                                                              k
                                                         1
                                                    +       F V i (k ; z ,  ,  )|(z, ,  )
                                                        1+r

with:
                                                                                     2        2
             z    F         (1 - ) (Vi + bi ) + z +  +                                                                F
                                                                                                                      2
                  N                                                            ,     2        2          and:   N (0,   )
                                             0                                                

    Using the notations from Appendix A.1, it is direct to see that the optimal policy for this firm can
be expressed as a function of the optimal policy of a firm with bi = 0 and Vi = 0:

                               i
                                                               V i +b i                   k
                              k  (k ;  + Vi + bi , ,  ) = e     1-        × k (          Vi +bi   ; , ,  )
                                                                                     e    1-



    However, note that unlike in Appendix A.1, given a history of shock 0 , 1 , 1 , 2 . . . , T , T +1 ), the
capital stock of a firm with bi and Vi is not a constant multiple of the capital stock of the firm with
bi = 0 and Vi = 0. This is because if 1 is the productivity of the firm with bi = 0 and Vi = 0 at date 1,
the productivity of the firm with bi and Vi at date 1 is 1 + Vi , not 1 + Vi + bi .
    To numerically solve the model with a fixed bias in belief, we first find the optimal policy function
for a firm with no biased belief (bi = 0) and no long-run mean in productivity (Vi = 0), k (k ; , ,  ). We
then draw a history of shock (it , it )t , which allows us to calculate a history of actual TFP (it )t , with
it = it-1 + (1 - )Vi + it + it . We then calculate the optimal capital stock of the firm recursively
through:
                          i
                                                       Vi +bi    kit+1
                 kit+1 = k  (kit ; it , it , it+1 ) = e 1- × k ( Vi +bi ; it - Vi - bi , it , it+1 )
                                                                e 1-

   To calculate aggregate TFP in this economy, we use a similar approach to the one described in
Appendix A.4. We start by computing the average steady-state capital in the economy with w = 1,
Y = 1 and Vi = 0 for all i, but with  and b at their estimated value. Denote this steady state capital
by K  = i ki 
              di. Similarly, let Y  = i pi yi di be the average steady-state sales in this economy. Both
         
K and Y can be found by solving the model in the way described above.
   Recall that, in our general equilibrium model, the sale of firm i in an economy with aggregate
output Y is given by:11
                                                             1- 
                                       pit yit = Y 1- eit (kit lit ) ,
where it is the revenue productivity in our firm-level model. After labor optimization, given a wage w
on the labor market, firm i's sales at date t is simply:
                                                                                         
                             1-      Y (1-)                    e  Vi Y (1-)                                      1-         
    pit yit = (1 - (1 - ))                      e  it kit
                                                       
                                                          =                                       (1 - (1 - ))            e  (it -Vi ) kit
                                                                                                                                        
                                      w    1-
                                            
                                             
                                                                          w    1-
                                                                                
                                                                                  



                                                                               
                                                                          =e  i

    We now relate the optimal investment decision of firms in an economy with w = 1 = Y and Vi = 0
to that of an economy with arbitrary w and Y and a long-term mean in TFP Vi .
    Consider first the Bellman problem of the firm with long-term productivity of Vi = 0, bias (b) and
  11
       We omit the constant B for convenience, without loss of generality.




                                                              50
w = Y = 1:
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                      (k - (1 -  )k )
                       Vb (k ; , ,  )   =       max e   k  - (k - (1 -  )k ) - ck
                                                 k                                                                           k
                                                                  1
                                                             +       F [V (k ;  ,  ,  )|(, ,  )]
                                                                 1+r

with:
                                                                                            2           2
                       F          + (1 - )b +  +                                                                              F   2
                       N                                                            ,       2           2            and:   N (0,   ), and
                                          0                                                             

 = (1 - (1 - )).
         
   Let kb (k ; ,  ) be the optimal policy function of this problem. Consider now the problem of a firm
with the same bias b, but with w = 1, Y = 1 and Vi = 0:

                                                                                                                                            2
                                                     Y 1-                                                                   (k - (1 -  )k )
             Vbi (k ; z, ,  )    =      max              1-          e  z k  - (k - (1 -  )k ) - ck
                                        k            w                                                                             k
                                                          1
                                                 +           F V i (k ; z ,  ,  )|(z, ,  )
                                                         1+r

with:
                                                                                                        2        2
             z         F        (1 - ) (Vi + b) + z +  +                                                                               F 2
                       N                                                                        ,       2        2          and:   N (0,   )
                                                0                                                                

      Define  = z - Vi . We can rewrite the Bellman problem as a function of  instead of z :
                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                     Y 1-                                                                          (k - (1 -  )k )
        V i (k ;  + Vi , ,  )    =      max              1-          e  ( +Vi ) k  - (k - (1 -  )k ) - ck
                                         k           w                                                                                    k
                                                          1
                                                     +       F V i (k ;  + Vi ,  ,  )|(, ,  )
                                                         1+r

with:
                                                                                                 2          2
                           F          + (1 - )b +  +                                                                               F2
                           N                                                            ,        2          2          and:   N (0,   )
                                              0                                                             
      We can rewrite this previous problem in a simpler fashion:
                                                                              
                                            i                        k                              k                        k
V i (k ;  + Vi , ,  )      =    max e 1-         e                    i
                                                                                    -                i          - (1 -  )     i
                                 k
                                                                 e   1-                       e     1-                      e 1-
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                
                                                         k                                   k
                                                         i       - (1 -  )                   i
                                                     e 1-                                   e 1-
                                                                                                                  1
                                         -ck                                                                    +    F V i (k ;  + Vi ,  ,  )|(, ,  )
                                                                                                                
                                                                          k                                      1+r
                                                                            i
                                                                         e 1-

with:
                                                                                        2           2
                       F         + (1 - )b +  +                                                                               F 2
                       N                                                        ,       2           2              and:   N (0,   ), and:
                                         0                                                          
            Vi
  i
          e 1- Y
e 1- =    (1-)     .
         w 1-



                                                                           51
     This last representation is equivalent to:
                                                                     
 V i (k ;  + Vi , ,  )                                       k                             k                           k
              i              =    max       e                 i         -                   i        - (1 -  )          i
                                    k
         e   1-                                         e    1-                        e   1-                        e 1-
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                 
                                             k                                  k
                                              i       - (1 -  )                i
                                           e 1-                             e 1-
                                                                                                  1                    V i (k ;  + Vi ,  ,  )
                                  -ck                                                           +                                               |(, ,  )
                                                                                                
                                                                                                     F                              i
                                                              k                                  1+r                               e 1-
                                                            i
                                                         e 1-

with:
                                                                                           2         2
                     F              + (1 - )b +  +                                                                           F2
                     N                                                          ,          2         2           and:   N (0,   )
                                            0                                                        
     It is clear from this equation that:

                                     i,                             
                                                                        i                        k
                                    kb  (k ;  + Vi , ,  ) = e 1- × kb (                          i
                                                                                                      ; , ,  )
                                                                                               e 1-
    Consider a firm facing a history of shock (t , t ).
    It is direct to see from the previous result that for a firm with long-term productivity Vi , bias bi and
in an economy with aggregate output Y and wage w, the optimal capital stock is given by:
                                                                        i
                                                                         
                                                             kit = e 1- kit ,
        
where kit is the capital stock chosen by a firm with a similar history of shocks (it , it ), similar fore-
casting biases (bi and  ) but with a long-term productivity of Vi = 0, and w = Y = 1.
    We can show this result by induction. Consider a history of shocks (it , it )t . Assume that ki0 =
 i
      
e 1- kit . At date 1, if i1 is the productivity of the firm with Vi = 0, the productivity of the firm with Vi
is i1 + Vi . As a result, we know from our previous result that:


                                i,                                                     i
                                                                                                         ki0
                         ki1 = kb  (ki0 ; i1 + Vi , i1 , i2 )           =           e 1- × kb (           i
                                                                                                                ; i1 , 1i , i2 )
                                                                                                         e 1-
                                                                                       i
                                                                                             
                                                                        =           e 1- × kb (ki0 ; i1 , 1i , i2 )
                                                                                       i
                                                                                          
                                                                        =           e 1- ki1



    In a similar way, we can relate the sales of firm i, with long-term productivity Vi and bias bi in
the actual economy (w, Y ), to the sales of a firm with a similar history of shocks (,  ), with long-term
productivity 0 and in an economy with w = Y = 1:
                                                                                    
                                                 pit yit = e  i × e 1- i p    
                                                                          it yit
                                                                            i
                                                                     =e 1-

Therefore, since p    
                  it yit is orthogonal to Vi , we obtain a simple expression for the equilibrium wage:

                                                      (1-)                      Vi
                                                  w     1-       =          e 1- di Y 
                                                                        i

     In the actual economy, firm i labor demand is simply:

                                                                  (1 - )
                                                     lit =                             pit yit
                                                                     w


                                                                     52
   Therefore, aggregate labor demand writes:

                                                     (1 - )
                                          Ld =                            Y
                                                        w

In equilibrium, labor supply equals labor demand:
                                          L0 1+
                                             w  = (1 - )Y
                                          w0

By substituting the equilibrium wage, one can derive an expression for aggregate output as a function
of Y  :                                                                -
                                                              (1+ ) (11
                                      L0             Vi
                                                             
                                                                      -)
                              Y =                 e 1-  di Y
                                  (1 - )w0      i

   We can similarly relate aggregate TFP to K  and Y :
                                                                      
                                                          Vi         1-           1-(1-)
                                         1-
                       T F P = ((1 - ))              e   1-    di         (Y  )            (K  )-
                                                 i

   To calculate the TFP losses from distorted beliefs, we can simply simulate the model assuming
                                                                
 = b = 0, Y = w = 1 and V = 0, calculate the average capital K0  and sales Y0 in this economy, and
compute:

                                                                    1 - (1 - )
                 log(T F P ) =  (log(K  ) - log(K0
                                                 
                                                   )) +                        (log(Y0 ) - log(Y  ))
                                                                          




                                                         53
