                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             RISING BANK CONCENTRATION

                                        Dean Corbae
                                       Pablo D'Erasmo

                                     Working Paper 26838
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26838


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




The authors wish to thank the editors Bill Dupor and Miguel Faria-e-Castro, the discussant
Jochen Mankart, and Jean-Francois Houde for helpful comments. The views expressed in this
paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Rising Bank Concentration
Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo
NBER Working Paper No. 26838
March 2020
JEL No. E44,G21,L11,L13

                                         ABSTRACT

Concentration of insured deposit funding among the top four commercial banks in the U.S. has
risen from 15% in 1984 to 44% in 2018, a roughly three-fold increase. Regulation has often been
attributed as a factor in that increase. The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching
Efficiency Act of 1994 removed many of the restrictions on opening bank branches across state
lines. We interpret the Riegle-Neal act as lowering the cost of expanding a bank's funding base.
In this paper, we build an industry equilibrium model in which banks endogenously climb a
funding base ladder. Rising concentration occurs along a transition path between two steady
states after branching costs decline.


Dean Corbae
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
corbae@ssc.wisc.edu

Pablo D'Erasmo
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall, Philadelphia PA 19106
pabloderasmo@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Concentration of insured deposit funding in the U.S. has risen from 15% in 1984 to 44%
in 2018 (when measured as the fraction of deposits held at the top 4 banks relative to
deposits held at all U.S. bank holding companies), a roughly three-fold increase. Regulation
has often been attributed as a factor in that increase. The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking
and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 removed many of the restrictions on opening bank
branches across state lines imposed under the McFadden Act of 1927 and other laws that
attempted to address long-standing concerns about the concentration of financial activity.
We interpret the Riegle-Neal act as lowering the cost of expanding a bank's funding base.
More generally, the methods in our paper can be applied to any government regulation that
loosens or restricts the size of banks.1
    In this paper, we build an industry equilibrium model in which banks endogenously climb
a funding base ladder along the lines of Ericson and Pakes (1995).2 Specifically, a bank can
raise the mean size of its deposits at a cost. Idiosyncratic shocks to its deposits and to the
success of its loan portfolio lead to an endogenous size distribution of banks. The specific
method of (deposit) capacity accumulation we apply is due to Besanko and Doraszelski
(2004).3
    Our paper is related to the delegated monitoring model of Diamond (1984). Diamond
provides a framework where large banks arise to economize on the fixed costs of monitoring
individual borrowers more efficiently than a large number of small depositors. Economies of
scale in monitoring (decreasing average costs) induce size. The problem of monitoring the
monitor is also solved by size; large diversified banks can offer non-contingent (and hence
incentive compatible) deposit contracts. There are numerous empirical papers documenting
the existence of scale economies in banking such as Berger and Hannan (1998) or Berger and
Mester (1997).4 A large pool of depositors is also consistent with geographic diversification
as described in Liang and Rhoades (1988).
    Quantitative models of imperfect competition in the deposit market have been offered
by Aguirregabiria, Clark, and Wang (2016), Egan, Horta¸    csu, and Matvos (2017), Drechsler,
Savov, and Schnabl (2017) and Corbae and Levine (2019). In this paper we focus on imperfect
competition in the loan market as in Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019).5 To solve the model, we
use the computational methods in Weintraub, Benkard, and Van Roy (2008). In particular,
    1
     For instance, the proposal in Dodd-Frank to limit concentration is applicable.                      See
https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2014/06/11/proposed-dodd-frank-concentration-limit-on-financial-
institution-ma-transactions/
   2
     In our earlier paper Corbae and D'Erasmo (2013) we exogenously change the cost structure so that
banks can branch across two regions and examine the impact on competition in the loan market.
   3
     For an application of these methods to study the regulatory burden of the Dodd-Frank Act on small
banks see Liu (2019).
   4
     For a more recent paper, see Wheelock and Wilson (2018).
   5
     There is a strand of literature that focuses on dynamic general equilibrium models with a representative
bank under perfect competition in loan and deposit markets (e.g., Van den Heuvel (2008), Aliaga-D´        iaz
and Olivero (2012), and Begenau (2018)). There are several papers with a competitive banking sector which
induce a size distribution of banks (e.g. Mankart, Michaelides, and Pagratis (2015) and Rios Rull, Takamura,
and Terajima).


                                                     1
the approximation methods allow for there to be strategically important (dominant) banks.
We think of rising concentration as occurring along a transition path between two steady
states following a decline in branching costs.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes some aspects of the data that mo-
tivate our paper. Section 3 describes our environment while Section 4 describes the Markov
Perfect Equilibrium of our model. Section 5 describes the parameterization of the model.
Section 6 describes equilibrium properties of the model. Finally, Section 7 describes our main
experiment; we lower the cost of expanding a regional bank's funding base due, for exam-
ple, to a regulatory change like Riegle-Neal and quantify the change in bank concentration.
Section 8 provides directions for future research.


2       Data
As in Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019), we use data from the Consolidated Report of Condition
and Income (known as Call Reports) that insured banks in the U.S. submit to the Federal
Reserve each quarter.6
    As Figure 1 makes clear, the number of commercial banks in the U.S. has fallen from over
11,000 in 1984 to under 5000 in 2018 while the deposit market share of the top 4 banks has
grown from 15% in 1984 to 44% in 2018, a roughly three-fold increase. Another clear fact
from Figure 1 is that there was relative stability in those shares in the decades 1984-1993
and 2009-2018.
    Rising market shares of big banks motivates us to consider a model of the banking
industry that allows for imperfect competition. Furthermore, it allows us to understand
how regulatory policy may affect market structure as well as consider how market structure
influences risk taking behavior that regulators are attempting to mitigate.
    6
   Balance Sheet and Income Statements items can be found at https://cdr.ffiec.gov/public/. We group
commercial banks to the Bank Holding Company Level.




                                                 2
        Figure 1: Number of Banks and Bank Concentration (Top 4 Deposit Share)


             12000                                                                       60


             11000                                                                       53.75


             10000                                                                       47.5


              9000                                                                       41.25


              8000                                                                       35


              7000                                                                       28.75


              6000                                                                       22.5


              5000                                                                       16.25


              4000                                                                       10
                 1983   1987    1991    1995    1999   2003    2007    2011   2015    2019
                                                   year



Note: Number of Banks refers to the number of bank holding companies. Top 4 Deposit share refers to the
share of total deposits in the hands of the top 4 banks in the asset distribution. Source: Call Reports.


    As Figure 2 makes clear, exit by merger rose tremendously around the time of the Riegle-
Neal Act. That fact motivates the model in our paper. Rather than an explicit model of
the merger process, we take a more reduced form approach where a bank can pay a cost to
acquire a larger market share. The figure also makes clear that there was substantial exit
by failure during the financial crisis. That fact motivates us to include an exit choice in the
bank decision problem. The second round of consolidation apparent in the figure was due in
large part to the acquisition of unprofitable banks following the crisis by large banks.7
   7
    For the post-crisis consolidation see Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2017) and Kowalik et al.
(2015). Unlike Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019), here we do not include aggregate shocks since we think of the
regulatory reform as a long run change.




                                                   3
                                     Figure 2: Decomposition of Exit Rate (1984 - 2018)


                                7
                                                                                     Exit Rate
                                                                                     Exit by Merger
                                                                                     Exit by Failure
                                6



                                5
               Percentage (%)




                                4



                                3



                                2



                                1



                                0
                                    1985    1990     1995    2000     2005    2010           2015
                                                             year


Note: Exit Rate corresponds to the ratio of the number of discontinued bank charters to the total number
of banks. Exit by Merger refers to the ratio of those banks that exit and were targets of a merger to
total banks. Exit by Failure refers to the ratio of banks that failed (as classified by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation) to the total number of banks. Source: Call Reports and Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.


   In Figure 3, we show real (1984 dollar) deposit holdings of the largest 35 bank holding
companies at the midpoints of the 1984-1993 and 2009-2018 periods. The rising share of
the top 4 banks following Riegle-Neal is clearly evident. The rise of the top 4 in 2018 (JP
Morgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Citibank) came about in part by a string
of mergers. In particular, from 1989 to 1992, North Carolina National Bank acquired over
200 (small) banks and in 1992 changed its name to Nationsbank. In 1996, Chemical bought
Chase but kept the Chase name. In 1997, Norwest bought Wells Fargo (and took their name)
and Nationsbank bought Bank of America (and took their name). In 2000, Chase bought JP
Morgan (and added their name). These facts motivate our dynamic modeling of acquiring
capacity size as in Besanko and Doraszelski (2004).




                                                             4
                                        Figure 3: Deposit Distribution Pre- and Post-Reform



                                      Ranking 1989                                                        Ranking 2013
         40




                                                                          40
                  REPUBLIC NEW YORK CORPORATION                                    POPULAR, INC.
                  NATIONAL CITY CORPORATION                                        FIRST NIAGARA FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
                  FIRST WACHOVIA CORPORATION                                       FIRST REPUBLIC BANK
                  BANK OF TOKYO, LTD., THE                                         DEUTSCHE BANK TRUST CORPORATION
                  CONTINENTAL BANK CORPORATION                                     DISCOVER FINANCIAL SERVICES
         30




                                                                          30
                  NATWEST HOLDINGS INC.                                            ZIONS BANCORPORATION
                  CITIZENS AND SOUTHERN CORPORATION                                HUNTINGTON BANCSHARES INCORPORATED
                  MARINE MIDLAND BANKS, INC.                                       SANTANDER HOLDINGS USA, INC.
                  MIDLANTIC CORPORATION                                             ALLY FINANCIAL INC.
                  SOVRAN FINANCIAL CORPORATION                                      COMERICA INCORPORATED
                  SHAWMUT NATIONAL CORPORATION                                      BBVA COMPASS BANCSHARES, INC.
                  NBD BANCORP, INC.                                                 BANCWEST CORPORATION
                  FLEET/NORSTAR FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.                               GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC., THE
                  FIRST UNION CORPORATION                                           M&T BANK CORPORATION
       Rank




                                                                        Rank
                  MELLON BANK CORPORATION                                           BMO FINANCIAL CORP.
        20




                                                                         20
                  FIRST FIDELITY BANCORPORATION                                     KEYCORP
                  BARNETT BANKS, INC.                                                UNIONBANCAL CORPORATION
                  SUNTRUST BANKS, INC.                                               NORTHERN TRUST CORPORATION
                  BANK OF NEW ENGLAND CORPORATION                                    REGIONS FINANCIAL CORPORATION
                  BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORPORATION                                 RBS CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
                  BANK OF BOSTON CORPORATION                                          FIFTH THIRD BANCORP
                  BANC ONE CORPORATION                                                MORGAN STANLEY
                  PNC FINANCIAL CORP.                                                 HSBC NORTH AMERICA HOLDINGS INC.
                  FIRST CHICAGO CORPORATION                                            SUNTRUST BANKS, INC.
                  BANK OF NEW YORK COMPANY, INC., THE                                  BB&T CORPORATION
         10




                                                                          10




                  WELLS FARGO & COMPANY                                                  STATE STREET CORPORATION
                   J.P. MORGAN & CO. INCORPORATED                                         TD US P & C HOLDINGS ULC
                   MANUFACTURERS HANOVER CORPORATION                                       CAPITAL ONE FINANCIAL CORPORATION
                   FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORP                                                PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE
                   NCNB CORPORATION                                                         BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON CORPORATION, THE
                   CHEMICAL BANKING CORPORATION                                              U.S. BANCORP
                   SECURITY PACIFIC CORPORATION                                                                           CITIGROUP INC.
                    CHASE MANHATTAN CORPORATION                                                                                WELLS FARGO & COMPANY
                    BANKAMERICA CORPORATION                                                                                          BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION
                      CITICORP                                                                                                             JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.
         0




                                                                          0




              0                  500      1000        1500   2000              0                   500      1000        1500                               2000
                                   Deposits (Billions $)                                             Deposits (Billions $)



Note: Banks are ranked according to deposits. Deposits are in reported in real terms. Red bubbles identify
banks that end up in the Top 4 of the distribution post-reform (2013). Source: Call Reports.


    As in Diamond (1984), the motives to get bigger are increasing returns and diversification.
We follow the empirical literature in banking (and our previous work Corbae and D'Erasmo
(2019)) by estimating bank level costs.8 We focus on banks in the top 2% of the asset
distribution. Consistent with Figure 3, in the pre-reform period (1984-1993), we split the
sample into two groups, Top 35 (denoted 2 ) and the rest (i.e., the Top 36 - 2%, denoted
1 ). Banks in the 2 group are the large regional banks and most of them were still confined
to operate only in one state since in most states regulation prevented them from expanding
across state borders. In the post-reform period (2009-2018), we split the Top 35 group into
two groups and consider the Top 4 (denoted 3 ) separately from the Top 5-35 (denoted 2 ),
   8
       Appendix A-3 presents the details of the estimation.


                                                                    5
so we estimate the cost structure for three groups. Table 1 presents evidence that average
costs are decreasing in size pre- and post-reform. This is indirect evidence for increasing
returns.

                Table 1: Cost Structure by Bank Size (Pre and Post - Reform)

                   Pre-Reform Estimates (1984 - 1993)
                        Size Group                   Mg Net Exp           Fixed Cost
                   Data          Model Avg. Cost       c (  )/               f / 
                   Top 35          2        2.16         1.34                0.82
                   Top 36 - 2%      1       2.81         2.00                0.81
                   Post-Reform Estimates (2009 - 2018)
                        Size Group                   Mg Net Exp           Fixed Cost
                   Data          Model Avg. Cost       c (  )/               f / 
                   Top 4            3       1.24         0.61                0.63
                   Top 5 - 35      2        1.56         0.98                0.58
                   Top 36 - 2%     1        1.96         1.44                0.52

Note: We study banks in the top 2% of the asset distribution. We group all banks in the Top 35 for
the pre-reform period (these are primarily large regional banks by construction since regulation prevented
them to expand across state borders). For the post-reform period, we split this group and consider Top 4
separately from the Top 5-35. Estimates corresponds to (asset-weighted) averages across banks in a given
group. Source: Call Reports.


   One of the drivers of bank differences in our model is the capacity to capture depositors.
Using our panel of commercial banks in the U.S., we estimate how that process of deposits
evolves for bank holding companies of different sizes. We keep the same grouping convention
that we described above. After controlling for firm and year fixed effects as well as a time
trend, we estimate the following autoregressive process for log-deposits for bank j of type
  {1 , 2 , 3 } in period t:

                            log(dj           d     d     j         j
                                 ,t ) = (1 -  )d +  log(d,t-1 ) + u,t ,                               (1)

where dj                                                                             i
        ,t is the sum of deposits and other borrowings in period t for bank j , and u,t is iid
                       2
and distributed N (0, ,u ). Assuming the process is stationary, the variance of the deposit
                               
process is given by  = (1-(,u   d )2 )1/2 . Since this is a dynamic model we use the method
                                
proposed by Arellano and Bond (1991). Consistent with the evidence presented in Figure 1,
we estimate this process for the pre-reform period (1984-1993) and for the latest period in
our sample (2009-2018).
   Table 2 presents the results. Consistent with the diversification story in Diamond (1984),
we find that the variance of deposit inflows decrease as banks grow in size.




                                                    6
                               Table 2: Deposit Process Parameters


                 Size Group              Pre-Reform Estimates (1984 - 1993)
                                            ¯     ¯
                 Data              Model   ed     d            u,       
                                     2
                 Top 35                   1.00 1.00 0.806 0.123 0.208
                 Top 36 - 2%        1     0.12 0.88 0.830 0.140 0.250

                 Size Group              Post-Reform Estimates (2009            - 2018)
                                            ¯     ¯
                 Data              Model   ed     d           u,                   
                                     3
                 Top 4                    19.26 1.19 0.827 0.037                 0.066
                 Top 5 - 35         2     1.73 1.03 0.762 0.086                  0.132
                                     1
                 Top 36 - 2%             0.1956 0.91 0.738 0.106                 0.157

Note: We study banks in the top 2% of the asset distribution. We group all banks in the Top 35 (2 ) for the
pre-reform period (these are large regional banks by construction since regulation prevented them to expand
across state borders). For the post-reform period, we split this group and consider Top 4 (3 ) separately
from the Top 5-35 (2 ). Average deposits are normalized to 1 for the Top 35 group in the pre-reform period.
d is reported relative to this group.



3     Environment
Each period, banks intermediate between a unit mass of ex-ante identical entrepreneurs who
have a profitable project which needs to be funded (the potential borrowers) and a mass
H > 1 of identical, households (the potential depositors). Time is discrete and there is an
infinite horizon.

3.1     Households
Infinitely lived, risk neutral households with discount factor  are endowed with 1/H units
of the good each period. We assume households are sufficiently patient such that they
choose to exercise their savings opportunities. In particular, households have access to an
exogenous risk-free storage technology yielding 1+ r between any two periods with r  0 and
 (1 + r) = 1. They can also choose to supply their endowment to a bank or to an individual
borrower. If matched with a bank, a household who deposits its endowment there receives
 D
rt  whether the bank succeeds or fails since we assume deposit insurance. Households can
hold a fraction of the portfolio of bank stocks yielding dividends (claims to bank cash flows)
and can inject equity to banks. They pay lump-sum taxes/transfers t which include a lump-
sum tax tD used to cover deposit insurance for failing banks. Finally, if a household was to
match directly with an entrepreneur (i.e. directly fund an entrepreneur's project), it must
compete with bank loans. Hence, the household could not expect to receive more than the
bank lending rate rL in successful states and must pay a monitoring cost. Since households
can purchase claims to bank cash flows, and banks can more efficiently minimize costly

                                                    7
monitoring along the lines of Diamond (1984), there is no benefit to matching directly with
entrepreneurs. Finally, households make initial equity injections to fund entry by banks.

3.2    Entrepreneurs
Infinitely lived, risk neutral entrepreneurs demand bank loans in order to fund a new project
each period. Specifically, a project requires one unit of investment in period t and returns
next period:
                                   1 + Rt with prob p(Rt )
                                                                                          (2)
                                   1 - t with prob [1 - p(Rt )]
in the successful and unsuccessful states, respectively. That is, borrower gross returns are
given by 1 + Rt in the successful state and by 1 - t in the unsuccessful state where t is
the chargeoff rate. We assume that log(t )  N (µ ,  ) and it is i.i.d. across borrowers
and time. The success of a borrower's project, which occurs with probability p(Rt ), is
independent across borrowers and time conditional on the borrower's choice of technology
Rt  0.
     The entrepreneur can save aE,t+1  R+ with return r (i.e. the same storage technology as
households) and can choose how much of the project to finance with retained earnings It+1 
[0, 1]. We assume a parameterization such that the entrepreneur is sufficiently impatient that
she would not choose to undertake any of these alternatives. That is, the discount factor E
is sufficiently low such that entrepreneurs choose not to use retained earnings to finance their
projects, instead choosing to eat their earnings and fund projects which generate returns in
the following period using one period loans that require monitoring.
     As for the likelihood of success or failure, a borrower who chooses to run a project with
a higher return Rt has more risk of failure. Specifically, p(Rt ) is assumed to be decreasing
in Rt . Thus, the technology exhibits a risk-return trade-off. Further, since Rt is a choice
variable, project returns and failure rates are endogenously determined. While borrowers
are ex-ante identical, they are ex-post heterogeneous owing to the realizations of the shocks
to the return on their project. We envision borrowers either as firms choosing a technology
that might not succeed or households choosing a house that might appreciate or depreciate.
                                                                 L
     There is limited liability on the part of the borrower. If rt is the interest rate on a bank
                                                                     L
loan that the borrower faces, the borrower receives max{Rt - rt        , 0} in the successful state
and 0 in the failure state. Specifically, in the unsuccessful state he receives 1 -  which must
be relinquished to the lender. Table 3 summarizes the risk-return tradeoff that the borrower
faces if the cross-sectional distribution of banks is µt (that is described in detail below).




                                                8
                                Table 3: Borrower's Problem

                  Borrower Chooses Rt     Receive       Pay         Probability

                  Success                  1 + Rt    1 + rL (µt )     p(Rt )
                  Failure                  1-          1-           1 - p(Rt )




    Borrowers have an outside option (reservation utility) t  [,  ] drawn at the beginning
of the period from a cummulative distribution function (t ). These draws are i.i.d. over
time. We think of this outside option as an alternative source of external finance to the bank
loan.
    Both Rt and t are private information to the entrepreneur, as well as the history of past
borrowing and repayment by the entrepreneur (which provides the rationale for short term
bank loans). As in Bernanke and Gertler (1989), success or failure is also private information
to the entrepreneur unless the loan is monitored by the lender. With one period loans, since
                                                            L
reporting failure (and hence repayment of 1 -  < 1 + rt       ) is a dominant strategy in the
absence of monitoring, loans must be monitored. Monitoring is costly as in Diamond (1984).

3.3    Banks
We build a model along the lines of Ericson and Pakes (1995) where banks Cournot compete
in a single-good market (loans) and there is endogenous entry and exit. As in Diamond
(1984), banks exist in our environment to pool risk and economize on monitoring costs. We
assume there are 3 types of banks:    = {1 , 2 , 3 }. We will say that bank of type i+1
is bigger than bank i . In our application, we call banks of type 3 national, banks of type
2 regional, and banks of type 1 local. There can be multiple banks of each type operating
and banks of all types have some degree of market power.
    Each incumbent bank is assigned a unique positive integer-valued index j . As in Corbae
and D'Erasmo (2019), bank type  determines the mean and variance of a bank's deposits
d . In particular, banks in the model face the deposit process we estimated in equation (1).
To make our definition of type consistent with the data presented in Table 2, the mean of
the deposit process satisfies di+1 > di so that higher types have a bigger funding base.
Furthermore, also consistent with the data presented in Table 2, the variance of deposits
satisfy i+1  i so that bigger banks have lower variance consistent with diversification.
                                                             Nd
We discretize the deposit process so d  D = {d1   , . . . , d } and denote its transition matrix
by G (d,t+1 , d,t ). Unlike Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019), here deposits are the only source of
funding besides seasoned equity.
    Along the lines of Besanko and Doraszelski (2004), a given bank of type  can invest
,t  R+ to become a larger type bank (i.e., a small local bank can invest to become a
regional bank and a medium sized regional bank can invest to become a large national
bank). We think about this investment technology as a reduced form way of capturing

                                               9
mergers and acquisitions. In particular, we let di+1 = (di+1 - di ) > 0. The probability
that a bank of type t = i transitions to type t+1 is given by
                                                (1- )(di+1 )- ,t
                                            
                                                 1+(di+1 )- ,t
                                                                        if t+1 = i+1
                                            
                                                1- +(di+1 )- ,t
                   T t+1 |t = i , ,t =                                  if t+1 = i        ,            (3)
                                                  1+(di+1 )- ,t
                                                      
                                                                        if t+1 = i-1
                                            
                                                1+(di+1 )- ,t


where the parameters  > 0 and  > 0 measure the effectiveness of investment (at ,t = 0
to be precise).9 Investment in deposit capacity depends on the level of investment and the
size of the expected increase (captured by di+1 ). Clearly banks cannot move further down
from the lowest size so that
                                                     (d2 )- ,t
                                      1             1+(d2 )- ,t
                                                                       if t+1 = 2
                       T t+1 |t =  , ,t =               1
                                                                                                       (4)
                                                    1+(d2 )- ,t
                                                                       if t+1 = 1

and depending on the state of regulation, the highest size banks (either 2 with size (e.g.
branching) restrictions or 3 without size restrictions) cannot move higher so that
                                      
                                       1-+(di+1 )- ,t if  = i
                                           1+(di+1 )- ,t        t+1
                T t+1 |t = i , ,t =                                        .          (5)
                                                 
                                                     -
                                                1+(di+1 )
                                                             if t+1 = i-1
                                                                 ,t


    After the realization of t , a given incumbent bank is randomly matched with a set of
                                                                             D
potential household depositors d,t who receive deposit interest rate r,t        and then decide
how many loans to extend. When extending loans ,t , banks maximize profits and face a
capacity constraint ,t  d,t . If a bank chooses an amount of loans lower than its capacity
constraint (i.e., ,t < d,t ), the leftover deposits (i.e. a,t = d,t - ,t ) can be invested in the
same risk-free technology that the households have access to with return equal to r. Note
that since the outside option for a household matched with a bank is to store at rate r, we
        D
know r,t   r. Finally, there is a realization of charge-off rates t which are i.i.d. across time
and bank. Static profits (denoted  (t , dt , t ; µt )) for an incumbent bank of type t , with
deposits d,t , charge-off rate t in industry state µt (to be described below) are realized from
its lending ,t given by

           (t , d,t , t ; µt ) = pt rL (µt ) - (1 - pt )t   ,t
                                                                           D
                                                                 + ra,t - r,t d,t - c (   ,t )   - f   (6)

where pt denotes the fraction of loans that repay (an endogenous object that is consistent
with the borrower's problem), c ( ,t ) the marginal cost of extending ,t loans, and f the
fixed operating cost. Note that rL (µt ) depends on the distribution via the loan choice of
bank j and all its competitors.
    Given profits  (t , d,t , t ; µt ), banks can choose to exit. To keep the computation
of the model tractable, we also incorporate a type specific exogenous probability of exit
  9
      This specification nests Besanko and Doraszelski (2004) when  = 0.


                                                    10
x . If a bank decides to continue, it then decides how much to invest in order to im-
prove their capacity to collect deposits. Banks can finance investment with internal funds
( (t , d,t , t ; µt )) or by issuing equity e,t whenever ,t >  (t , d,t , t ; µt ). That is e,t =
max{,t -  (t , d,t , t ; µt ), 0}. Issuing equity is costly with cost function given by  (e,t ).
For tractability, unlike Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019), here we assume that banks cannot
retain earnings. Dividends net of equity injections are given by
            (t , d,t , t ; µt ) - ,t                                if  (t , d,t , t ; µt ) - ,t  0
D,t =
            (t , d,t , t ; µt ) - ,t -  (,t -  (t , d,t , t ; µt )) if  (t , d,t , t ; µ) - ,t < 0
The objective function of the bank is to maximize the expected present discounted value of
future dividends net of equity injections with discount factor  . It is important to note that
while deposits conditional on bank size (d,t ) are exogenous, external finance is endogenous
since bank size (t ) via investment (,t ) and seasoned equity (e,t ) are endogenous.
    We assume there is limited liability and that incumbent banks have the option to exit
after extending loans. The value of exiting is given by
max{0,  [1 + pt rL (µt ) - (1 - pt )t ]    ,t   - c (   ,t )
                                                                           D
                                                               - f - (1 + r,t )d,t +  (1 + r)(d,t -      ,t )},   (7)
where  captures the recovery rate of a bank's assets at the exit stage,
    We consider an entry process similar to Farias, Saure, and Weintraub (2012). At time
period t, there are a finite but large number of potential entrants. Each potential entrant is
assigned a unique positive integer-valued index j . Each period, potential entrants observe a
positive integer-valued cost t funded by an initial equity injection by households. Potential
entrants make entry decisions simultaneously. Entrants do not earn profits in the period
they decide to enter. They appear in the following period in state (t+1 = 1 , d1 ,t+1 ) (i.e.,
we assume that all entrants start as a small bank) where d1 ,t+1 is drawn from G1 (d1 ) the
invariant distribution associated with G1 (d1 ,t+1 , d1 ,t ).
    For each bank j , the timing of events is as follows:
                                    j
   1. At the beginning of period t, t and dj
                                           ,t are realized.

                j
   2. Loans     ,t   are chosen.
   3. The portfolio of performing and non-performing loans is drawn from pt and chargeoff
      rates j                                        j
            t are realized inducing a realization of  .

   4. Exit and entry choices are made.
   5. Investment j
                 ,t is chosen.

                                          j
   6. Dividends net of equity injections D,t are paid.
    In summary, the simple balance sheet of a bank in our environment is given by: book
assets equal loans ( ), storage (a), and fixed capital () while book liabilities equal deposits
(d) and the initial equity injection.10
  10
    In the call report data, we consider fixed capital () as "premises and fixed assets" as well as "intangible
assets".


                                                        11
3.4    Information
There is asymmetric information on the part of entrepreneurs (borrowers) and banks/households
(lenders). Only entrepreneurs know the riskiness of the project they choose (Rt ) and their
outside option (t ). Project success or failure is unobservable unless the project is moni-
tored. The history of past borrowing and repayment by the entrepreneur is also unobservable.
Other information is publicly observable.


4     Equilibrium
This section presents the equilibrium of the model. We start by describing the household
problem (which determines the supply of deposits and seasoned equity to banks) and the
entrepreneur problem (which determines the demand for bank loans) followed by the bank
problem.

4.1    Household's Problem
The problem of a representative household is
                                                                      
                                         max       j
                                                                 E0          t Ct           (8)
                            {Ct ,ah,t+1 ,dh,t+1 ,{St       
                                                    +1 }j }t=0        t=0

    subject to


                      Ct + ah,t+1 + dh,t+1 +             [Ptj + 1{e          j
                                                                  ^j =1} t ]St+1            (9)
                                                                      t
                                                     j
                      1            j
                  =     +        [D,t + Ptj ]Stj + (1 + r)ah,t + (1 + rt
                                                                       D
                                                                         )dh,t - t .
                      H      j


where Ptj and Stj+1 are the post-dividend stock price and stock holdings of bank j respectively,
1{·} is an indicator function that takes the value one if the argument {·} is true and zero
otherwise, and e^j
                 t = 1 denotes the entry decision of bank j in period t. Given exit and entry
decision rules, in cases in which a bank has exited, Ptj = 0 on the right-hand side of the
budget constraint, and, in cases in which a firm has entered, Ptj > 0 on the left hand side of
the budget constraint.
    The first order condition for Stj+1 for an incumbent bank j is:

                                      Ptj =  D,t
                                              j        j
                                                +1 + Pt+1 .                                (10)

We will derive the expression for the equilibrium price of a share after we present the bank's
problem.
    If banks offer the same interest rates on deposits as households can receive from their
                           D
storage opportunity (i.e. rt+1 = r ), then a household would be indifferent between matching


                                                     12
with a bank and using the autarkic storage technology. In that case, any household who is
matched with a bank would be willing to deposit at the insured bank. Furthermore, the first
order condition for saving in the form of deposits or storage technology implies  (1 + r) = 1,
which we assume parametrically.

4.2     Entrepreneur's Problem
                        L
Every period, given {rt   , t }, entrepreneurs choose whether (E,t = 1) or not (E,t = 0) to
operate the technology (E,t  {0, 1}) and if they do, they choose the type of technology to
operate Rt , whether to use retained earnings It+1  [0, 1] to internally finance the project, and
how much to save aE,t+1  R+ to maximize the expected discounted utility of consumption.
That is,
                                                                        
                                                                              t
                                            max                    E0         E CE,t         (11)
                               {CE,t ,aE,t+1 ,It+1 ,E,t ,Rt }t=0
                                                                        t=0

subject to
                                                                         L
          CE,t + aE,t+1 + It+1 = (1 - E,t )(t + It ) + E,t E (It , Rt ; rt ) + (1 + r)aE,t   (12)

where
                                               L          L
                        L         max{0, Rt - rt  + (1 + rt )It } with prob p(Rt )
          E (It , Rt ; rt )=                     L          L
                                  max{0, - - rt + (1 + rt )It } with prob 1 - p(Rt )

where CE,t  R+ is the entrepreneur's consumption.
   If mt is the multiplier on the non-negativity constraint on aE,t+1  0, the first order
condition for aE,t+1 is given by
                                   mt = 1 - E (1 + r).                               (13)
Since we assume a sufficiently impatient entrepreneur (i.e. E (1 + r) < 1), then aE,t+1 = 0.
Similarly, the entrepreneur chooses not to use retained earnings to fund the project (i.e.
                            L
It+1 = 0 provided E (1 + rt   ) < 1 (i.e. the bank loan is not too costly relative to current
consumption).
    If the entrepreneur undertakes the project, then an application of the envelope theorem
implies
                                              L
                                E (It , Rt ; rt )
                                        L
                                                  = -p(Rt ) < 0.                         (14)
                                     rt
Thus, participating borrowers are worse off the higher is the interest rate on loans. This
has implications for the demand for loans determined by the participation constraint. In
particular, since the demand for loans is given by
                                                     
                                Ld (rt
                                     L
                                       )=               1{t E (It ,Rt ;rt
                                                                        L )} d(t ),          (15)
                                                 0

                               Ld (rt
                                    L)
In that case, (14) implies      rt L     < 0. That is, the loan demand curve is downward sloping.

                                                            13
4.3      Incumbent Bank Problem
                                 j
Bank j 's individual state is (t   , dj
                                      ,t ), which lies in a finite set, while the industry state
is denoted µt , which is a counting measure. We will write an individual bank's problem
recursively, denoting a variable yt by y and yt+1 by y .
    As in Ericson and Pakes (1995)), we will be looking for a symmetric equilibrium in
the sense that all banks in the same individual state (i.e. (j , dj           k   k
                                                                        ) = ( , d )) are treated
identically. The cross-sectional distribution µt specifies the number of banks in each state
(, d )  { × D }. We let n denote the number of incumbent banks at time period t,
that is, n =     ,d µ(, d ). Further, the law of motion for the industry state is denoted
µ = H(µ, N ) where N e denotes the number of entrants and the transition function H is
              e

defined explicitly below.
    After being matched with d potential depositors and making them a take-it-or-leave-it
                     D
deposit rate offer r   , an incumbent bank of type  chooses loans in order to maximize
profits. Given the take-it-or-leave-it deposit rate offer and that the outside storage option
                                                   D
for a household is r, we know in equilibrium r        = r. After profits are realized, banks can
choose to exit setting x = 1 or choose to remain x = 0. When choosing its loan supply the
bank solves11
                             (, d ; µ) = arg max E [ (, d , ; µ)] .                         (16)
                                                  d
    Given that all banks have some degree of market power, a bank takes into account that
its loan supply affects the loan interest rate and that other banks will best respond to its
loan supply. The first order condition (of problem (16)) with respect to is

                   L                                 p R L                         drL
         E      pr - (1 - p) - c +               p +      (r + )                             -  = 0,        (17)
                                                     R rL                           d
                                                (+)
                       (+) or (-)                               (-)                (-)

where   0 represents the multiplier on the  d constraint. The first bracket represents
the marginal change in profits from extending an extra unit of loans. The second bracket
corresponds to the marginal change in profits due to a bank's influence on the interest
rate it faces. This term depends on the bank's market power. A change in interest rates
also endogenously affects the fraction of delinquent loans faced by banks (i.e. the term
 p R
R rL
         < 0). Given limited liability entrepreneurs take on more risk when their financing
costs rise.
                                                                            L
    It is important to note that changes in the loan interest rate (i.e. dr
                                                                          d
                                                                              ) in (17) are derived
                                        d L      s             d L
from the market clearing condition L (r ) = L (µ) where L (r ) is given above in (15) and
Ls (µt ) denotes the total supply of loans given by
                                     Ls (µ) =         t (, d ; µ)µ(, d ).                                   (18)
                                                ,d

    11               D
    Note that when r    = r and c (  ) is sufficiently small, then       = d will tend to hold in equilibrium and
equation (6) reduces to

                           (, d , ; µ) = prL (µ) - (1 - p) - r              - c (  ) - f .

.

                                                      14
For a given bank distribution µ(, d ), changes in the loan supply of a given bank have
a direct effect on the aggregate loan supply but also an indirect effect via changes in the
response of its competitors.
    After loans have been extended, the value of an incumbent bank in period t (i.e., at the
exit stage 4 in timing) is

                   V (, d , ; µ) = max      V x=0 (, d , ; µ), V x=1 (, d , ; µ)               (19)
                                   x{0,1}


where V x=1 (, d , ; µ) is defined in equation (7) and V x=0 (, d , ; µ) is given by

   V x=0 (, d , ; µ) = max  (, d , ; µ) -  - 1{              (,d ,;µ)-<0}   ·  ( -  (, d , ; µ))
                               

                             +x
                               E ,d , |d,, [V ( , d ,  ; µ )]                                  (20)

subject to the transition functions T ( |, ) and µ = H(µ, Ne ).

4.4    Bank Entry
The value of an entrant net of entry costs in the industry state µ is

                             V e (µ) = - + Ed , V (1 , d1 ,  ; µ ) .                           (21)

Recall that entrants do not operate in the period they enter and, consistent with the data,
they all start small (i.e., with  = 1 ). Potential entrants will decide to enter if V e (µ)  0.
The number of entrants N e is determined endogenously in equilibrium. Free entry implies
that

                                        V e (µ) × N e = 0.                                     (22)

That is, in equilibrium, either the value of entry is zero, the number of entrants is zero, or
both.

4.5    Evolution of the Cross-Sectional Bank Size Distribution
The distribution of banks evolves according to µ = H(µ, Ne ) where each component is given
by:

µ ( , d ) =            (1 - x(, d , ))(1 - x
                                            )T ( |, (, d , ))G (d , d )µ(, d )df () + N
                                                                                        e
                                                                                                     Ge (d1 )(23)
              ,d                                                                               d 1


where f () represents the cumulative distribution of  and Ge (d1 ) the distribution from
which deposits for entrants are drawn. Equation (23) makes clear how the law of motion
for the distribution of banks is affected by entry (N e ) and exit (x) decisions as well as the
accumulating size decision ().


                                                  15
4.6    Funding Deposit Insurance and Servicing Securities
The government collects lump-sum taxes (or pays transfers if negative) denoted  that cover
the cost of deposit insurance  D in the event of bank failure. Let post-liquidation net transfers
be given by

      (, d , ; µ) = (1 + rD )d -  [1 + prL (µ) - (1 - p)]             -  (1 + r)(d -   )


where   1 is the post-liquidation value of the bank's asset portfolio. Then aggregate taxes
are given by

 D (µ) · H =           (x(, d , ; µ) + (1 - x(, d , ))x
                                                       ) max{0, (, d , ; µ)}µ(, d )df () .(24)
               ,d   



4.7    Definition of Equilibrium
Given r, a pure strategy Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE) is a set of functions {aE , I , E , R}
describing entrepreneur (financing) behavior, {ah , dh , S } describing household (saving) be-
havior, { (, d), (, d, ), x(, d, ), e(µ)} describing loan, investment, exit and entry behav-
ior, a bank value function V (, d, ), a cross-sectional distribution of banks µ, a function
describing the number of entrants N e , a loan interest rate rL (µ), a deposit interest rate rD ,
stock prices P , and a tax function  D such that:

  1. Given rL and r, {aE , I , E , R} are consistent with entrepreneur optimization (11)-(12)
     inducing an aggregate loan demand function Ld (rL ) in (15).

  2. Given rD = r and P , {ah , dh , S } are consistent with household optimization (8)-(9)
     inducing a deposit matching process.

  3. Given the loan demand function and deposit matching process, { (, d), (, d, ), x(, d, )}
     and V (, d, ) are consistent with bank optimization (19)-(20) inducing an aggregate
     loan supply function defined in (18).

  4. The entry rule is consistent with entrant bank optimization (21) and the free-entry
     condition is satisfied (22).

  5. The law of motion for the industry state induces a sequence of cross-sectional distri-
     butions that are consistent with entry, exit, and investment decision rules in (23).

  6. The interest rate rL (µ) is such that the loan market clears. That is,

                                Ld (rL ) = Ls (µ) =        (, d; µ)µ(, d).
                                                      ,d


  7. Stock prices satisfy (10).

  8. Taxes/transfers  D (µ) cover the cost of deposit insurance in (24).

                                               16
5      Parameterization
A model period is one year. Our main source for bank level variables (and aggregates
derived from it) is the Consolidated Report of Condition and Income for Commercial Banks
(regularly called "call reports").12 We aggregate commercial bank level information to the
Bank Holding Company level. To solve the model, we use the computational methods in
Weintraub, Benkard, and Van Roy (2008).13 In particular, the approximation methods allow
for there to be strategically important (dominant) banks. We think of rising concentration
as occurring along a transition path between two stationary ergodic (long run average) bank
distributions following a decline in branching costs.
    Given the relative stability of deposit market shares prior to the passing of the Riegle-
Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act in 1994 evidenced in Figure 1, we
calibrate the model to an initial period from 1984 - 1993 where restrictions on opening bank
branches across state lines were in place. In this initial period, only transitions between
two types of banks {1 , 2 } are feasible since investing to transition into 3 is assumed to
be infinitely costly (due to branching regulation prior to its repeal in Riegle-Neal). We
identify these banks with local banks and large regional banks in the Top 2% of the asset
distribution. Specifically, in the pre-reform period, the top 2% corresponds to 190 banks on
average. Of these banks in the top 2%, we classify those in the Top 35 as 2 -type banks and
those in the Top 36-190 (i.e., the other 155 banks) as 1 -type banks. Parameters governing
the investment transition probability and the cost of extending loans are assumed to be type
and period specific. In the post-reform period, the top 2% banks in the asset distribution
correspond to 103 banks on average. Of these banks, we classify those in the Top 4 as 3 -type
banks, those in the Top 5-35 as 2 -type banks, and the rest (68 banks) as 1 -type banks.
Notably the number of banks in the top 2% fell by 45.79% consistent with the drop in the
total number of banks presented in Figure 1.
    We parameterize the stochastic process for the borrower's project as follows. For each
borrower, let s = a - bR + e , where e is iid (across agents and time) and drawn from
       2
N (0,    ). We define success to be the event that s > 0, so in states with higher e success is
more likely. Then

                                p(R) = 1 - Pr(s  0|R)
                                     = 1 - Pr (e  -a + bR)
                                     =  (a - bR) ,                                               (25)
                                                                                         2
where (x) is a normal cumulative distribution function with zero mean and variance         .
The stochastic process for the borrower outside option, ( ), is simply taken to be the
uniform distribution [0,  ]. To reduce the number of parameters to calibrate and since we
do not have enough information on the liquidation value of the assets of large banks (since
we do not observe liquidations in the largest category) we set  =  and calibrate  using
  12
     Source: FDIC, Call and Thrift Financial Reports, Balance Sheet and Income Statement
(http://www2.fdic.gov/hsob/SelectRpt.asp?EntryTyp=10). See Appendix A-2 for a description of the data.
  13
     Appendix A-1 describes the solution algorithm we use to approximate a Markov Perfect Equilibrium.



                                                 17
                                                                                     0    1
data from the FDIC. We parameterize the equity issuance cost function  (e ) = (        +    e )
                                                                           0     1 2
where e = max{0, -( -  )} and the cost of extending loans c (  ) = c  + c  .
    As part of the calibration exercise, we estimate transition probabilities between banks
of different sizes. In particular, we estimate transition matrices by counting the number of
banks in each bin-year and dividing by the total number of banks of each type in a given
year. We then take the time series average of the corresponding bin for each period. For
example, to compute the fraction of banks that remain in state 1 , we first count how many
1 banks in period t are still of type 1 in period t + 1. Let this number be Nt1,1 . Then,
                                1, 1
the value in T ^t ( |) equals Nt 1 where N 1 corresponds to all banks of type 1 in period t.
                               Nt          t

The reported value in Table 6 corresponds to the time-average of T  ^t ( |). The failure state
incorporates the transition to a bank outside the top 2%.
    Table 4 presents the parameters of the model and the targets that were used. We use
several moments from our panel of banks in the U.S., estimates in Table 6, and the estimates
of the deposit process presented in Table 2.




                                              18
                                           Table 4: Parameters

  Parameter                                         Value     Target
  Deposit Interest Rate (%)       rD                0.010     Avg Interest Expense Deposits
  Mean Charge Off Rate                              0.424     Avg Charge Off Rate
  Std. Dev Charge Off Rate                          0.199     Std Dev Charge Off Rate
  Exit Value Recovery                               0.804     Recovery Value Bank Failures (FDIC)
  Bank Discount Factor                              0.988     1/(1 + r)
  Measure Households              H                 270.0     Number of Banks Top 2%
  Borrower Success Prob. Function a                 4.291     Avg. Borrower Return
  Borrower Success Prob. Function b                 26.31     Avg. Default Frequency
  Borrower Success Prob. Function e                 0.107     Avg. Loan Interest Rate
  Outside Option                                    0.462     Elasticity of Loan Demand
  Cost Function Loans 1           c0
                                   1                0.012     Avg Net Mg Expense 1
  Cost Function Loans 1           c1
                                   1                0.050     Elasticiticy Mg Expense 1
  Fixed Cost 1                    f 1               0.001     Fixed Cost / Loans 1
  Cost Function Loans 2           c0
                                   2                0.009     Avg Net Mg Expense 2
                         2
  Cost Function Loans             c1
                                   2                0.005     Elasticiticy Mg Expense 2
               2
  Fixed Cost                      f 2               0.006     Fixed Cost / Loans 2
  Transition Probability Function                   50.00     Loan Market Share 1
  Transition Probability Function                   0.450     Fraction of Banks 1
  Transition Probability Function                   0.850     Transition 1 to 2
  Equity Issuance Costs 1          0
                                    1               0.001     Avg Equity Issuance 1
                           1       1
  Equity Issuance Costs             1               0.350     Fract 1 Banks Issue Equity
  Equity Issuance Costs 2          0
                                    2               0.020     Avg Equity Issuance 2
                           2       1
  Equity Issuance Costs           2                 0.350     Fract 2 Banks Issue Equity
  Exogenous Exit 1                x1                0.025     Transition 1 to exit
  Exogenous Exit 2                x2                0.000     Transition 2 to exit
  Entry Cost                                        0.092     Exit Rate
Note: The entry cost is set as part of the equilibrium selection. In particular, in the baseline case, the entry
cost is the one that satisfies the zero entry condition for the value of entrants N e that provides the best fit
 of the model. This entry cost is kept constant when running the main experiment presented in Section 7.



  Table 5 (first two columns) and Table 6 present a set of data moments together with their
model counterparts for the pre-reform period (i.e., the period used in the calibration).14
  14
    We discuss the post-reform moments in Table 5 when we present the results from our experiment in
Section 7.




                                                      19
                  Table 5: Data & Model Moments Pre and Post-reform

                                                   Pre-Reform    Post-Reform
             Moment (%)                           Data Model Data Model
             Charge - Off Rate                    1.08    0.81  1.15     0.63
             Avg. Borrower Return                12.94 15.18 12.94 15.20
             Avg. Default Frequency               3.16    1.84  2.94     1.41
             Loan Interest Rate                   6.42    6.64  3.13     4.29
             Elasticity of Loan Demand            -1.10   -0.75 -1.10   -0.39
             Avg Net Mg Expense 1                 2.00    2.03  1.44     1.62
             Avg Net Mg Expense 2                 1.34    1.31  0.98     0.89
             Fixed Cost / Loans 1                 0.81    0.82  0.52     0.44
             Fixed Cost / Loans 2                 0.82    0.85  0.58     0.67
             Loan Market Share 1                 34.00 45.23    9.82    11.43
             Fraction of Banks 1                 81.85 80.06 65.71 61.96
             Avg Equity Issuance 1                0.06    0.76  0.08     4.30
             Avg Equity Issuance 2                0.05    0.00  0.08     0.00
             Exit (Failure) Rate                  1.00    2.08  0.65     3.31
             Frac Banks Ei/Assets > 0 1          10.33 30.02    7.05    94.90
             Frac Banks Ei/Assets > 0 2          12.88    0.00  6.40     0.00
             Total Number of Banks               190.00 190.00 103.00 52.00
             Avg Net Mg Expense 3                   -       -   0.61     0.69
             Fixed Cost / Loans 3                   -       -   0.63     0.75
             Avg Cost 1                           2.81    2.85  1.96     2.06
             Avg Cost 2                           2.16    2.15  1.56     1.56
             Avg Cost 3                             -       -   1.24     1.44
             Fraction of Banks 2                 18.15 19.94 30.37 34.11
             Fraction of Banks 3                  0.00    0.00  3.92     3.92
             Deposit Market Share 1              35.67 45.22    9.27    10.67
             Deposit Market Share 2              64.33 54.77 36.59 38.24
             Deposit Market Share 3               0.00    0.00  54.14 51.09
             Loan Market Share 2                 66.00 54.77 37.76 40.95
             Loan Market Share 3                  0.00    0.00  52.42 47.62
             Avg. Net Interest Margin             4.77    5.27  4.43     3.74
             Number of Banks 1                   155.00 152.00 68.00 32.00
             Number of Banks 2                   35.00 38.00 31.00 18.00
             Number of Banks 3                    0.00          4.00     2.00
             Avg Div/Assets 1                     0.45    0.33  0.48     0.00
             Avg Div/Assets 2                     0.38    2.28  0.51     0.04
             Avg Div/Assets 3                       -       -   0.73     1.61
             Frac Banks Ei/Assets > 0 3             -       -   1.95     0.00
Note: Moments above the line in the "pre-reform" period correspond to calibration targets. All other
 moments in the pre-reform period are not targeted. Section 7 describes the main experiment and
                                      post-reform moments.

                                                20
   At the calibrated parameters, the transition probabilities for different values of investment
are those presented in Figure 4. Table 6 presents a comparison between the transition
probabilities in the data and those in the model when evaluated at the optimal investment.

                                          Figure 4: Transition Probabilities
                                                   1                                                  2
                              Transition at                                      Transition at
                  1                                                1

                0.9                                               0.9

                0.8                                               0.8
                                                         1                                                      1

                                                                                                                2
                0.7                                      2        0.7

                0.6                                               0.6

                0.5                                               0.5

                0.4                                               0.4

                0.3                                               0.3

                0.2                                               0.2

                0.1                                               0.1

                  0                                                0
                      0    0.05     0.1     0.15   0.2                  0     0.05     0.1   0.15         0.2
                                  investment (i)                                     investment (i)




                                                                  ^( |)
                             Table 6: Bank-Type Transition Matrix T

                                                  Data                             Model
                                          Pre - Reform Period               Pre - Reform Period
                                              (1984 - 1993)                     (1984 - 1993)
                                            1      2                         1      2
                                          t  +1   t +1  Failure             t +1   t +1   Failure
                                               
                          Entrant         1.00 0.00      0.00               1.00 0.00      0.00
                          t1
                                          0.96 0.01 0.03
                                               
                                                                            0.85 0.12      0.03
                          t2
                                          0.05 0.95 0.00                    0.44 0.55      0.00

Note:  denotes targeted moment. We study banks in the top 2% of the asset distribution. In the pre-reform
period, we group all banks in the Top 35 (2 ). These are large regional banks by construction since regulation
prevented them to expand across state borders.


   The model does a reasonable job in explaining some of the moments. The model under-
predicts the default frequency and to some extent the persistence of bank type. The model
overpredicts slightly the deposit and loan market share of small banks (1 ). It misses on


                                                             21
some of the equity issuance moments. The model does a good job in capturing the fraction
of small banks (1 ), the net interest margin, and the cost structure by bank size (i.e., the
model captures scale economies observed in the data since average costs are decreasing in
size).


6    Model Properties
In this section, we provide a description of the workings of the model for the calibration
discussed above. Banks of different types and at all deposit levels find it optimal to set
 (, d ) = d . This is because the estimated costs, which are in line with the increasing
returns observed in the data, are not large enough to induce banks to use less than the full
amount of available deposits. Figure 5 presents expected profits evaluated at the optimal
decision rules. It is clear that profits are increasing in bank type and deposits. The fact
that expected profits are increasing in deposits provides the incentive for banks to invest to
acquire a higher type state (i.e. a higher deposit base).


                           Figure 5: Expected Profits E [ (, d, )]

                 0.04


                0.035


                 0.03


                0.025
         E[ ]




                 0.02


                0.015


                 0.01


                0.005


                   0
                    0.4   0.6     0.8      1        1.2     1.4      1.6      1.8




    Figure 6 displays the realized profit function and Figure 7 displays the bank value func-
tion. As one would expect, properties of expected profits in Figure 5 induce the ordering
that realized profits and value functions are increasing in bank-type (conditional on ). Im-
portantly, realized profits are decreasing in charge-off rates . This fact accounts for exit in
the model (i.e. high charge-off banks are more likely to exit) as evident in Figure 8.


                                               22
                                    Figure 6: Realized Profits  (, d, )

        0.005
                               L
        0.004
                               M

        0.003                  H



        0.002

        0.001

            0
                         0.7       0.8    0.9        1       1.1         1.2     1.3       1.4         1.5         1.6



         0.05
                               L
         0.04
                               M

                               H
         0.03

         0.02

         0.01

            0
                   0.7         0.8        0.9            1         1.1         1.2         1.3         1.4             1.5




                               Figure 7: Bank Value Function V (, d, )

          0.1



        0.095



         0.09                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                                       H

        0.085
             0.6               0.8               1             1.2               1.4               1.6                     1.8



         0.18

         0.17

         0.16

         0.15

         0.14                                                                                                      L

                                                                                                                   M
         0.13
                                                                                                                   H

         0.12
            0.6          0.7        0.8    0.9           1     1.1         1.2       1.3         1.4         1.5           1.6




Figure 8 shows the exit decision rule. Small local banks (1 -type banks) exit for low

                                                             23
deposit levels when  is above its mean. However, when the charge-off rate is low, small
banks with high deposits (above its mean) choose to continue operating. Banks of 2 -type
choose not to exit for all levels of . It is important to note that this decision is driven
not only by realized profits but also by the expected charter value of the bank V (, d, ; µ)
displayed in Figure 7.


                                 Figure 8: Exit Decision Rule x(, d, )

               1
                                                                                            L

                                                                                            M

                                                                                            H
              0.5



               0
                          0.7    0.8   0.9   1       1.1         1.2     1.3   1.4   1.5   1.6



               1
                                                                                            L

                                                                                            M

                                                                                            H
              0.5



               0
                    0.7         0.8    0.9       1         1.1         1.2     1.3   1.4        1.5




   Figure 9 introduces the investment decision rule. Investment is, in general, slightly
decreasing in deposits for 1 banks, with banks at the low end of the deposit distribution
choosing to invest in order to grow. On the other hand, investment is increasing for 2 -type
banks which invest in order to maintain their larger deposit base. The difference derives
from the link between the marginal benefit of investment (as captured by how the expected
value of the bank E ,d , |d,, [V ( , d  ; µ )] changes with investment ) and the value of
deposits d . The marginal benefit of investment is decreasing in d for 1 banks while the
opposite is true for 2 banks. The intuition is simple. The smallest 1 banks benefit the
most from an increase in the likelihood of moving up in  and the largest 2 banks benefit
the most from increasing the probability of staying at the highest  = 2 .




                                                     24
                            Figure 9: Investment Decision Rule (, d, )

           0.012

             0.01                                                                           L

                                                                                            M
           0.008
                                                                                            H
           0.006

           0.004

           0.002

               0

           -0.002
                          0.7    0.8   0.9   1       1.1         1.2     1.3   1.4   1.5   1.6



           0.012

             0.01                 L

                                  M
           0.008
                                  H
           0.006

           0.004

           0.002

               0

           -0.002
                    0.7         0.8    0.9       1         1.1         1.2     1.3   1.4        1.5




    Figure 10 presents the resulting dividends net of equity injections (before equity costs)
for the bank ( (, d, ) - (, d, )) that corresponds to dividend payments when positive
and equity issuance when negative. This figure makes clear that, given profit levels, small
1 banks are willing to issue equity to attain their optimal level of investment while large 1
banks and 2 banks make enough profits to cover both investment and dividends. Table 5
(pre-reform period) also shows that this is consistent with the data.




                                                     25
            Figure 10: Dividends net of equity injections ( (, d, ) - (, d, ))

             0.01
                                 L

            0.005                M

                                 H

                0


            -0.005


             -0.01
                           0.7       0.8   0.9   1       1.1         1.2     1.3   1.4   1.5   1.6



             0.05
                                 L
             0.04
                                 M

                                 H
             0.03

             0.02

             0.01

                0
                     0.7         0.8       0.9       1         1.1         1.2     1.3   1.4     1.5




    Figure 11 presents the equilibrium ergodic distribution of banks for the pre-reform period.
As clear from the law of motion in equation (23), the exit decision rule in Figure 8 and the
investment decision rule in Figure 9 induce the long run distribution. The model generates
a fraction of banks of 1 -type that is close to the data (80.1% in the model vs 81.9% in the
data). Since all Figures 5 through 9 are normalized by mean deposits of each type of bank,
we present the distributions in Figure 11 normalized as well. If the figure was presented
on non-normalized deposits, the left tail of the distribution would entail the fraction of 1
banks which is increasing in deposit size and the right tail of the distribution would entail
the fraction of 2 banks which is decreasing in deposit size. In this way, the distribution
would appear bell shaped.




                                                         26
                                      Figure 11: Pre-Reform Distribution of Banks

                              0.3
                                        1

                                        2

                             0.25



                              0.2
            fraction banks




                             0.15



                              0.1



                             0.05



                               0
                                0.6     0.8       1        1.2       1.4      1.6       1.8




7      Rising Concentration Experiment
We calibrated the model to an initial (1984-1993) stationary ergodic equilibrium where re-
strictions on opening bank branches across state lines were in place. Specifically, we cali-
brated to an initial equilibrium where only transitions between two types of banks {1 , 2 }
are feasible since investing to transition into 3 is assumed to be infinitely costly (due to
branching regulations prior to its repeal in Riegle-Neal).
    Our experiment involves a second stationary ergodic equilibrium in which banks of three
types {1 , 2 , 3 } operate corresponding to the relatively stable period 2009-2018. In this
stationary ergodic equilibrium, we still have local and regional banks but we also incorporate
the possibility of transitioning into becoming a 3 -type bank which corresponds to large
national banks (Top 4). The experiment amounts to reducing the cost of investment so
transitioning into 3 is feasible (but we keep the values of ,  , and  unchanged) and we
also incorporate the observed changes in the cost structure of banks and the evolution of
deposits from the period 2009-2018.15
  15
    More specifically, we solve for a new stationary ergodic equilibrium of the model where the transition
function allows for movements between the three bank types. In addition, we adjust the cost parameters
{0  and f } to match the average net marginal expenses and fixed costs by bank type after the reform. We
set x according to values in Table 7. The parameters of the deposit process are set according to Table 2
(post-reform period) and r = 0.005 a small number as observed in the post-reform data. Equity issuance
costs parameters of 3 banks are set equal to those of 2 banks. All other parameters remain the same.
Table A.1 presents the set of parameters that change between the pre- and post-reform period.



                                                          27
    Since the parameters governing the transition function are independent of bank type and
the cost parameters are estimated "outside" the model, the resulting level of concentration in
the second stationary ergodic equilibrium is an endogenous object that we did not target.16
Below, we present a decomposition to show how much of the change in concentration can be
explained by changes in the distribution versus pure changes in the deposit process. We find
that approximately half of the change in concentration corresponds to endogenous changes
in the distribution. We then ask "how much of the untargeted observed increase in deposits
of the top 4 banks can the model generate?
    Table 5 (see Section 5) and 7 present a set of relevant moments from the data and the
model post-reform. Recall that the moments targeted in the calibration correspond only to
those above the line for the pre-reform period. In addition, for the post-reform period, we
also used as targets average net expenses and fixed costs. No moments in Table 7 are targeted
except for the transition into failure. Furthermore, the transition probabilities (as a function
of investment) post-reform are presented in Figure 12. The model moments presented in
Table 7 result from combining the function in Figure 12, the optimal investment decision
(Figure 15) and the ergodic distribution (Figure 13).


                                                              ^( |)
                         Table 7: Bank-Type Transition Matrix T

                                       Data                            Model
                              Post - Reform Period             Post - Reform Period
                                 (1994 - 2018)                    (1994 - 2018)
                            1      2      3                  1      2      3
                           t+1 t    +1   t +1 Failure       t+1 t    +1  t  +1 Failure
               Entrant     1.00 0.00 0.00      0.00         1.00 0.00 0.00      0.00
                1
               t           0.93 0.02 0.00      0.05         0.72 0.23 0.00      0.05
                2
               t           0.02 0.97 0.01      0.00         0.41 0.54 0.05      0.00
                3
               t           0.00 0.02 0.98      0.00         0.00 0.43 0.57      0.00

Note: We study banks in the top 2% of the asset distribution. For the post-reform period, we consider
Top 4 (3 ) separately from the Top 5-35 (2 ).  Note that the initial year of the post-reform period used
to estimate this matrix differs from that presented Table 5. The small number of bank types we consider
prevents us from using the 2008-2018 period and obtain a meaningful transition matrix.
  16
    Strictly speaking, since the average level of deposits post-reform is set to that observed in the data
and, as Table 2 shows, the average deposit for banks in the Top 35 increases between the pre-reform and
the post-reform, a fraction of the increase in concentration can be attributed to exogenous changes in the
deposit process. However, the distribution of banks is endogenous which in the end is what determines the
overall level of concentration.




                                                   28
                            Figure 12: Transition Probabilities Post- Reform

                                    1                                  2                                  3
                  Transition at                      Transition at                      Transition at
          1                                  1                                  1
                                                                           1                                  1

         0.9                                0.9                            2   0.9                            2
                                                                           3                                  3

         0.8                                0.8                                0.8
                                        1
         0.7                            2   0.7                                0.7
                                        3
         0.6                                0.6                                0.6


         0.5                                0.5                                0.5


         0.4                                0.4                                0.4


         0.3                                0.3                                0.3


         0.2                                0.2                                0.2


         0.1                                0.1                                0.1


          0                                  0                                  0
              0       0.1         0.2            0       0.1         0.2            0       0.1         0.2
                   investment (i)                     investment (i)                     investment (i)




    Table 5 shows that the model does a fairly good job predicting the actual increase in
concentration in the deposit and loan market in the stationary ergodic equilibrium associated
with the elimination of branching restrictions. After the reform, the deposit market share of
the Top 4 banks is 54.1% in the data versus 51.09% in the model. A similar result is observed
for the loan market (52.42% versus 47.62%, in the data and the model, respectively). Note
that while parameters of the deposit process are set so that the average size of a bank of
type 3 is that of a bank in the Top 4, the endogenous distribution of banks that results from
solving the model determines the untargeted market shares in the deposit and loan market.
As in the data, while there are many more small banks than large banks, the deposit and
loan market shares in the model are increasing in bank size. In addition, the number of banks
drops over time in our equilibrium (which indirectly mimics paying for an acquisition which
lowers competition). The drop is larger in the model (72.6%) than in the data (45.8%).
    Figure 13 presents the post-reform stationary ergodic (long-run average) equilibrium
distribution of banks. The model generates a fraction of banks that is decreasing in size as
we observe in the data. More specifically, the fraction of banks by bank type are 65.71%,
30.37%, and 3.92% in the data versus 61.96%, 34.11%, and 3.32% in the model, for banks
of type 1 , 2 , and 3 , respectively.




                                                         29
                                    Figure 13: Distribution Banks Post-reform

                           0.25
                                             1
                                             2

                                             3
                            0.2
          fraction banks




                           0.15




                            0.1




                           0.05




                             0
                              0.7   0.8     0.9      1        1.1    1.2        1.3   1.4




    What accounts for the change? We decompose the changes in the deposit market share
for the top 35 banks (2 -type pre-reform and 2 plus 3 -type banks post-reform) into what
can be explained by endogenous changes in the distribution and what is driven by changes in
the deposit and cost processes taken from the data. Without changes in the deposit processes
(i.e., the level of concentration that would arise by combining the pre-reform deposit levels
with the post-reform bank distribution), the market share of the Top 35 banks would have
increased from 64.3% to 75.8% as opposed to 89.3%. That is, endogenous changes explain
about 46.0% of the change in deposit market share of large banks. The post-reform deposit
market share of 2 and 3 banks is 38.2% and 51.1%. Without changes in the deposit process
these figures would have been 68.7% and 7.12%. That is, while changes in the distribution
help to generate the shift towards large banks (since many small banks disappear in the
post-reform period), the growth in the deposit base helps to explain the skewness observed
post-reform.
    There are some interesting differences in decision rules in the post-reform stationary
ergodic equilibrium. Figure 14 shows the loan decision rule. Importantly, since type 3
banks have such a large deposit base (i.e. from Table 2 the mean of the deposit process for
type 3 is more than double the size of that for type 2 banks), the monitoring costs c3 ( 3 )
of extending 3 = d3 loans is excessively high, so that type 3 set 3 < d3 (or equivalently
a3 > 0 at all levels of realized deposits).




                                                         30
                                        Figure 14: Loan Decision Rule (, d)
                                                                                                     2                                           3
                           Loan Decision Rule                           Loan Decision Rule                             Loan Decision Rule
                    0.28                                          2.3                                             22
                                           1                                                2                                            3
                                   loan(       )                                    loan(       )                                loan(       )
                                   d                                                d                                            d
                                                                  2.2
                    0.26                                                                                          21

                                                                  2.1


                    0.24                                                                                          20
                                                                   2


                                                                  1.9
                    0.22                                                                                          19
            loans




                                                          loans




                                                                                                          loans
                                                                  1.8

                     0.2                                                                                          18
                                                                  1.7


                                                                  1.6
                    0.18                                                                                          17


                                                                  1.5

                    0.16                                                                                          16
                                                                  1.4


                    0.14                                          1.3                                             15
                        0.15      0.2              0.25                 1.4   1.6   1.8         2   2.2            16       18           20      22
                               deposits (d)                                   deposits (d)                                  deposits (d)




    Figure 15 presents the investment decision rules. Investment is constant in d for banks
of type 1 and 3 and rises for banks of type 2 . Further, the 2 banks invest the most in
order to grow while 3 banks invest more than 1 in order to maintain their size.




                                                                                31
                          Figure 15: Investment Decision Rule (, d, )
                                                      investment ( 1 ,d,         )
             0.02
                                L
            0.015               M

                                H
             0.01

            0.005

               0
                          0.8           0.9              1                1.1                 1.2               1.3


                                                      investment ( 2 ,d,         )
             0.05
                            L
             0.04
                            M

             0.03           H


             0.02

             0.01

               0
                    0.8         0.85   0.9     0.95       1        1.05         1.1         1.15    1.2         1.25   1.3


                                                      investment ( 3 ,d,         )
             0.02

            0.015

             0.01
                                                                                                                       L
            0.005                                                                                                      M

                                                                                                                       H
               0
                      0.9               0.95                  1                      1.05                 1.1




    Figure 16 presents the resulting net cash flow for the bank ( (, d, ) - (, d, )) that
corresponds to dividend payments when positive and equity issuance when negative. Con-
sistent with the data, as Table 5 also shows, dividend payments post reform are increasing
in .




                                                              32
                       Figure 16: Net Cash Flow ( (, d, ) - (, d, ))

            -0.004
                             L

                             M
            -0.006           H




            -0.008



             -0.01
                           0.8           0.9           1               1.1              1.2               1.3


            0.005




                0
                                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                 H
            -0.005
                     0.8         0.85   0.9     0.95   1        1.05         1.1      1.15    1.2         1.25       1.3


             0.35

               0.3

             0.25

               0.2
                                                                                                                 L

             0.15                                                                                                M

                                                                                                                 H
               0.1
                       0.9               0.95              1                   1.05                 1.1




    Another interesting outcome of the experiment is that the model captures how changes
in monetary policy (here we think of them as changes in r) affects the interest rate on loans.
In this experiment, we have set r at 1.25% pre-reform and at 0.5% post-reform. Even though
there is a large increase in concentration, the model is consistent with the decline in loan
interest rates observed in the data. The loan interest rate goes from 6.4% to 3.13% in the
data and the model generates a decline from 6.6% to 4.3%.


8    Directions for Future Research
We modeled the incentive to grow (acquire a broader deposit base in the presence of in-
creasing returns) following a decrease in regulation in a simple dynamic model of imperfect
competition. Without targeting the rise in concentration, the model does incredibly well at
matching the observed concentration moments over the last decade. Our model can serve
as a framework to conduct policy counterfactuals to understand rising concentration in the
banking industry.
    To keep the analysis tractable, we made several simplifying assumptions which we hope to
address in future research. First, we assume there is no retained earnings by banks. Second,
we neglected the transition between the two steady states. Third, while a size ladder may
be a tractable reduced form way of modeling mergers, to match data we plan to explicitly
modeling the merger process in future work.




                                                           33
References
Aguirregabiria, Victor, Robert Clark, and Hui Wang. 2016. "Diversification of geographic
  risk in retail bank networks: evidence from bank expansion after the Riegle-Neal Act."
  The RAND Journal of Economics 47 (3):529­572.

Aliaga-D´iaz, Roger and Mar´ ia P´ia Olivero. 2012. "Do bank capital requirements amplify
  business cycles? bridging the gap between theory and empirics." Macroeconomic Dynamics
  16 (3):358­395.

Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond. 1991. "Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte
  Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations." The review of economic
  studies 58 (2):277­297.

Begenau, Juliane. 2018. "Capital requirements, risk choice, and liquidity provision in a
  business cycle model." Risk Choice, and Liquidity Provision in a Business Cycle Model
  (March 6, 2018) .

Berger, Allen N and Timothy H Hannan. 1998. "The efficiency cost of market power in the
  banking industry: A test of the "quiet life" and related hypotheses." Review of Economics
  and Statistics 80 (3):454­465.

Berger, Allen N, Leora F Klapper, and Rima Turk-Ariss. 2009. "Bank competition and
  financial stability." Journal of Financial Services Research 35 (2):99­118.

Berger, Allen N and Loretta J Mester. 1997. "Inside the black box: What explains differences
  in the efficiencies of financial institutions?" Journal of banking & finance 21 (7):895­947.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler. 1989. "Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations."
  American Economic Review 79 (1):14­31.

Besanko, David and Ulrich Doraszelski. 2004. "Capacity dynamics and endogenous asym-
  metries in firm size." RAND Journal of Economics :23­49.

Corbae, Dean and Pablo D'Erasmo. 2013. "A quantitative model of banking industry dy-
  namics." mimeo .

------. 2019. "Capital requirements in a quantitative model of banking industry dynamics."
  National Bureau of Economic Research .

Corbae, Dean and Ross Levine. 2019. "Competition, stability, and efficiency in the banking
  industry." mimeo .

Den Haan, Wouter J, Steven W Sumner, and Guy M Yamashiro. 2007. "Bank loan portfolios
  and the monetary transmission mechanism." Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (3):904­
  924.



                                             34
Diamond, Douglas W. 1984. "Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring." The
  review of economic studies 51 (3):393­414.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2017. "The Deposits Channel of Mon-
  etary Policy." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4):1819­1876.

Egan, Mark, Ali Horta¸  csu, and Gregor Matvos. 2017. "Deposit competition and financial
  fragility: Evidence from the us banking sector." American Economic Review 107 (1):169­
  216.

Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes. 1995. "Markov-perfect industry dynamics: A framework
  for empirical work." The Review of economic studies 62 (1):53­82.

Farias, Vivek, Denis Saure, and Gabriel Y Weintraub. 2012. "An approximate dynamic
  programming approach to solving dynamic oligopoly models." The RAND Journal of
  Economics 43 (2):253­282.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 2017. "Community Bank Mergers Since the Financial
  Crisis: How Acquired Community Banks Compared With Their Peers." FDIC Quarterly
  11 (4).

Kashyap, Anil K and Jeremy C Stein. 2000. "What do a million observations on banks say
 about the transmission of monetary policy?" American Economic Review 90 (3):407­428.

Kowalik, Michal, Troy Davig, Charles S Morris, Kristen Regehr et al. 2015. "Bank consol-
 idation and merger activity following the crisis." Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
 Economic Review 100 (1):31­49.

Liang, Nellie and Stephen A Rhoades. 1988. "Geographic diversification and risk in banking."
  Journal of Economics and Business 40 (4):271­284.

Liu, Kuan. 2019. "The Impact of the Dodd-Frank Act on Small U.S. Banks." mimeo .

Mankart, Jochen, Alexander Michaelides, and Spyros Pagratis. 2015. "Bank capital buffers
 in a dynamic model." Financial Management .

Rios Rull, Victor, Tamon Takamura, and Yaz Terajima. ???? "Banking Dynamics, Market
  Discipline, and Capital Regulations." mimeo, volume=, number=, pages=, year=2019 .

Van den Heuvel, Skander J. 2008. "The welfare cost of bank capital requirements." Journal
  of Monetary Economics 55 (2):298­320.

Weintraub, Gabriel Y, C Lanier Benkard, and Benjamin Van Roy. 2008. "Markov perfect
 industry dynamics with many firms." Econometrica 76 (6):1375­1411.

Wheelock, David C and Paul W Wilson. 2018. "The evolution of scale economies in US
 banking." Journal of Applied Econometrics 33 (1):16­28.


                                            35
Appendix
A-1       Solution Algorithm
The analysis of Markov-Perfect Equilibrium with imperfect competition is generally limited
to industries with just a few firms, less realistic than the number of banks we consider in
this paper. The main restriction is that since firms have market power their decision rules
are a function of the decision rules of all their competitors. Even if one were to restrict to
symmetric strategies in which decision rules become a function of the industry state, the
number of industry states to be considered becomes very large quickly. For this reason, we
solve the model following the approach in Weintraub, Benkard, and Van Roy (2008). The
algorithm approximates a Markov-perfect equilibrium by assuming that firms, at each time,
make decisions based on their own state and the long-run average industry state that prevails
in equilibrium. This reduces the computational cost considerably since firms' decision rules
are not explicitly a function of the sequence of industry states but rather a function of the
ergodic distribution. The results in Weintraub, Benkard, and Van Roy (2008) establish
conditions under which this approximation works well asymptotically.
    In short, the algorithm searches over an entry rate until the free entry condition is satisfied
(provided all other equilibrium conditions are met). More specifically, to find an equilibrium
we perform the following steps:

   1. Set tolerances ,  , x , and e to small values. Start with an entry rate N e,g where
      iteration g = 0 is an initial guess.

   2. Start with an investment decision rule h (, d, ) and an exit decision rule xh (, d, )
      where iteration h = 0 is an initial guess.

   3. Using N e,g , h (, d, ), and xh (, d, ) compute the long-run industry state µh (, d; N e,g ).


   4. Obtain an equilibrium in the loan market:
                                        k
      a. Guess a loan decision rule         (, d) where iteration k = 0 is an initial guess.
      b. For each {, d}, given that the industry state µh (, d; N e,g ) and k (, d) determines
         the residual loan supply function, obtain the best response k+1 (, d) by maximizing
         profits.
                            k+1              k
      c. Compute  =               (, d) -        (, d) .
      d. If  < , an equilibrium in the loan market has been found, continue to the next
         step. If not, return to step 4b with the updated loan decision rule k+1 (, d).

   5. Solve the bank problem to obtain investment and exit rules:

      a. For each {, d, }, solve the bank problem to obtain h+1 (, d, ) and xh+1 (, d, ).
      b. Using h+1 (, d, ) and xh+1 (, d, ), compute a new long-run industry state µj +1 (, d; N e,g ).


                                                     A.1
       c. Compute  = h+1 (, d, ) - h (, d, ) and x = xh+1 (, d, ) - xh (, d, ) .
       d. If  <  and x < x continue to the next step. If not, return to step 4b with the
          updated industry state µj +1 (, d; N e,g ).
   6. Obtain the value of an entrant V e (µj +1 ). If V e (µj +1 ) < e an equilibrium has been
      found. If not, return to step 3 with the updated entry rate N e,g+1 . The update of N e,g
      is done taking into account the value of V e (µj +1 ). If V e (µj +1 ) > 0, set N e,g+1 > N e,g .
      If V e (µj +1 ) < 0, set N e,g+1 < N e,g .
    While the algorithm just described has been proven to converge, we also experimented
with a slightly modified version where we evaluate the value of the entrant for many possible
values of the number of entrants (i.e., we compute points 1 through 5 for many N e ) and
define an equilibrium as one where the condition in point 6 is satisfied. This modified version
of the algorithm is more costly computationally but robust.


A-2        Data Description
As in Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019), we compile a large panel of banks from 1984 to 2018
using data for the last quarter of each year.17 The source for the data is the Consolidated
Report of Condition and Income (known as Call Reports) that banks submit to the Federal
Reserve each quarter.18 Report of Condition and Income data are available for all banks
regulated by the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the
Comptroller of the Currency. All financial data are on an individual bank basis.
     We consolidate individual commercial banks to the bank holding company level and retain
those bank holding companies and commercial banks (if there is not top holder) for which
the share of assets allocated to commercial banking (including depository trust companies,
credit card companies with commercial bank charters, private banks, development banks,
limited charter banks, and foreign banks) is higher than 25 percent. We follow Kashyap
and Stein (2000) and Den Haan, Sumner, and Yamashiro (2007) in constructing consistent
time series for our variables of interest. Finally, we only include banks located within the
fifty states and the District of Columbia. In addition to information from the Call Reports,
we identify bank failures using public data from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-
tion (FDIC).19 We also identify mergers and acquisitions using the Transformation Table
in https://www.ffiec.gov/npw/FinancialReport/DataDownload. We identify "events" where
the acquired and acquiring firms are commonly owned in some form before the acquisition
(i.e., the listed merger is only a corporate reorganization) and discard these events from the
merger sample.
     To deflate balance sheet and income statement variables we use the CPI index. When
we report weighted aggregate time series we use the asset market share as the weight. To
  17
     There was a major overhaul to the Call Report format in 1984. Since 1984 banks are, in general, required
to provide more detailed data concerning assets and liabilities. Due to changes in definitions and the creation
of new variables after 1984, some of the variables are only available after this date.
  18
     Balance Sheet and Income Statements items can be found at https://cdr.ffiec.gov/public/.
  19
     Data is available at https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html.


                                                     A.2
control for the effect of a small number of outliers, when constructing the loan returns, cost
of funds, charge offs rates and related series we eliminate observations in the top and bottom
1% of the distribution of each variable. We also control for the effects of bank entry, exit
and mergers by not considering the initial period, the final period or the merger period (if
relevant) of any given bank.


A-3         Cost Estimation
We estimate the marginal cost of producing a loan c ( ,t ) and the fixed cost  following the
empirical literature on banking (see, for example, Berger, Klapper, and Turk-Ariss (2009)).20
The marginal cost is derived from an estimate of marginal net expenses that is defined to be
marginal non-interest expenses net of marginal non-interest income. Marginal non-interest
expenses for bank j are derived from the following trans-log cost function:
       log(N IEtj ) = g1 log(wt
                              j
                                ) + h1 log( j                 j             j 2
                                              t ) + g2 log(qt ) + g3 log(wt )                (A.3.1)
                      +h2 [log( t )] + g4 log(qt ) + h3 log( t ) log(qt ) + h4 log( t ) log(Wtj )
                                 j 2              j 2            j        j         j

                                j
                      +g5 log(qt  ) log(Wtj ) + g6 1      2 2
                                                     t + g6             j
                                                            t + g8,t + g9 + j t,
            j
where N IE,t   is Non-interest expenses (calculated as total expenses minus the interest ex-
pense on deposits, the interest expense on federal funds purchased, and expenses on premises
                    j
and fixed assets), g9 is a bank fixed effect, Wtj corresponds to input prices (labor expenses),
 j                                                                  j
 t corresponds to real loans (one of the two bank j 's outputs), qt represents safe securities
(the second bank output), the t regressor refers to a time trend, and k8,t refers to time fixed
effects. We estimate this equation by panel fixed effects with robust standard errors clustered
by bank.21 Non-interest marginal expenses are then computed as:
                           N IEtj   N IEtj
   Mg Non-Int Exp.            j   =    j   h1 + 2h2 log( j                            j
                                                         t ) + h3 log(qjt ) + h4 log(wt ) .(A.3.2)
                            t          t

Marginal non-interest income (Mg Non-Int Inc.) is estimated using an equation similar to
equation (A.3.1) (without input prices) where the left hand side corresponds to total non-
interest income. Net marginal expenses (Mg Net Exp.) are computed as the difference
between marginal non-interest expenses and marginal non-interest income. The fixed cost
 is estimated as the total cost on expenses of premises and fixed assets. Table 1 presents
the estimated average net expense, the fixed cost, as well as the average cost by bank size.


A-4         Pre and Post Reform Parameters
When running the post-reform experiment, we solve for a new stationary ergodic equilibrium
of the model where the transition function allows for movements between the three bank
  20
     The marginal cost estimated is also used to compute our measure of Markups and the Lerner Index.
  21
     We eliminate bank-year observations in which the bank organization is involved in a merger or the bank
is flagged as being an entrant or a failing bank. We only use banks with three or more observations in the
sample.


                                                   A.3
types. We adjust the cost parameters {0      and f } to match the average net marginal
expenses and fixed costs by bank type after the reform. We set x     according to values in
Table 7. The deposit interest rate r = 0.005 is set to the smallest number that allowed us
to solve the model (the value of the real return on the deposits for the post-reform period
equals -1.34%). Equity issuance cost parameters of 3 banks are set equal to those of 2
banks. All other parameters remain the same. The parameters of the deposit process are
set according to Table 2 (post-reform period). Table A.1 presents the set of parameters that
change or are added in the post-reform period (except those already displayed in Table 2).


                       Table A.1: Pre and Post Reform Parameters

          Parameter                                   Pre-Reform Post Reform
          Deposit Interest Rate (%)   r = rD             0.013      0.005
          Bank Discount Factor       = (1 + r)-1         0.988      0.995
          Cost Function Loans 1         c0
                                         1               0.012     0.0045
          Fixed Cost 1                  f 1              0.001      0.001
          Cost Function Loans 2         c0
                                         2               0.009      0.001
          Fixed Cost 2                  f 2              0.006      0.010
          Exogenous Exit 1              x1               0.025      0.051
                                3
          Cost Function Loans           c0
                                         3                 -       0.0061
          Cost Function Loans 3         c1
                                         3                 -       0.0001
          Fixed Cost 3                  f 3                -        0.114
          Equity Issuance Costs 3        0
                                          3                -        0.020
                                  3      1
          Equity Issuance Costs         3                  -        0.350
          Exogenous Exit 3              x3                 -        0.000




                                            A.4
