                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GENDER ROLES AND THE GENDER EXPECTATIONS GAP

                                      Francesco D'Acunto
                                       Ulrike Malmendier
                                        Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 26837
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26837


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank Johannes Hermle for excellent research assistance. We also thank Shannon Hazlett and
Victoria Stevens at Nielsen for their assistance with the collection of the PanelViews Survey. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the University of Chicago Booth School of
Business and the Fama--Miller Center for Research in Finance to run the surveys. We also thank
Klaus Adam, Sumit Agarwal, Andreas Fuster, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Chris Roth, Giorgio Topa,
Johannes Wohlfart, and conference and seminar participants at the NBER Behavioral Finance,
the NBER Corporate Finance, the 2019 SITE workshop, the Cleveland Fed Conference on
Inflation, Boston College, and the University of Chicago for valuable comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Francesco D'Acunto, Ulrike Malmendier, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender Roles and the Gender Expectations Gap
Francesco D'Acunto, Ulrike Malmendier, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 26837
March 2020
JEL No. C90,D14,D84,E31,E52,G11

                                           ABSTRACT

Expectations about macro-finance variables, such as inflation, vary significantly across genders,
even within the same household. We conjecture that traditional gender roles expose women and
men to different economic signals in their daily lives, which in turn produce systematic variation
in expectations. Using unique data on the contributions of men and women to household grocery
chores, their resulting exposure to price signals, and their inflation expectations, we show that the
gender expectations gap is tightly linked to participation in grocery shopping. We also document
a gender gap in other economic expectations and discuss how it might affect economic choices.


Francesco D'Acunto                                Michael Weber
Boston College                                    Booth School of Business
Carroll School of Management                      University of Chicago
dacuntof@bc.edu                                   5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                  Chicago, IL 60637
Ulrike Malmendier                                 and NBER
Department of Economics                           michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
I       Introduction
Beliefs about the future shape economic decisions, and they often differ systematically
across genders. Women tend to hold significantly more distorted beliefs than men about
key economic variables, ranging from consumer and house-price inflation to expectations
about stock prices, medical and schooling expenses, and their own financial situation.1 For
the case of consumer inflation, both men and women have upward-biased expectations,
compared to ex-post outcomes, but women's upward bias is systematically larger. We
label this phenomenon the "gender expectations gap."
        The gender expectations gap can have detrimental consequences for women's
economic choices and long-term wealth, as well as hamper the effectiveness of economic
policies that aim to manage households' expectations. Earlier research also shows that
distorted beliefs about economic variables induce stress and affect women's happiness and
well-being (Di Tella et al., 2001). Yet, existing research provides little explanation for the
root of the stark gender differences in beliefs.
        In this paper, we assess the role of traditional gender roles as a determinant of the
gender expectations gap. Gender roles induce women and men to engage in different
activities and to select into different environments in their daily lives. As a result, women
and men have different experiences and are exposed to different signals about the economy.
Exposure to different signals leads to differences in economic perceptions and expectations
(Lucas, 1972).
        Our analysis focuses on the role of grocery shopping and exposure to grocery
prices. Complying with traditional gender roles, women still undertake the majority
of grocery shopping for their households,2 which exposes them to grocery-price changes
more frequently than men. Grocery-price inflation, in turn, is highly volatile--so much
so that the Core consumer price index excludes food (and energy) to better identify
inflation trends (Evans and Fisher, 2011). Since consumers focus disproportionately on
    1
     Cf. Bjuggren and Elert (2019); Jacobsen et al. (2014); Armantier et al. (2013); Bruine de Bruin et al.
(2010).
   2
     See Pew Research Center (2019) analysis of the 2014-2016 BLS American Time
Use      Survey    available    here:        https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/09/24/
among-u-s-couples-women-do-more-cooking-and-grocery-shopping-than-men/ft_19-08-28_
genderchores_1/.


                                                    1
        Figure 1: Gender Expectations Gap Within Households: Raw Data




Notes. The left bar of Figure 1 plots the average differences in the inflation expectations of women and
men within all households headed by heterosexual couples in our sample based on the customized Chicago
Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. The mid and right
bars propose a sample split based on whether men in the household take part in grocery shopping. Error
bars indicate 95% confidence intervals obtained from standard errors clustered at the household level.



price increases rather than decreases, as shown in the prior literature (Cavallo et al., 2017;
Ranyard et al., 2008; Bates and Gabor, 1986), women's exposure to volatile price changes
can generate upward bias in their perception of current inflation and in their expectations
of future inflation, giving rise to the gender expectations gap.
       To assess the relationship between gender-specific exposure to economic signals and
expectations, we construct a novel data set that combines detailed information about
individuals' participation in their household's grocery chores and their corresponding
exposure to price signals from a representative US sample (Kilts-Nielsen Consumer Panel)
with individual-level elicitation of economic beliefs (Chicago Booth Expectations and
Attitudes Survey, CBEAS).3
       Our data are the first to establish the gender expectations gap within households. As
shown in the left panel of Figure 1, the raw data indicates that women have significantly
   3
    Following our paper, other researchers have started to elicit individual inflation expectations in the
Kilts-Nielsen Consumer Panel through customized surveys (see, e.g., Coibion et al. (2019) and Coibion
et al. (2020)).


                                                    2
higher inflation expectations than men, within (heterosexual) married couples.
     The raw data also reveal a second novel fact, which is the focus of our analysis: The
gender expectations gap varies substantially based on which spouse engages in grocery
shopping. Households in which men do not partake in grocery chores fully explain the
gender gap in inflation expectations (cf. middle bar of Figure 1). In households where
spouses share grocery shopping more equally, we fail to detect any economically or
statistically significant gender gap in inflation expectations (cf. right bar).
     The economic magnitude of the gap, around 0.4-0.6 pp, is large, amounting to 25%
of the US Federal Reserve's inflation target of 2%. Based on the Fisher equation, such
upward bias implies that, for a given level of nominal rates, women perceive real interest
rates to be lower than men, which in turn distorts consumption spending according to
the consumer Euler equation. For example, given 1.5% nominal rates in the US economy
over recent years, women would perceive real rates to be 33% lower than men.
     Our multivariate analysis shows that the gender gap and the difference between
households with and without male participation in grocery chores are robust features of
the data. The gender gap is unaffected when we control for differences in risk preferences,
numeracy, or financial literacy within households, which Lusardi and Mitchell (2008) and
Niederle (2015) have shown to be important determinant of expectations. The results also
do not change when we partial out income, education levels, and other demographics, such
as unemployment status or ethnicity, which influence uncertainty in individual inflation
expectations. Moreover, as in the raw data, no gender difference exists once we restrict
the analysis to grocery shoppers.
     We also verify that men and women have a very similar mapping from their
perception of current inflation to inflation expectations, which rules out that unobserved
characteristics make men and women process information about current inflation
differently.
     Finally, we conduct a complementary analysis of the New York Fed Survey of
Consumer Expectations (SCE). Here, we ask whether traditional gender norms also shape
expectations other than inflation. The SCE contains information on gender, preferences,
demographics, inflation expectations, house prices, medical expenses, the stock market,


                                              3
and the government deficit, though not on grocery shopping and no within-household
elicitations.
     We first corroborate the external validity of the CBEAS results on the gender
expectations gap in the SCE, over both a short-term and long-term horizon. We then
show that women are less likely to expect positive stock returns, expect higher house-price
inflation, are more pessimistic about US government debt, and perceive their own financial
situation as worse relative to men.
     Lacking direct data on individuals' contribution to grocery chores as a measure of
exposure to prices and adherence to traditional gender roles, we use two indirect proxies
in the SCE. We identify two subsamples in which traditional gender roles tend to be
less stark. The first subsample are respondents from areas where a high share of men
does at least some grocery shopping for their households, as identified in the CBEAS
data. The second subsample are respondents below 25 years of age, among whom the
perception of traditional gender norms tends to be less stark (Glaeser and Ma, 2013;
D'Acunto, 2018). In these two subsamples, the gender expectations gap is indeed lower
for all measures of inflation. Moreover, we find that the volatility and the uncertainty of
economic expectations are higher among women, which is consistent with women being
exposed to volatile signals about prices such as grocery prices, which change frequently.
     Overall, our results support the conjecture that differences in women's and men's
daily environments can have significant consequences for their beliefs about key economic
variables. That is, traditional gender roles can shape beliefs not only in contexts that
have been singled out as being "gendered," such as beliefs about the ability of women to
perform in STEM disciplines or in leadership roles. Even in realms that have no gender
connotation, such as economic expectations, differential exposure to signals in daily life
due to differential gender roles leave an imprint on women's outlook.
     Our findings on the gender expectations gap as well as the underlying signal-exposure
mechanism have significant implications, both at the macroeconomic and the microeco-
nomic level. At the macro level, inflation expectations are central to the effectiveness of
economic policy (Bernanke, 2010), especially as low interest rates are becoming common
in most industrialized countries (Summers, 2018). In such times, inflation expectations


                                            4
directly shape perceived real interest rates and determine consumption and savings
decisions as captured by the consumer Euler equation. Systematic gender differences
in belief formation might therefore hamper the effectiveness of aggregate policies that
aim to stabilize the business cycle and to avoid prolonged economic crises.
    At the micro level, distorted inflation expectations can be detrimental to individual
economic outcomes. Consumers who expect higher prices might engage in excessive
consumption, not accumulate enough savings for retirement, and make suboptimal
real-estate investments. The gender expectations gap might adversely affect women's
financial decisions and wealth accumulation, which in turn increases gender inequality in
wealth.
    Earlier research has documented that gender roles affect women's preferences, beliefs,
and outcomes in several domains (Croson and Gneezy, 2009; Bertrand, 2011; Adams and
Funk, 2012), including their choices of fields of education and skills (MossRacusin et al.,
2012; Guiso et al., 2008; Dossi et al., 2019), occupations (Eagly and Steffen, 1984), career
paths (Adams and Kirchmaier, 2016; Goldin and Mitchell, 2017), and investment decisions
(D'Acunto, 2018). In those areas, gender roles influence both women's own actions, as
they comply to a prescribed gender role (Steele, 1997; Correll, 2004), and the actions of
others based on gender stereotyping (Fern´
                                         andez et al., 2004; Skewes et al., 2018; Eagly,
1987; Carli et al., 2016).
    In all these cases, gender roles affect beliefs about women's ability to conduct
male-connotated tasks, and outcomes that possess a gender-specific connotation.
Our findings suggest that, even beyond decisions that are stereotypically gendered,
seemingly innocuous differences in women's daily exposures to prices can have significant
consequences for perceptions and expectations. The evidence in our paper highlights a
relationship between gender roles and non-gendered beliefs and outcomes, which is subtle
and hard to reduce through traditional policy interventions.




                                             5
II       Survey Data
We utilize a novel source of data, the CBEAS, which we fielded online in two waves in June
2015 and June 2016. We invited all members of the Kilts-Nielsen Consumer Panel (KNCP)
to participate, approximately 40,000-60,000 households per wave. KNCP reports both
static demographics, such as household size, income, ZIP code of residence, and marital
status, and dynamic features of participants' grocery purchases, such as categorizations of
the products purchased, information on the shopping outlets, and the per-unit price paid
for each item. The prices are collected electronically through scanner-based registration by
participating households. To ensure the accuracy of the data, Nielsen organizes monthly
prize drawings, provides points for its gift catalog after each scanner-data submission,
and is in ongoing communication with panel households. Not surprisingly, given these
incentives, the KNCP has a retention rate of more than 80%.
       In the CBEAS, we elicit the numerical inflation expectations and perceptions of
household members.        For inflation expectations, we elicit both point estimates and
distributions. We also ask respondents if they are the primary grocery shopper for their
household, sometimes shop, or never do the shopping, and we record whether the female
household head is a non-retired and non-unemployed homemaker ("stay-home mum").
       To test for the relationship between traditional gender roles and expectations, we
limit the sample to heterosexual couples in which we observe the survey responses of
both the male and the female household head. In these households, we compare men and
women, keeping constant all household-level characteristics. This sample includes 20,866
observations of male and female household heads across both survey waves, which belong
to 7,846 unique households.
       Consistent with the notion that women are more likely to do the grocery shopping
for the household, female heads declare that they were the main grocery shopper in 5,135
households (65%), whereas male heads did so only in 908 households (12%),4 and another
household member in the remaining 1,803 households (22%). Other household members
who report being the main grocery shopper are typically female individuals whose age is
   4
    A two-sided t-test for whether the shares of grocery shoppers are equal across genders rejects the
null hypothesis at standard levels of significance (p<0.01).


                                                  6
higher than the age of both male and female heads, and who do not enter our analysis.
       In a complementary analysis, we study the gender expectations gap for a longer
period than available through the KNCP waves in the SCE data from June 2013 to April
2018. The SCE has become a key survey tool to study the effectiveness of monetary
policy in the US.5 It collects a broad set of economic expectations for a representative
population, alongside demographic characteristics, as well as elicited mathematical and
financial skills. The survey is a rotating panel in which the same respondent is interviewed
every month for up to 12 months. We restrict the sample to respondents for whom we
observe both expectations and financial skills. Our working sample thus includes 40,568
individual-month observations. The number of unique individuals in the sample is 6,052,
of which 49.66% are women. We define all the variables we use in the paper in Table A.1.



III       Results
We first assess the conjecture that differences in men's and women's daily exposures to
price signals help explain the gender expectations gap. As they undertake the majority
of grocery shopping duties for their households, women are exposed to the volatile and
large price changes of grocery goods more frequently than men. This differential exposure
could explain the higher inflation expectations among women because individuals focus
disproportionately more on price increases rather than decreases (Cavallo et al., 2017;
Ranyard et al., 2008; Bates and Gabor, 1986), and tend to map their perception of current
price changes into inflation expectations (D'Acunto et al., 2019).
       As previewed in Figure 1 in the introduction, the raw data of the CBEAS reveals that
women's inflation expectations are on average 0.40 percentage points higher than those
of men (p < 0.01). The average difference, however, masks substantial heterogeneity:
households in which men do not participate in grocery shopping exhibit a 0.64 pp (p <
0.01) gender difference in inflation expectations, compared to a small and insignificant
difference of 0.10 pp (p = 0.35) in other households. A two-sided t-test for equality of
gender differences between the two samples rejects the null at p < 0.01. The pattern
   5
    Armantier et al. (2017) provide a detailed overview of the survey design, the sample construction,
and summary statistics of the SCE.


                                                  7
is qualitatively similar in households with a "stay-home mum," in which the gender
difference amounts to 0.58 pp, compared to 0.36 pp in other households, albeit with
both differences being statistically significant (p < 0.01).
    The economic magnitude of the gender difference is sizable: The inflation target of
the Federal Reserve is 2% per year, and realized inflation was less than 2% during our
survey months. Hence, the gender expectations gap amounts to more than a quarter of
both targeted and realized inflation in terms of economic magnitude.
    We test whether these patterns from the raw data persist in a multivariate setting in
which we account for demographic variables and preferences that might affect gender
differences in inflation expectations. We estimate a linear model regressing inflation
expectations on gender and our proxy for gender roles, controlling for all demographics and
individual characteristics available in our data, including age, square of age, employment
status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status, college dummy, four race
dummies, reported risk tolerance, and confidence of inflation expectations (individual-level
variance of the probability distribution of inflation expectations). The confidence proxy
captures the possibility that women might generally be less (over-)confident or less certain
than men: The higher the variance, the less confident is the respondent about their
expectations of future inflation. Additionally, we control for a set of expectations about
other economic variables that might predict inflation expectations, including expectations
about individual income, individual financial soundness, and aggregate US growth. In
the most restrictive specification, we include household fixed effects to ensure that
time-invariant heterogeneity across households does not explain our results.
    Figure 2 displays the same gender differences as Figure 1, but based on the estimates
from the multivariate analysis. The pattern is very similar to the raw data. Within
households, women's inflation expectations are on average 0.33 p.p. (p<0.01) higher than
men's (left graph). However, in households in which men do not participate in grocery
shopping, the difference amounts to 0.65 p.p. (p<0.01), compared to -0.011 p.p. (p=0.94)
in other households (right graph).
    The pooled-sample analysis in Online-Appendix Table A.2 provides the same insight,
including the disappearance of gender differences after controlling for grocery-price


                                              8
exposure. Columns 1 to 3 display the estimation results from three specifications: using an
indicator for female as independent variable (in column 1), using an indicator for being the
main grocery shopper as independent variable (in column 2), and including both variables
(in column 3). Columns 4 to 6 show parallel estimations but within household.
    Across households, women exhibit 0.29 p.p. (p<0.01) higher inflation expectations
than men (column 1), and respondents who are the main grocery shopper for the household
exhibit 0.47 p.p. (p<0.01) higher inflation expectations relative to other respondents
(column 2). Most importantly, however, the specification in column 3 reveals that,
after controlling for participation in grocery shopping, no significant gender difference
in inflation expectations is detectable, neither economically nor statistically (0.13 p.p.,
p=0.14), whereas the coefficient on grocery shopping remains largely unchanged (0.41 p.p.,
p<0.01). All findings continue to hold, and the coefficient estimates remain quantitatively
very similar, when we restrict the estimation to variation within households (columns
4-6). These estimates imply that innate (or otherwise induced) gender-specific variation
cannot generate the gender difference in beliefs after controlling for grocery-price exposure.
Instead, the exposure to different price signals can predict the gender differences in beliefs.

    We complement these results with estimations based on sample splits and on the
alternative stay-home proxy.      First, we split the full sample into the subsample of
households whose female heads do not participate in grocery shopping at all and the
complementary subsample where the female head does at least some grocery shopping.
As shown in column 1 of Table A.3 in the Online Appendix, we detect no gender
expectations gap between male and female heads in households whose female heads do
not participate in grocery shopping at all. Consistent with the estimates above, the
coefficient estimate for female heads becomes negative and insignificant. Note that this
subsample is small--it only comprises 8.7% of the full representative sample. By contrast,
the gender expectations gap between female and male heads is positive and significant in
the remainder of the sample (columns 2). The pooled-sample specification in column 3
confirms that the difference is significant: When we include a dummy for observations in
the complementary sample (where women do at least some shopping) interacted with the
indicator for a female respondent, the female dummy is insignificant and the interaction


                                              9
effect significantly positive. Hence, the gender expectations gap does not appear to be
driven by intrinsic characteristics related to gender, but participation in grocery shopping
emerges a crucial channel to explain the gap.
     Columns 4-6 of Table A.3 confirm these findings qualitatively using the stay-home
mum proxy for traditional gender norms and exposure to different price signals in daily
life. We find that the gender expectations gap is larger for the subsample of households
where the female head is a homemaker (columns 5), relative to households where the
female head is employed in the formal labor market (column 4). The difference becomes
economically even larger and remains statistically marginally significant in the pooled-
sample specification where we interact the female and subsample indiators (column 6).



IV      Mechanisms
Our research hypothesis posits that, given the large and volatile price changes of groceries,
frequent exposure to grocery prices biases women's beliefs about inflation. The underlying
mechanism can be broken down into two parts: First, the differential exposure generates
higher inflation perceptions, that is, women perceive current inflation to be higher than
men. Second, the gender differences in inflation perceptions map into differences in
expectations about (future) inflation.
     Figure 3 provides direct evidence consistent with the first part of the mechanism.
Panel A displays the gender gap in the perception of current inflation (the percentage
change in consumer prices over the last twelve months) in the raw data. In line with
the results for inflation expectations, women perceive current inflation to be higher than
men (left bar), and this gender difference only occurs in households in which men do not
participate in grocery shopping (middle and right bars). As with inflation expectations,
these results also hold conditional on all observables we discussed before (Panel B).
     We assess the second part of the proposed mechanism in Figure 4. The binscatter
map expectations of future inflation against perceptions of current inflation, with men's
observations shown as triangles and women's as circles. Panel A documents a strong
correlation between perceptions and expectations. Moreover, this correlation does not


                                             10
vary systematically across genders as the plots for males and females overlap tightly.
    The same holds when we account for selection into grocery-shopping, which might be
correlated not only with gender but also with (gender-specific) characteristics that could
explain our results. As shown in Panel B of Figure 4, we find a very similar mapping
between inflation perceptions and expectations whether we focus on men or women who
do or do not go grocery shopping.
    The uniform mapping between perceived and expected inflation also holds up when
estimated in a multivariate linear regression using inflation expectations as the dependent
variable, and inflation perceptions, the indicator for being female, and their interaction
as independent variables, conditional on the same controls discussed above. Inflation
perceptions are a strong predictor of inflation expectations, whereas both the coefficient
on the interaction with inflation perceptions (-0.052, p=0.527) and the gender coefficient
(-0.284, p=0.321) are insignificant.
    In summary, women do not have a different mapping function of inflation perceptions
into expectations than men, and hence innate cognitive gender-specific characteristics are
unlikely to play a role in the process of mapping inflation perceptions into expectations.
Instead, higher exposure to grocery price inflation predicts higher perceptions, which in
turn map into higher expectations.



V     External Validity and Other Expectations
The CBEAS data is unique in that it is the first data to jointly report participation
in grocery chores, exposure to specific grocery prices, and inflation expectations for both
male and female household heads within the same household. We now extend the analysis
to expectations of other economic variables using the New York Fed SCE sample. The
SCE elicits expectations about short- and long-term consumer price inflation, house prices,
stock prices, the size of the US government debt, and individuals' own financial situations.
The main drawback of the SCE for our scope is that it does not provide information on
household structure or on shopping duties. At the same time, the SCE covers a longer
time period, more economic expectations, and includes a rich set of measures of financial


                                            11
and economy literacy and numeracy.
    In Figure 5, we plot expectations for all of the above-mentioned economic variables
across genders. The vertical bars indicate men's and women's expectations in the full
sample, and the horizontal bars indicate gender differences. The data reveals a significant
gender expectations gap across all expectation measures. Women expect 55% higher short-
and long-term consumer price inflation, and 38% higher house-price inflation. Turning
to the stock market, a smaller fraction of women (38%) than men (46%) expect positive
returns over the following 12 months. This difference in beliefs is economically large
and might help explain why women stay away from stock investments, which have been
historically profitable and are a major source of wealth accumulation for US households.
Women also expect the likelihood that the US government debt increases to be 25.5%,
whereas men expect it to be 21%. Finally, only 12% of women, but 20% of men, perceive
their financial situation to have improved over the prior 12 months.
    We test whether these univariate gender differences in economic expectations continue
to hold when controlling for a broad set of individual-level characteristics, including age,
race, marital status, education, income, as well as numeracy and financial skills. In Online-
Appendix Table A.4, we report ordinary-least-squares coefficients and standard errors
clustered at the individual level. To allow comparison of the size of estimated coefficients,
we standardize the outcome variables. (We report the value of one standard deviation
and the median of each outcome variable on top below the variables names.) Across
all columns, the estimation results remain unchanged and are similar to the graphical
raw-data evidence.
    To further probe the role of numeracy and financial literacy, we re-estimate all
coefficients on the subsample of survey respondents who replied correctly to all the
questions about numeracy and financial skills described in Table A.1 (Numeracy 1-2,
Probability 1-3, Fin. Literacy 1-2). As shown in Online-Appendix Table A.5, the results
are again similar. The gender expectations gap also persists when considering different
types of consumer prices and expenses, including grocery prices, medical expenses,
schooling expenses, and housing rents (see Online-Appendix Table A.6). Moreover, women
exhibit not only more pessimistic expectations but also a higher volatility and uncertainty


                                             12
of expectations, computed as the within-individual volatility of numerical expectations as
well as the tendency to round numerical expectations (Manski and Molinari, 2010; Binder,
2017); see Online-Appendix Table A.7.
       As discussed, we cannot construct the same gender-role proxy in the SCE as in
the CBEAS since the CBEAS data is unique in providing both expectations data and
participation in grocery chores. To provide indirect evidence also for the SCE, we study
specific subsamples that are likely to differ in their compliance with traditional gender
roles. The first subsample approximates involvement in grocery chores based on geography
using our CBEAS sample. We consider respondents from states where a high share of men
does at least some grocery shopping for their households (the top 25% US states), which
we label `Man Shops.' The second subsample consists of respondents below 25 years of
age (`Young'), among whom the perception of traditional gender norms has become less
stark than among older cohorts (Glaeser and Ma, 2013; D'Acunto, 2018).
       The horizontal bars in Figure 5 indicate the corresponding gender differences. The
top bar plots the difference in expectations for the full sample (`All'). The next two
bars in each graph, labeled `Man Shops' and `Young' show the corresponding gender
differences for the first and the second subsample. Consistently, the gender gamp in
inflation expectations is lower in the subsample with male involvement in grocery chores
and the subsample of young couples, where traditional gender roles are likely less stark.
This holds for any type of inflation measure, as well as for almost all variables overall.6



VI        Discussion and Conclusion
Traditional gender roles expose women to different information about prices than men.
This differential exposure distorts women's inflation expectations and contributes to
explaining the gender expectations gap. One implication of our findings is that gender
roles shape beliefs not only in contexts that have been singled out as "gendered," such as
beliefs about the ability to perform in STEM disciplines or in leadership roles, but also
in realms that have no gender connotation, such as inflation expectations.
   6
    Beliefs about future stock price changes in the subsample of respondents in US states with a higher
share of men doing the groceries is the only exception to this pattern.


                                                  13
    These subtle effects of gender roles are hard to tackle with targeted policy
interventions. Policies that have been implemented around the world include support for
women in STEM disciplines (United States Congress, 2017) or gender quotas on the boards
of large companies (Armstrong and Walby, 2012). However, in order to reduce the gap in
economic expectations and hence improve women's economic and financial choices relative
to men's, women's exposure to a wider range of economic signals and environments would
need to be fostered, which seems difficult to enforce through legislation or regulation.
    Another relevant angle is the recent tendency of shopping outlets to move to
online retail. This development is interesting both because it individualizes shopping
experiences, which might become even easier to trace, and because it might affect the ways
in which men and women are differentially exposed to price changes, inflation perceptions
and expectations. Our findings imply that such technologically-induced changes in norms
about shopping will affect the gender expectations gap going forward.




                                            14
References
Adams, R. B. and P. Funk (2012). Beyond the glass ceiling: Does gender matter?
  Management science 58 (2), 219­235.
Adams, R. B. and T. Kirchmaier (2016). Women on boards in finance and stem industries.
  American Economic Review 106 (5), 277­81.
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, S. Potter, G. Topa, W. Van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar
  (2013). Measuring inflation expectations. Annu. Rev. Econ. 5 (1), 273­301.
Armantier, O., G. Topa, W. Van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2017). An overview of the
  survey of consumer expectations. Economic Policy Review (23-2), 51­72.
Armstrong, J. and S. Walby (2012). Eu gender quotas in management boards. EU Notes .
Bates, J. M. and A. Gabor (1986). Price perception in creeping inflation: Report on an
  enquiry. Journal of Economic Psychology 7 (3), 291­314.
Bernanke, B. S. (2010). Monetary policy objectives and tools in a low-inflation
  environment.       In Speech at a conference on Revisiting Monetary Policy in a
  Low-Inflation Environment, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October, Volume 15.
Bertrand, M. (2011). New perspectives on gender. Handbook of Labor Economics 4(B),
  1543­1590.
Binder, C. (2017). Measuring uncertainty based on rounding: New method and an
  application to inflation expectations. Journal of Monetary Economics 90, 1­12.
Bjuggren, C. M. and N. Elert (2019). Gender differences in optimism. Applied
  Economics 0 (0), 1­14.
Bruine de Bruin, W., W. VanderKlaauw, J. S. Downs, B. Fischhoff, G. Topa, and
  O. Armantier (2010). Expectations of inflation: The role of demographic variables,
  expectation formation, and financial literacy. Journal of Consumer Affairs 44 (2),
  381­402.
Carli, L., L. Alawa, and Y. Lee (2016). Stereotypes about gender and science. Psychology
  of Women Quarterly 56, 565­576.
Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Inflation expectations, learning, and
  supermarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 9 (3), 1­35.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, D. Georgarakos, and M. Weber (2020). Forward guidance
  and household expectations.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2019). Monetary policy communications
  and their effects on household inflation expectations. Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Correll, S. (2004). Constraints into preferences: Gender, status, and emerging career
  aspirations. American Sociological Review 69 (1), 93­113.
Croson, R. and U. Gneezy (2009). Gender differences in preferences. Journal of Economic
  literature 47 (2), 448­74.
D'Acunto, F. (2018). Identity and choice under risk. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., U. Malmendier, J. Ospina, and M. Weber (2019). Exposure to daily price
  changes and inflation expectations. Working Paper .


                                           15
Di Tella, R., R. J. MacCulloch, and A. J. Oswald (2001). Preferences over inflation
  and unemployment: Evidence from surveys of happiness. American Economic
  Review 91 (1), 335­341.
Dossi, G., D. N. Figlio, P. Giuliano, and P. Sapienza (2019). Born in the family:
  Preferences for boys and the gender gap in math. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Eagly, A. (1987). Sex differences in social behavior: A social-role interpretation. Hillsdale,
  NJ: Erlbaum .
Eagly, A. and V. Steffen (1984). Gender stereotypes stem from the distribution of women
  and men into social roles. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46, 735­754.
Evans, C. L. and J. D. Fisher (2011). What are the implications of rising commodity
  prices for inflation and monetary policy? Chicago Fed Letter (286), 1.
Fern´
    andez, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004). Mothers and sons: Preference formation
  and female labor force dynamics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1249­
  1299.
Glaeser, E. and Y. Ma (2013). The supply of gender stereotypes and discriminatory
  beliefs. NBER working paper no. 19109 .
Goldin, C. and J. Mitchell (2017). The new lifecycle of women's employment:
  Disappearing humps, sagging middles, expanding tops.                Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 31 (1), 161­182.
Guiso, L., F. Monte, P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008). Culture, gender, and math.
  Science 320 (5880), 1164­1165.
Jacobsen, B., J. B. Lee, W. Marquering, and C. Y. Zhang (2014). Gender differences in
  optimism and asset allocation. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 107, 630
  ­ 651. Empirical Behavioral Finance.
Lucas, R. E. (1972). Expectations and the neutrality of money. Journal of Economic
  Theory 4 (2), 103­124.
Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell (2008). Planning and financial literacy: How do women
  fare? American Economic Review 98 (2), 413­17.
Manski, C. and F. Molinari (2010). Rounding probabilistic expectations in surveys.
  Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 28 (2), 219­231.
MossRacusin, C., J. Dovidio, V. Brescoll, M. Graham, and J. Handelsman (2012). Science
  faculty's subtle gender biases favor male students. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences 109, 16474­16479.
Niederle, M. (2015). Gender. Handbook of Experimental Economics .
Ranyard, R., F. Del Missier, N. Bonini, D. Duxbury, and B. Summers (2008). Perceptions
  and expectations of price changes and inflation: A review and conceptual framework.
  Journal of Economic Psychology 29 (4), 378­400.
Skewes, L., C. Fine, and N. Haslam (2018). Beyond mars and venus: The role of gender
  essentialism in support for gender inequality and backlash. PLOS ONE 13 (7).
Steele, C. (1997). A threat in the air: how stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
  performance. American Psychologist 52, 613­629.
Summers, L. (2018). The threat of secular stagnation has not gone away. Avail-


                                             16
 able at http://larrysummers.com/2018/05/06/the-threat-of-secular-stagnation-has-not-
 gone-away/ .
United States Congress, H. (2017). Promoting women in entrepreneurship act. Public
 Law No.: 115-6 (02/28/2017) .




                                         17
       Figure 2: Gender Expectations Gap Within Households: Residuals




Notes. The leftmost bar of Figure 2 plots the average differences in the inflation expectations of women
and men within all households headed by heterosexual couples in our sample based on the customized
Chicago Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016, conditional
on controls. Control variables include age, square of age, employment status, 16 income dummies, home
ownership, marital status, college dummy, four race dummies, reported risk tolerance, household fixed effects,
individual income expectations, expectations for aggregate US growth, and individual expectations about
financial soundness. The two bars on the right propose a sample split based on whether men in the household
take part in grocery shopping. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals obtained from standard errors
clustered at the household level.




                                                   18
       Figure 3: Gender Gap in Inflation Perceptions Within Households


                                       Panel A: Raw Data




                                        Panel B: Residuals




Notes. The leftmost bar of Figure 3 Panel A plots the average differences in the inflation perceptions of
women and men for all households in our sample based on the customized Chicago Booth Expectations
and Attitudes Survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. The two bars on the right propose a
sample split based on whether men in the household take part in grocery shopping. Error bars indicate
95% confidence intervals obtained from standard errors clustered at the household level. Figure 3 Panel B
presents gender differences defined as above conditional on controls. Control variables include age, square
of age, employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status, household size, college
dummy, four race dummies, reported risk tolerance, household fixed effects, individual income expectations,
expectations for aggregate US growth, and individual expectations about financial soundness.




                                                  19
Figure 4: Mapping of Perceptions into Expectations by Gender and Grocery
Shopping

                                    Panel A: Unconditional




                         Panel B: Conditional on Grocery Shopping




Notes. Figure 4 Panel A is a binscatter plot mapping inflation perceptions into inflation expectations by
gender and Panel B also conditions on grocery-shopping behavior. Inflation perceptions and expectations
are based on the customized Chicago Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey, which we fielded in June of
2015 and 2016.

                                                 20
                     Figure 5: Gender and Economic Expectations



       Short-term
         Short-termInflation
                    Inflation                   Long-term Inflation
                                                  Long-term  Inflation                  House Price
                                                                                       House   Price
          Expectations
          Expectations  (%)                        Expectations
                                                   Expectations (%)                    Expectations
                                                                                      Expectations (%)
  12           All                        12            All                    12           All
        Man Shops                                Man Shops                           Man Shops
  10        Young                         10         Young                     10        Young
   8                 0            2        8                  0            2    8                 0             2
   6                                       6                                    6
   4                                       4                                    4
   2                                       2                                    2
   0                                       0                                    0
             Male        Female                      Male Female                        Male Female
          Expect  Higher
           Expected Higher                       Perception    Own
                                                  Perception Own                      Expect
                                                                                      ExpectedHigher
                                                                                                Higher
           StockPrices
           Stock  Prices
                       (%)                         Fin.
                                                 Fin.    Situation
                                                      Situation [-2; 2]               US  Gov't
                                                                                       USGov't  Debt
                                                                                               Debt (%)
                                          0.4                                  50
               All                                     All                                  All
  80    Man Shops                               Man Shops                            Man Shops
                                                                               40
             Young                        0.3       Youn                                 Youn
  60
                     -8               0                       00.07        0.00 30                0.0     2.5
                                          0.2
  40                                                                           20

  20                                      0.1
                                                                               10

   0                                      0.0                                   0
             Male        Female                      Male         Female                 Male         Female

Notes. The vertical bars in this figure report the estimated mean for men (green, left bar) and women
(yellow, right bar) of a set of numerical expectations elicited by the New York Fed Survey of Consumer
Expectations (see Armantier et al. (2017)). Black segments are 95% confidence intervals. Grey horizontal
bars indicate the difference between the expectations of women and men for three groups: "All" includes the
full sample; "Man Shops" includes only respondents in the top 25% of US states based on the share of men
who are the main grocery shopper in the household, which we compute in the Chicago Booth Expectations
and Attitudes Survey ; "Young" includes only respondents below 25 years of age; the two latter subsamples
capture groups in which gender norms might be less stark than the full sample.




                                                       21
                  Online Appendix:
Gender Roles and the Gender Expectations Gap
    Francesco D'Acunto, Ulrike Malmendier, and Michael Weber

                       Not for Publication




                                1
                                       Table A.1: Variable Names, Sources, and Definitions

             Variable Name                Source                                  Variable Definition
    Inflation Expectations (ST)         NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 12-month-ahead inflation rate forecast
                                        and CBEAS
    Inflation Expectations (LT)         NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 5-year-ahead inflation rate forecast
    House Price Expectations            NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 12-month-ahead forecast for the price increase of the
                                                     average home nationwide
    Likelihood Stock Prices Increase    NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical expectations about the percent chance that 12 months
                                                     ahead on average stock prices in the US stock market will be higher than at
                                                     the time of the interview
    US Gov't Debt Expectations          NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical expectations about the number of percentage points
                                                     by which they expect the U.S. government debt to increase/decrease over
                                                     the following 12 months
    Perception Financial Situation      NY Fed SCE   Respondent's answer to the question "Do you think you (and any family




2
                                                     living with you) are financially better or worse off these days than you were
                                                     12 months ago?" Five ordered categorical answers range from "Much Worse
                                                     off " (-2) to "Much Better off " (2).
    Grocery Expected Inflation          NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 12-month-ahead food inflation rate forecast
    Gas Expected Inflation              NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 12-month-ahead gas inflation rate forecast
    Medical Expected Inflation          NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 12-month-ahead medical care inflation rate forecast
    Schooling Expected Inflation        NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 12-month-ahead college-expense inflation rate forecast
    Rent Inflation Expectations         NY Fed SCE   Respondent numerical 12-month-ahead average house rent inflation rate forecast
    Female                              NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is female, zero otherwise
                                        and CBEAS
    Age                                 NY Fed SCE   Respondent age
                                        and CBEAS
                                                                                                              continued on next page
                                        Table A.1: Variable Definitions (cont.)
      Variable Name          Source                                Variable Definition
    Hispanic               NY Fed SCE    Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is Hispanic
                           and CBEAS
    Black                  NY Fed SCE    Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is African American
                           and CBEAS
    Asian                  NY Fed SCE    Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is Asian
                           and CBEAS
    Some College           NY Fed SCE Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent has some college education
                           and CBEAS but did not earn a college degree
    College Degree         NY Fed SCE    Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent earned a college degree
                           and CBEAS
    Post-graduate Degree   NY Fed SCE    Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent earned a post-graduate degree




3
                           and CBEAS
    Single                 NY Fed SCE    Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is single
                           and CBEAS
    Employed               NY Fed SCE Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is employed in a full-time
                           and CBEAS or part-time job
    Income Group 1         NY Fed SCE Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent's household has a pre-tax
                           and CBEAS income below $40,000 over the previous 12 months
    Income Group 2         NY Fed SCE Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent's household has a pre-tax
                           and CBEAS income between $40,000 and $99,999 over the previous 12 months
    Income Group 3         NY Fed SCE Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent's household has a pre-tax
                           and CBEAS income of $100,000 or above over the previous 12 months
                                                                                                continued on next page
                                          Table A.1: Variable Definitions (cont.)

    Variable Name       Source                                              Variable Definition
    Confidence        NY Fed SCE   Standard deviation of the probability distribution of numerical expectations for 12-month-ahead
                      and CBEAS    inflation. The probability distribution is elicited by asking respondents to allocate 100 percentage
                                   points across 10 bandwidths that might include the realized 12-month-ahead inflation rate.
                                   For instance: "The rate of inflation will be between 4% and 8%: ... percent chance"
    Numeracy 1        NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent replied correctly to the question "In a sale,
                                   a shop is selling all items at half price. Before the same, a sofa costs $300. How much will
                                   it cost in the sale?", zero otherwise.
    Numeracy 2        NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent replied correctly to the question "Let's say
                                   you have $200 in a savings account. The account earns ten per cent interest per year.
                                   Interest accrues at each anniversary of the account. If you never withdraw money
                                   or interest payments, how much will you have in the account at the end of two years?"
    Probability 1     NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent replied correctly to the question "In the BIG BUCKS
                                   LOTTERY, the chances of winning a $10.00 prize are 1%. What is your best guess about how many




4
                                   people would win a $10.00 prize if 1,000 people each buy a single ticket from BIG BUCKS?"

    Probability 2     NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent replied correctly to the question "If the chance of
                                   getting a disease is 10 percent, how many people out of 1,000 would be expected to get the disease?"
    Probability 3     NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent replied correctly to the question "The chance of
                                   getting a viral infection is 0.0005. Out of 10,000 people, about how many of them are expected
                                   to get infected?"
    Fin. Literacy 1   NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent replied correctly to the question "Imagine that the
                                   interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2% per year. After one year,
                                   how much would you be able to buy with the money left in this account?"
    Fin. Literacy 2   NY Fed SCE   Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent replied correctly to the question "Please tell me
                                   whether this statement is true or false: Buying a single company's stock usually provides a safer return
                                   than a stock mutual fund."
    Grocery Shopper   CBEAS        Dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is the primary grocery shopper for the household
    Table A.2: Inflation Expectations: Gender and Grocery Shopping


                                    (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)

                                          Across Households                   Within Households


Female                             0.291                     0.134     0.330                   0.162
                                  (0.081)                   (0.092)   (0.106)                 (0.119)
Main Grocery Shopper                            0.474      0.413                    0.516    0.415
                                               (0.106)      (0.118)                (0.132)    (0.149)

Demographics                         X           X            X         X            X            X
Expectations                         X           X            X         X            X            X
Household FE                                                            X            X            X

R2                                0.107        0.108        0.108     0.616        0.616      0.611
Obs.                              20,866       20,866      20,866     20,866       20,866    20,866
                              
   p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes. Table A.2 reports ordinary-least-squares coefficients and standard errors clustered at
the household level (in parentheses). Observations are the responses of male female heads
of household in the customized Chicago Booth Expectations and Attitudes Survey, which
we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. In all columns, the outcome variable is respondents'
12-month ahead numerical inflation expectations. F emale is an indicator for female heads;
M ainGroceryShopper is an indicator equal to 1 if the respondents who declare that they
are the main grocery shopper for the household; Demographics include age, square of
age, employment status, 16 income dummies, home ownership, marital status, college
dummy, four race dummies, reported risk tolerance, and confidence in inflation expectations
accuracy. Expectations include dummies for respondents' 12-month-ahead qualitative income
expectations, 12-month-ahead individual financial soundness, and 12-month-ahead aggregate
US growth.




                                                       5
      Table A.3: Inflation Expectations: Subsamples and Stay-Home Mums


                                              (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)              (5)          (6)

                                      Female Head    Female Head    Full     Female Head    Female Head       Full
 Sample                               No Groceries   Some Groc.    Sample      Worker       Stays Home       Sample


 Female                                -0.186           0.382       -0.486      0.249           0.648        0.241
                                       (0.357)         (0.111)     (0.336)     (0.113)         (0.322)       (0.111)
 Female ×                                                          0.716                                     0.506
 Female Head Some Groc./                                           (0.321)                                   (0.287)
 Female Head Stays Home

 Demographics                                 X           X          X            X               X            X
 Expectations                                 X           X          X            X               X            X
 Household FE                                 X           X          X            X               X            X

 R2                                      0.657          0.615       0.616        0.624          0.614         0.616
 Obs.                                    1,806         19,060      20,866       17,289          3,577        20,866
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes. Table A.3 reports ordinary-least-squares coefficients and standard errors clustered at the household level (in
parentheses). Observations are the responses of male female heads of household in the customized Chicago Booth
Expectations and Attitudes Survey, which we fielded in June of 2015 and 2016. In all columns, the outcome variable
is respondents' 12-month ahead numerical inflation expectations. Column (1) restricts the sample to households
whose female head does not do any groceries. Columns (2) uses the complementary sample of households whose
female head does at least some groceries, that is, she is the main grocery shopper or does some grocery shopping.
Column (4) restricts the sample to households whose female head is employed in the formal labor market. Column
(5) uses the complementary sample of households whose female head is a homemaker. In columns (3) and (6),
the indicators F emale Head Some Groc. and F emale Head Stays Home equal 1 for both male and female
heads of households whose female head does some groceries or is a homemaker, respectively. (The levels of these
household-level indicators are fully absorbed by the household fixed effect.) F emale is a dummy variable that
equals 1 for female heads, and zero otherwise. Demographics include age, square of age, employment status, 16
income dummies, home ownership, marital status, college dummy, four race dummies, reported risk tolerance, and
confidence in inflation expectations. Expectations include dummies for respondents' 12-month-ahead qualitative
income expectations, 12-month-ahead individual financial soundness, and 12-month-ahead aggregate US growth.




                                                      6
Table A.4: Gender and Economic Expectations: Multivariate Analysis
                            (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
                       Short-Term      Long-Term       House      Stock      Perceived   US Gov't
                        Inflation       Inflation      Prices     Prices     Fin. Sit.    Debt
 St. dev.                13.2 pp        13.3 pp        9.9 pp     23.1 pp    8.56 pp     33.9 pp
 Median                   3 pp           3 pp           5 pp       50 pp       0 pp       10 pp
 Female                   0.08           0.04          0.08       -0.24      -0.07       0.05
                           (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.02)       (0.01)
 Age                      0.00              0.00        0.00      -0.00      -0.01        -0.00
                           (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)       (0.00)
 Hispanic                   0.01            0.02           0.06   -0.16      0.12            0.01
                           (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.02)
 Black                    0.21           0.25          0.14         -0.07       0.07      0.10
                           (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.05)     (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.03)
 Asian                       0.04           0.05          -0.02      -0.01     -0.01        -0.01
                           (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.07)     (0.06)    (0.06)       (0.03)
 Some College                0.03           0.04          0.04        0.04     -0.04     0.07
                           (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.02)
 College                    -0.03          -0.04          -0.02     0.14       -0.01        0.04
                           (0.04)         (0.03)         (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.02)
 Postgraduate               -0.03          -0.02          -0.01   0.15         -0.00        0.04
                           (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.02)
 Single                      0.01           0.03          0.03       0.05       0.01        0.01
                           (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.01)
 Employed                   -0.01          -0.02          -0.01       0.03   0.26           -0.01
                           (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.02)       (0.01)
 Income Group 1              0.01           0.01       0.06        -0.06     -0.10          -0.02
                           (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.01)
 Income Group 3          0.074          0.053          0.10       -0.10      -0.27           0.00
                           (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.01)
 Confidence               0.01           0.01          0.01           0.00     -0.00     0.01
                           (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)       (0.00)
 Numeracy 1                 -0.01          -0.06          -0.08       0.07     -0.05         0.07
                           (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.07)     (0.08)    (0.07)       (0.05)
 Numeracy 2              -0.07          -0.07          -0.05       0.10         0.01     -0.03
                           (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.01)
 Probability 1           -0.08          -0.08*            -0.05    0.07         0.02        -0.02
                           (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.04)     (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.02)
 Probability 2              -0.01          -0.06        -0.08        -0.01      0.04       -0.05
                           (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.02)
 Probability 3              0.01           -0.00          -0.01       0.03      0.04         0.02
                           (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.02)
 Fin. Literacy 1             0.03           0.03          -0.03      0.06       0.03        0.01
                           (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.03)    (0.04)       (0.02)
 Fin. Literacy 2          -0.11          -0.11         -0.20         0.08      -0.06        -0.04
                           (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.06)     (0.05)    (0.04)       (0.03)
 Constant                   -0.08           0.08          0.05       -0.11   0.31           -0.05
                           (0.11)         (0.11)         (0.11)     (0.11)    (0.10)       (0.08)
 R2                        0.07           0.06          0.06       0.06        0.07        0.07
 Obs.                     39,645         39,645        39,645     39,603      39,621      39,645
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes. Table A.4 reports ordinary-least-squares coefficients and standard errors (in
parentheses) clustered at the individual level, estimated on the New York Fed Survey of
Consumer Expectations. All dependent and independent variables are defined in Table A.1.
Outcome variables are standardized. We report the value of one standard deviation of each
outcome variable and its median below the variables names. The sample period is from June
2013 to April 2018.
                                                   7
Table A.5: Gender and Economic Expectations: Only Mathematically and
Financially Literate

                                    (1)              (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)

                            Short-Term         Long-Term         House     Stock     Perceived   US Gov't
                             Inflation          Inflation        Prices    Prices    Fin. Sit.    Debt

    Female                        0.13              0.08         0.14      -0.20       -0.06      0.05
                                   (0.03)           (0.03)        (0.03)    (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.02)


    Demographics                    X                 X            X         X          X           X
    Income Group FE                 X                 X            X         X          X           X
    Year-month FE                   X                 X            X         X          X           X

    R2                             0.02              0.02         0.03      0.04       0.07        0.04
    Obs.                          15,781            15,781       15,781    15,762     15,773      15,781
                                  
       p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,         p < 0.001

   Notes.    Table A.5 reports ordinary-least-squares coefficients and standard errors (in
   parentheses) clustered at the individual level, estimated on the New York Fed Survey of
   Consumer Expectations. All dependent and independent variables are defined in Table A.1.
   Outcome variables are standardized. The sample is limited to respondents who provide correct
   answers to the survey questions labeled Numeracy 1, Numeracy 2, Probability 1, Probability
   2, Probability 3, Fin. Literacy 1, Fin. Literacy 2, described in Table A.1. The sample period
   is from June 2013 to April 2018.




                                                             8
Table A.6: Gender and Economic Expectations: Price Categories

                                  (1)         (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)

                             Grocery         Gas     Medical    Schooling   Housing
                              Prices        Prices   Expenses   Expenses     Rents

    Female                    0.02          -0.02     0.02       0.03       0.03
                              (0.01)        (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)


    Demographics                  X           X         X          X          X
    Quantitative Skills           X           X         X          X          X
    Income Group FE               X           X         X          X          X
    Year-month FE                 X           X         X          X          X

    R2                         0.07          0.06      0.06       0.07       0.07
    Obs.                      39,645        39,645    39,645     39,645     39,645
                                  
       p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,         p < 0.001

   Notes. Table A.6 reports ordinary-least-squares coefficients and standard
   errors (in parentheses) clustered at the individual level, estimated on the
   New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations. The outcome variables
   are respondents' 12-month ahead numerical inflation expectations for each
   specific price category listed on top each column. All outcome variables are
   standardized and in Table A.1. The sample period is from June 2013 to
   April 2018.




                                                9
                        Table A.7: Gender and Uncertainty of Economic Expectations

                                      (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

                                Rounding        Rounding       Rounding       Volatility     Volatility     Volatility
                               ST Inflation    LT Inflation   House Prices   ST Inflation   LT Inflation   House Prices

      Female                        0.11           0.09         0.08           2.01           2.07           1.18
                                     (0.01)         (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.28)         (0.27)         (0.17)


      Demographics                    X              X             X              X              X              X
      Quantitative Skills             X              X             X              X              X              X
      Income Group FE                 X              X             X              X              X              X
      Year-month FE                   X              X             X              X              X              X




10
      Panel                           X              X             X
      Cross-section only                                                          X              X              X

      R2                             0.13           0.12          0.04          0.21            0.24           0.19
      Obs.                          39,645         39,645        39,645         4,578          4,578          4,578
                                    
         p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

     Notes. Table A.7 reports ordinary-least-squares coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at
     the individual level, estimated on the New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations. In columns (1)-(3),
     the outcome variable is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent reported short-term, long-term,
     or house-price numerical inflation expectations rounded to a multiple of 5. In columns (4)-(6), the outcome
     variables are the within-individual variances of the short-term, long-term, and house-price numerical inflation
     expectations reported by each respondent who was interviewed more than once in the New York Fed Survey of
     Consumer Expectations. All other variables are defined in Table A.1. The sample period is from June 2013 to
     April 2018.
