                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE CAN HELP ADDRESS THE PROBLEM
                        OF CHILD POVERTY

                                         Seth Pollak
                                       Barbara L. Wolfe

                                      Working Paper 26842
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26842


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




S.D.P. was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (grant MH016285), a core grant
to the Waisman Center from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
[U54 HD090256], and both S.D.P and B.L.W. were supported by a grant from the Russell Sage
Foundation The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Seth Pollak and Barbara L. Wolfe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Developmental Neuroscience Can Help Address the Problem of Child Poverty
Seth Pollak and Barbara L. Wolfe
NBER Working Paper No. 26842
March 2020
JEL No. I14

                                         ABSTRACT

Nearly 1 in 5 children in the United States lives in a household whose income is below the
official federal poverty line, and more than 40% of children live in poor or near-poor households.
Research on the effects of poverty on children's development has been a focus of study for many
decades and is now increasing as we accumulate more evidence about the implications of
poverty. The American Academy of Pediatrics recently added "Poverty and Child Health" to its
Agenda for Children to recognize what has now been established as broad and enduring effects of
poverty on child development. A recent addition to the field has been the application of
neuroscience-based methods. Various techniques including neuroimaging, neuroendocrinology,
cognitive psychophysiology, and epigenetics are beginning to document ways in which early
experiences of living in poverty affect infant brain development. We discuss whether there are
truly worthwhile reasons for adding neuroscience and related biological methods to study child
poverty. And how might these perspectives help guide developmentally-based and targeted
interventions and policies for these children and their families.


Seth Pollak
Waisman Institute
1500 Highland Ave
Madison, WI 53705
spollak@wisc.edu

Barbara L. Wolfe
3458 Social Science Building
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
BWolfe@wisc.edu
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     3

       In 2013, the American Academy of Pediatrics added "Poverty and Child Health"

to its Agenda for Children (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2014) as a recognition of

the broad and enduring effects of poverty on children's development. These public

health implications are so profound that both UNICEF and the World Bank have not only

recognized the serious problems caused by child poverty, they have also called for the

need to end extreme poverty by 2030 (UNICEF and World Bank Group, 2016). Children

living in poverty are more likely to have poor health compared to peers not living in

poverty, and this gap in health widens as children age (Case et al., 2002; Fletcher &

Wolfe, 2014). Children from impoverished families do worse on nearly all measures of

academic attainment, from school readiness to grades to standardized test scores

(Duncan & Murnane, 2011; McKinney, 2014; Schuetz, Ursrpung & Woessman 2005).

And compared to children in financially-secure settings, children in poverty have high

rates of behavioral problems (Ackerman, Brown & Izard, 2004; Brooks-Gunn & Duncan,

1997; Duncan, Brooks-Gunn & Klebanov,1994). These developmental gaps persist into

adulthood and are reflected in lower lifetime earnings, worse health, and reduced

psychological well-being (Al Hazzouri, Haan, Galea & Aiello, 2011; Guralnik,

Butterworth, Wadsworth & Kuh, 2006; Minkler, Fuller-Thomson & Guralnik, 2006;

Wadsworth et al., 2016). The associations between child poverty and negative

outcomes are well documented, the mechanisms causing these sequelae are not well

understood. A relatively recent addition to the field has been the application of brain-

based methods to better understand the developmental consequences of child poverty.

Here, we address questions about whether and how these approaches might be useful
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   4

in guiding developmentally-based and targeted interventions and policies for children

living in poverty.



Setting the Context: What do we mean by poverty and socioeconomic status?

       It is often difficult to compare studies on the effects of poverty on child

development. This is because of the wide and inconsistent range of variables that

researchers use to define their samples (Pollak & Wolfe, In press). As we will explain

below, among researchers there is no single measure of what constitutes poverty. A

second issue is a lack of clarity between a family's income and their socio-economic

status (Farah, 2018). Simply put, poverty reflects low income or low access to

resources. Socioeconomic status, or SES, is an index of who is better off or worse off in

a given society. Although often used interchangeably, these are different constructs. For

example, the amount of money someone makes is not the same as occupational

prestige. A graduate student may have a very low income in the short term but will

eventually have a high income; a minister may have a low income but also free housing

and high local prestige. For these reasons, understanding how family circumstances are

affecting the development of children may require that researchers distinguish factors

such as higher versus lower income, more versus less education, better versus worse

neighborhoods, and prestigious versus less prestigious jobs. While these factors are

associated with each other, they each confer slightly different risk and protective factors

for children.

       Operationally defining poverty-- especially in a global context-- is a complex

issue (Pollak and Wolfe, In press). Much has been published about what constitutes
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    5

poverty, how to define it, and how to measure it (Institute for Research on Poverty,

2016; Short, 2016). Issues range from whether to include only income or also in-kind

benefits; the length of time under consideration (because families can move in and out

of poverty over different periods of a child's life, depending on how poverty is

measured); whether poverty measures should be absolute or relative to the median

income in a given community; whether poverty measures should give an indication of

the depth of poverty and whether a measure of child poverty should go beyond family

income to include broader factors such as parent's human capital and/or social

isolation.

       Studies of child poverty in the United States often make reference to a threshold

called the Federal Poverty Line (FPL). This concept was developed by Mollie

Orshansky of the Social Security Administration in the 1960s (Watts,

https://www.irp.wisc.edu/publications/focus/pdfs/foc92e.pdf). The FPL is updated each

year by the Census Bureau. The Census Bureau uses a set of money income

thresholds that vary by family size and composition to determine who is in poverty. If a

family's total income is less than the family's threshold, then that family and every

individual in it is considered in poverty. The official poverty thresholds do not vary

geographically, except for Hawaii and Alaska; they are updated annually for inflation

using the Consumer Price Index. The official poverty definition uses money income

before taxes and does not include capital gains or noncash benefits (such as public

housing, Medicaid, and SNAP, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program). This

threshold was initially developed to provide a yardstick for progress or regress in

government antipoverty efforts. But it is important for child development researchers to
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     6

recognize that the FPL is a simplification of the phenomenon of poverty created for

administrative uses, such as determining financial eligibility for certain federal programs.

       The FPL is used to determine who is eligible for certain federal subsidies and aid

such as Medicaid, SNAP, Family and Planning Services, the Children's Health

Insurance Program (CHIP), the National School Lunch Program, and subsidies on the

ACA (Affordable Care Act) exchanges. The actual percentage of the FPL determining

eligibility may sometimes be set by States so long as they are within parameters set by

the federal government. Thus, the FPL is not meant to be an index of what people need

to live well or to allow children to thrive. And it is not clear that an income above the FPL

is sufficient to support a family with young children. Indeed, research suggests that

families with children need an income of at least twice the FPL to meet most basic

needs, on average and varying by location (Cauthen & Fass, 2008). Part of the reason

for this misalignment is that the original FPL was based on the premise that food

accounted for a third of a low-income family's expenditures, but that is less true today.

       The issue of a family's local cost of living does not factor into the FPL, but

creates significant variance. As an example, in 2019 the federal government classified a

family of four earning up to $117,400 as low-income in the San Francisco Bay Area

(https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/il/il2018/2018summary.odn). To generate this

number, officials at the Department of Housing and Urban Development factor in the

median income and average housing costs in an area (an index slightly different from

the FPL). For reference, an annual income of between two and seven times the

California Poverty Measure is considered middle class. By this estimate, a middle class

income in the San Francisco Bay Area would range from $74,750 to $261,623
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      7

(https://www.ppic.org/interactive/california-poverty-by-county-and-legislative-district/).

By way of contrast, a family of four earning $63,600 would be classified as low-income

in Champaign-Urbana, IL, and a middle-class income in this area would range from

approximately $43,000 to $130,00.

       There are other ways that researchers measure child poverty. Some research

teams use questionnaires to target income, whereas many other researchers in

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries define

families living below 40 or 50% of the median income of that country. Studies of child

poverty in developing countries tend to use dollars per day below a set benchmark. Still

other researchers calculate an income-to-needs ratio, the concept used for the FPL,

where needs are defined as the FPL. In other cases, a family's specific situation might

be referenced such as the presence of a person with significant disabilities, which is

likely to increase "needs" beyond the FPL.

       Other researchers focus on specific aspects of the experience of poverty, such

as food insecurity, availability of stable housing, or minimum standards in housing.

Indeed, recently published reports have used a vast array of different kinds of questions

for research participants to characterize a child's family as living in poverty. These

range from varied and idiosyncratic ways to ask research participants about their family

income, to asking about the mothers' level of education. This latter issue of maternal

education is problematic, as discussed below.

       Frequently in developmental science, parent education is used as the sole proxy

for children's socio-economic environments. But parent education, alone, provides little

precision or insight into how children experience poverty (Duncan & Magnuson, 2012).
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development       8

Moreover, parental education is more a measure of socio-economic status, which is a

different construct from poverty or family income (Pollak & Wolfe, In press). It is not yet

clear whether low family income has the similar developmental effects on children as

low family socio-economic status (Hackman, Farah, Meaney, 2010). A recent article that

compares income and SES effects on the health of older adults finds that income is a

separate and indeed more closely tied gauge than other measures of SES (Darin-

Mattsson, Fors & Kåreholt, 2017).

       In summary, there is no single, simple measure of family income or parent

education that is sufficient to index the developmental context of poverty for a child.

Even while objective indices such as the federal poverty line may provide a useful

parameter for recruiting a study sample, there is no evidence that a child living

marginally above the federal poverty level is appreciably better off than one marginally

below, and indeed some researchers include those living below 133 or 200 percent of

the FPL as poor or near poor. Moreover, poverty and socio-economic status are

separate, albeit overlapping, constructs with different implications for children's

development. For these reasons, researchers need to be mindful of the fact that many

measures of child poverty are limited, likely underestimate poverty, may not consider

other resources available to children such as tax credits, food stamps, or subsidized

housing on the positive side or tax liabilities, out-of-pocket medical costs, or work-

related expenses on the negative side (each could either over or undercount resources

available to children), and often make no adjustment for geographic variation. While

U.S. researchers tend to measure deprivation by assessing whether households can

afford to meet a set of basic needs, many other developed countries use a "relative"
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     9

measure of poverty based on the share of families below 40 or 50 percent of median

income, on the premise that in a developed society, measuring the number of families

far from the median provides a better measure of whether families are outside of the

social mainstream.



How Many Children are Affected by Poverty?

       Nearly 40% of children in the United States live in poor or near-poor households

(Child Trends Database, 2018; Figure 1). Specifically, in 2017, 12.8 million children in

the US were living in households with incomes below the official poverty threshold; 39%

of these children were living in households with incomes below twice the poverty

threshold (Child Trends Databank, 2018). These numbers reflect only a limited twelve-

month snapshot of child poverty. Most of these children have parents who work, but low

wages or unstable employment result in insufficient family resources. The number of

children in the U.S. who spend some portion of their childhoods living in poverty line is

far higher than any single year estimate, with the youngest children at the greatest risk

(Jiang, 2016). Developed countries other than the United States have lower rates of

poverty, but there are still substantial numbers of children in these countries who are

living in under-resourced families. According to UNICEF, among 35 economically

advanced nations, the rate of children living in poverty ranged from 4.7% in Iceland, to

13.3% in Canada, 23.1% in the United States, and a high of 25.5% in Romania

(UNICEF, 2012). In the developing world, UNICEF estimates that extreme child poverty

(living on less than US $1.90 per day) describes 19.5 per cent of children, compared to

9.2 per cent of adults. This translates into approximately 385 million children living in
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   10

extreme poverty across the globe (UNICEF and World Bank Group, 2016). A report by

the U.S. National Center for Children in Poverty (Koball & Jiang, 2018) reveals that 44%

of children in the U.S. under age 9 years live in low income families with 21% defined as

poor (at the FPT) and 23% as near poor (100-199% of the FPT); those percentages

represent about 15 million children.



What is it About Poverty that Affects Children's Development?

       From a developmental science perspective, the effects of child poverty are likely

to be multi-determined (Duncan, Magnusson & Votruba-Drzal, 2017). While a full review

of the poverty literature is beyond the scope of this paper, even a partial listing of

candidate factors highlights the range of issues under the umbrella of "poverty"

potentially affecting children. Causal factors that have been proposed to link poverty to

poor outcomes in children have included limited access to medical care and insurance

(Meyer & Wherry, 2016); high exposure to pollution and environmental toxins known to

affect neurological functioning (Rowe et al., 2016; Currie et al., 2014; Currie,

Greenstone, & Moretti, 2011); high exposure to violence (Cancian, Slack, & Lang,

2010); inadequate nutrition (de Groot et al., 2015); high exposure to infectious diseases

(Hotez, 2011); social pressure associated with income inequality or low income relative

to a local community (Buttrick & Oishi, 2017; Halfon et al., 2017, Pickett & Wilkinson,

2015); low economic mobility (Baulch & Hoddinott, 2000; Chetty & Hendren, 2018);

environments characterized by instability and chaos, as reflected in factors such as food

insecurity and unstable housing (Evans & Garthwaite, 2014; Schneider, 1992); and
                                     Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    11

institutionalized racism (Chetty, Hendren, Jones & Porter, 2018) and, of course, stress

which we discuss in depth below.

       One reason that it is not yet clear which of these factors causes problems

associated with poverty is that it might be poverty itself that is the problem. When a child

lives in poverty, many of these factors are present at the same time, over a protracted

period of time. Rather than any one or two of these factors being primary in influencing

a child, it may well be that it is the confluence of multiple factors that threatens a child's

well-being.



How Might New Scientific Approaches Help?

       Various neuroscience techniques such as neuroimaging, neuroendocrinology,

cognitive psychophysiology, and epigenetics are now being employed to examine

aspects of brain development and functioning associated with early experiences of

living in poverty. There are many good reasons for considering these types of biological

methods alongside the traditional social science approaches to study child poverty. For

example, it is well established that early experiences are critical for shaping many

aspects of brain development related to children's behavioral functioning (Birn et al.,

2017; Fox et al., 2010; Johnson, 2001; Romens et al., 2015; Wismer Fries, 2005). In

humans, maturation of the brain regions responsible for higher cognitive functioning

continues throughout childhood and adolescence, leaving a long window of opportunity

and vulnerability for environments to influence brain plasticity (Bunge et al., 2002;

Blakemore et al., 2006).
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      12

       Traditionally, much of the research on child development in the context of poverty

has focused on reduced stimulation and reduced opportunities for learning compared to

children in higher-income homes (Jensen et al., 2018). But it is not obvious how

environments marked by poverty influence developmental mechanisms. For example,

poverty is also characterized by an overabundance of types of stimulation that can

negatively affect development. These factors include the presence of enduring stressors

such as ambient noise (including background noise such as that associated with

ongoing and unmonitored television), persistent household chaos, recurring conflicts

among family members, exposure to environmental toxins, parental stress, and

neighborhood violence--any of which might possibly alter physiologic systems involved

in stress regulation, comfort, and perceived security/stability (Coley, Lynch & Kull, 2015;

Deater-Deckard, Sewell, Petrill & Thompson, 2010; Evans & Kim, 2013; Miller & Chen,

2013; Hair, Hanson, Wolfe & Pollak, 2015). Thus, there may be numerous (and not

mutually exclusive) potential chronic effects on neural activity that can influence brain

and behavioral development (McEwen & Gianaros, 2010; Smith & Pollak, in press). For

these reasons, the use and integration of a variety of behavioral, cognitive, and

neuroscience measures permits researchers to better understand exactly how and why

poverty reduces the potential of children. The addition of these biological approaches to

the social science disciplines that traditionally address poverty holds tremendous

promise for increasing knowledge that could lead to more effective policies aimed at

reducing the negative sequelae of poverty.

       Although research on poverty and brain development in humans is relatively

recent, the cumulative evidence thus far is yielding new and highly convergent
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    13

perspectives on how and why poverty may be linked to myriad behavioral outcomes

throughout the life course. There have been a number of thorough reviews of recent

findings pertaining to child poverty and the brain, so we direct readers to these recent

and thorough papers rather than reproduce a full literature review here (See Blair &

Raver, 2016; Farah, 2018; Johnson, Riis, Noble, 2016).

       Our own work began by examining the effects of poverty on brain regions tied to

academic functioning in children (Figure 2). We focused on brain regions known to have

protracted periods of post-natal development, and brain tissue with low levels of

heritability (and therefore a higher likelihood of being influenced by a child's

experiences). This included tissue such as gray matter (the parts of the brain consisting

mainly of nerve cells) and brain regions including the frontal lobe (with ties to the

organization of behavior, judgment, impulse control, and attention), the temporal lobe

(implicated in memory, language, and emotion), and the hippocampus (associated with

learning, memory and processing of contextual information). Our initial finding was an

association between socioeconomic status and the hippocampus, a brain region known

to be affected by stress. We measured the volume of brain regions from brain images

(N = 317) acquired from children across the socioeconomic spectrum. Children from

lower income backgrounds had lower hippocampal volumes (Hanson, Chandra, Wolfe,

& Pollak, 2011). We next examined the trajectories of brain development in infants and

toddlers between five months and four years of age, as children began to experience

the effects of poverty. These children underwent MRI scanning, completing between 1

and 7 scans longitudinally. We found that infants from low-income families had less gray

matter, tissue critical for processing of information and execution of actions. Children
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    14

from lower-income households in this study had slower trajectories of brain growth

during infancy and early childhood (Hanson, Hair, Shen, Shi, Gilmore, Wolfe, and

Pollak, 2013; Figure 3). In a subsequent study, we examined whether these poverty-

related differences in brain growth were associated with children's academic

functioning. Using a longitudinal cohort study of participants from 4 to 22 years of age,

we found that poverty was tied to structural differences in several areas of the brain

associated with school readiness skills, with the largest influence observed among

children from the poorest households. Gray matter volumes of children below 1.5 times

the federal poverty level were significantly below developmental norms. These

developmental differences had consequences for children's academic achievement. On

average, children from low-income households scored lower on standardized

educational tests of skills such as reading comprehension and math computation, and

as much as 20% of the gap in test scores could be explained by maturational lags in

development of the frontal and temporal regions of the brain (Hair, Hansen, Wolfe, and

Pollak, 2015; Figure 4).

       What has been notable and striking is that although the neuroscience of poverty

is a relatively new and emerging area of scholarship, findings across independent

laboratories, using unique samples, have been highly convergent. Most studies of the

correlates of poverty have focused on regional changes in brain morphology in regions

related to language, emotion, and executive functions (Brito & Noble, 2014). These

include replicated associations of poverty with the hippocampus (Barch et al., 2016;

Brody, Gray, Barton et al., 2017; Ellwood-Loew et al., 2018; Hair et al., 2015; Hanson et

al., 2011, 2015; Luby et al., 2013), amygdala (Brody et al., 2017; Hanson et al., 2015;
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      15

Javanbakht et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2013; Luby et al., 2013; Merz et al., 2018; Muscatell

et al., 2012;), and prefrontal lobe (Hair et al., 2015; Hanson et al., 2013; Holz et al.,

2015; Noble et al., 2006, 2015; Figure 5). Differences also emerged for two different

indices of the communication between brain regions, resting-state functional

connectivity (Sripada et al., 2014), and white matter tracts (Dufford and Kim, 2017;

Gianaros et al., 2013; Gullick et al., 2016; Noble et al., 2015). The largest sample to

date reported wide-spread reductions in the surface area of the brain associated with

childhood poverty (Noble et al., 2015). In another study, lower family income tended to

be associated with reduced activation of the frontal lobe when children had to activate

their memory systems (Finn et al., 2017). These differences in brain function explained

differences in mathematics achievement test scores, an effect similar to our earlier

(2015) findings. To date, multiple papers have reported associations between

socioeconomic disadvantage and reduced cortical gray matter, as measured in terms of

volume (Hair, Hanson, Wolfe, & Pollak, 2015; Jednorog et al., 2012), thickness

(Lawson, Duda, Avants, Wu, & Farah, 2013; Mackey et al., 2015;), and surface area

(Noble et al., 2015). These brain measures correlate with measures of language

development (Romeo et al., 2017), executive functioning (Noble et al., 2015),

standardized tests of academic achievement (Finn et al., 2017; Hair et al., 2015;

Mackey et al., 2015), memory (Leonard, Mackey, & Finn, 2015), and well-being/health

(Evans, 2016; Krishnadas, McLean, Batty, et al., 2013). Thus, while research in this

area is still in a relatively early stage, there is a high degree in consistency among the

findings.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    16

       This new focus on biobehavioral mechanisms underlying poverty is poised to

guide empirically based and targeted interventions and policies for these children and

their families, as well as offering promise about ways to evaluate the effectiveness of

various anti-poverty programs focusing on children's development. This is an important

and timely issue given that most anti-poverty programs suffer from low effect sizes. A

fairly recent review of studies that evaluate early schooling found little robust evidence

of significant, positive effects of most interventions (Duncan and Magnuson, 2013). The

authors found "education programs appear to boost cognitive ability and early school

achievement in the short run. However, most of them show smaller impacts than those

generated by the best-known programs, and their cognitive impacts largely disappear

within a few years" (p.110). Duncan and Magnuson do suggest that more recent studies

suggest possible longer term effects on years of education, earnings and lower crime,

but clearly the evidence is mixed on the effectiveness of early childhood schooling, a

currently popular intervention. The evidence of fade out of effects suggests a possible

major contribution for "brain approaches. That is, since findings regarding short and

longer-term impacts on "cognitive and noncognitive" outcomes are mixed, it is uncertain

what investments in skills, behaviors, or developmental processes are particularly

important in producing positive impacts across the child's lifespan. The National

Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine sponsored a 2019 report that

responded to a Congressional mandate "to identify evidence-based programs and

policies for reducing the number of children living in poverty in the United States by half

within 10 years" (p.1). While they found evidence that a handful of programs (such as

the earned income tax credit, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, and
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     17

housing subsidies), do reduce poverty and lead to better child outcomes, the evidence

of how best to spend public dollars remains limited. The report concludes: the "[Office of

Management and Budget] should also convene working groups charged with assessing

the report's recommendations for research and data collection to fill important gaps in

knowledge about effective anti-child-poverty programs" (p. 6). We believe brain based

research can help us to learn how best to spend public dollars in this endeavor.



How can these data be applied to helping disadvantaged children?

       Below, we suggest five ways in which neuroscience-based approaches can be

harnessed to improve the circumstances of children living in poverty.



(1) Leverage a culture that values biology



       Though perhaps the least scholarly benefit of neuroscience, this rationale may

nonetheless confer significant benefit to anti-poverty efforts on behalf of children. For

better and for worse, issues that are framed as biomedical tend to get attention, are

elevated as priorities, and receive support that is not viewed as politically partisan. And

there is evidence that neuroscience data is viewed by the general public as especially

compelling. For these reasons, bringing brain-based measures to bear upon issues of

child poverty holds potential to not only to demonstrate effects of social programs, but to

also increase the likelihood that these effects are noticed and discussed by policy

makers.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     18

       This is such a non-scholarly argument that we want to be clear about what are

not saying. First, neuroscience data does not have elevated ontological status relative

to behavioral evidence. Second, no one needs neuroscience data to convey that

poverty is bad. And third, all behavior has a neurobiological underpinning, so the mere

fact that a behavioral phenomenon has a brain correlate is hardly a groundbreaking

insight. What is of potential value-- aside from real advances in understanding how

poverty influences basic aspects of children's biological development-- is that at the

very least, studies that provide neurobiological evidence may bring more interested

parties to the table. There is potential leverage to be gained from the fact that

neuroscientific evidence is often assumed-- incorrectly-- by laypersons to be more valid

and robust because the lay public often lacks the training or expertise that would enable

them to view neuroscience data through a critical lens. The lack of knowledge that most

laypersons have about the workings of the brain, much less the nuances of

neuroscientific methods, often leads them to be overly impressed by brain science,

even when behavioral research may be more relevant to policy decisions. The point is

not that neuroscience data itself is not useful or is somehow "duping" the general public.

We are simply stating that if brain data engages the interest and attention of people who

might not otherwise be inclined to support anti-poverty programs, that is a real benefit

for everyone.

       There has been some empirical research about the extent to which neuroscience

data compels people. Some studies report that brain images have a particularly

persuasive influence and that explanations of psychological phenomena generate more

public interest when they contain neuroscientific information. For example, presenting
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   19

brain images with articles resulted in higher ratings of scientific rigor for arguments

made in those articles as compared to articles accompanied by bar graphs (McCable &

Castel, 2008). Even irrelevant neuroscience information may influence how people

judge scientific information: people judged study descriptions containing irrelevant

neuroscience information as more satisfying than explanations without such data

(Weisberg, Keil, Goodstein, Rawson & Gray, 2008). One study even found that the

effects of brain images on evaluations of scientific reports was moderated by the way

those images were presented, with three-dimensional pictures of neuroimaging results

producing more positive evaluations (Keeher, Mayberry, & Fischer, 2011). These data

lend support to the notion that part of the fascination with neuroscience research lies in

the persuasive power of the actual brain images themselves, which provides a

seemingly physical basis for abstract processes, appeals to people's affinity for

reductionistic explanations of complex phenomena, or at least piques a fascination with

the idea of insight into the human brain (Beck, 2010).

       Some scientists have questioned the idea that people are especially compelled

by brain images, calling this is a "persistent meme" without empirical support (Michael,

Newman, Vuorre, Cumming & Garry, 2013). One study failed to replicate the earlier

findings in this regard, finding no general evidence of a neuroimage bias in people's

evaluation of scientific reports. Yet this same study noted that when laypeople are

exposed to multiple sources of data (e.g., when directly comparing neuroimages to

other depictions of data), a limited neuroimage bias was observed (Schweitzer, Baker,

& Risko, 2013). One possibility is that between 2008, when the original neuroimaging

bias studies were conducted, and 2013, when these findings were questioned, the
                                     Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      20

general public became less influenced by brain images. A more likely explanation is

supported by a recent set of experiments evaluating whether neuroscience information,

more broadly construed that just brain images, make explanations of psychological

phenomena more appealing. This study was done while controlling for participants'

analytical thinking abilities, beliefs on free will, and admiration for science. The

researchers found that accompanying fMRI pictures had no impact above and beyond

the neuroscience text, but that people found neuroscience information more alluring

than both social science and physical science information. People's analytical thinking

did not protect against the neuroscience bias, nor did a belief in free will (Fernandez-

Duque, Evans, Christian, & Hodges, 2015). Thus, the "allure of neuroscience" appears

to be conceptual rather than merely pictorial, reflecting lay beliefs about the explanatory

power of the human brain. In other words, the language and imprimatur of neuroscience

itself is compelling.

       Harnessing the power of this allure to heighten interest and concern about the

effects of child poverty is a net positive. But it is not without risks. The general public

may assume that biological correlates of some behavior demonstrates that the behavior

cannot be changed and that an individual has some sort of permanent deficit. Such a

conclusion would likely be false given evidence that the brain is malleable, and there is

a good deal of evidence that human brains have periods of heightened neuroplasticity.

Related to a confidence in all things biological is the common misunderstanding that

something "biological" is somehow innate and not the result of environmental factors, a

false conclusion belied by decades of empirical studies. In sum, conveying that children

in poverty show less activation in a brain region or neural system can be extremely
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   21

compelling to someone with little knowledge neuroscience, but also confers some risk of

misunderstanding. Brain-based data sounds both definitive and scientific, especially

because in most cases, presentations to policymakers do not afford the time to explain

the complicated processes of arriving at these conclusions. For this reason,

policymakers may construe an fMRI image as a photograph, or akin to an X-ray image.

In most brief interactions with policymakers, it may not be the best use of time to

undertake an explanation of the fact that fMRI images are highly processed interactions

between radio waves and the magnetic properties of hydrogen and deoxygenated

hemoglobin. Perhaps ironically, the complexity of the neuroscience methods

themselves may well lead laypeople to have greater confidence in the scientific rigor of

the images than in the behavioral phenomena that initially motivated the neuroscience

study. Thus, while it is useful for the public to be informed about ongoing research, this

usually requires that complex methods and findings are distilled into a simple message;

the difficult part is making sure that the simple message communicates what can and

cannot be concluded from the data.



(2) Neural activity might reveal processes underlying disparities not otherwise

observable, and that might also (hopefully) be responsive to change and generate

new or more refined hypotheses.



       Although studies have been successful at documenting the range of negative

sequelae associated with exposure to poverty in childhood, questions about the

specificity and distinctiveness of the mental processes affected by these experiences
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     22

have been elusive. There are a number of ways in which brain data might elucidate

developmental mechanisms, or at least provide a physiological grounding to constrain

or refine hypotheses regarding how and why economic deprivation affects child

development. This is because in vivo human brain-related responses can provide a

window into potential subcomponents of cognitive functioning, or mental processes

generally, that may not be observable from overt behavior. This is achieved not by

focusing only on "where" brain activation differences occur, but "how" the brain appears

to be processing different kinds of information.

       One education-relevant example is attention, a common but highly complex

phenomenon with many distinct sub-components. Attention often has the appearance of

a unitary system, and it is not uncommon to hear children described as having generally

good or poor attentional functioning. This tendency to generalize about attention may

arise because many of the behavioral consequences of attention covary and are difficult

to discern. However, in the brain, attention-related changes in neuronal activity are

observed in widespread structures, suggesting that attention results from

subcomponents corresponding to distinct biological mechanisms (Luo & Maunsell,

2019). It is possible that exposure to childhood poverty affects some particular neural

systems, or that some of these systems might be most amenable to change. If so,

knowledge of this processes would allow for more targeted--and perhaps more

effective--interventions.

       The notion that attention includes distinct components and forms is well

established. To illustrate, one aspect of attention involves sustaining vigilance over a

long time period to maintain performance across a task. Children need attentional
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     23

vigilance to pay attention over the course of a lesson or class, during a story or

presentation, or while reading. This is essentially preventing the mind (or eyes) from

wandering and staying engaged for a set period of time. A different aspect of attention

involves switching engagement, such as changing from one activity to another, or

attending to what a teacher is doing in front of a classroom while also attending to the

materials on one's own desk. Working on an assignment while also monitoring the time

left to complete the assignment is also example of this type of attention. Yet another

aspect of attention involves selecting what in the environment is relevant and important,

and dismissing irrelevant information so that cognitive resources are deployed to

important stimuli. In this regard attention can be more of less selective. Further,

attention is also subdivided according to what caused it to be deployed: physical events

in the environment (such as verbal instructions or a loud noise) versus internal factors

under voluntary control versus lingering effects of what someone has recently learned

or experienced (Maunsell, 2015). And finally, attention can be still further subdivided

into whether it is overt attention (associated with detectable behavior) or covert attention

(when attention changes with no outward manifestation). This range of examples is

meant only to highlight the many ways in which aspects of attention can span

timescales, functions, and goals that are not easily separated through behavioral

measures (Fortenbaugh, DeGutis, & Esterman, 2017).

       Similar to attention, cognitive functions such as memory also have

subcomponents that might be selectively impaired or remediated. It is now recognized

that different components of memory depend on separate brain structures. For

example, behavioral data could not reveal that separate processes underlie the abilities
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      24

to recall something directly versus recognizing something as seeming familiar (Henson,

2005). Different sub-skills necessary for effective reading are associated with activation

in separate brain regions (Welcome & Joanisse, 2012). And generally, in most

behavioral tasks, it is difficult to manipulate or measure a component of a participant's

attention without also capturing other cognitive processes, such as reward expectation,

motor preparation, or working memory.

       Besides specific skills relevant to children's healthy development, functional

neuroimaging has potential to reveal the general processes through which early

adverse experiences might affect children's learning (Smith & Pollak, In press). By

indexing fluctuations of neural activity, neuroimaging allows for an examination of the

processes through which children acquire new information or skills rather than a focus

solely on the outcome of learning (Karuza, Emberson & Aslin, 2014). As with attention,

memory, and reading, learning is often referred to as a single process, but the concept

subsumes many different operations and neural processes. Thus, there might be

multiple neural and psychological processes that are differentially affected by the

adversity associated with poverty. As just a few of many possibilities, there appear to be

distinct and separable neural processes for acquiring new information as compared to

using that information (McNealy et al., 2006), making predictions based upon learned

information (Waelti, Dickinson & Schultz, 2001), and learning the cause of an outcome

(Gerschman & Niv, 2010).

       There are likely changes in neural activity before there can be behavioral

evidence of learning, presumably during initial exposure to stimuli, before corresponding

behavioral changes are evident. Thus, based upon overt behavior alone, it is difficult to
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   25

differentiate participants who can learn, but do so more slowly versus those who

experience difficulties at the earliest stages of learning. Indeed, the time course of

learning is a reliable and important individual difference (Turk-Browne, Scholl, Johnson,

& Chun, 2010), and one that might be especially important in designing anti-poverty

early childhood education programs. For example, some children might do well earlier in

the learning process and then poorly later (something akin to fatigue), whereas other

may have poor performance early on and see their performance improve later in the

learning process (akin to needing a "warm-up"). Indeed, the time course of learning, and

the trajectory of learning during a task has emerged as an important variable in

accounting for social and educational difficulties in children exposed to very high levels

of adversity and stress (Hanson et al., 2017; Harms et al., 2018). These are insights

that cannot be observed without methods that allow analyses of how children continue

to process information after they are exposed to it (Karuza, Emberson & Aslin, 2014).

       Our point here is not that brain measures are an ideal or even the best possible

research approaches. They are among many tools and have their limitations. There are

many examples of cases where brain activity is uninformative about the similarity of

psychological tasks. For example, it is always possible that two tasks might involve the

same brain regions but use different populations of neurons or different patterns of

connectivity between regions. Conversely, two tasks might involve different regions but

involve the same type of computation. And observed brain activation may not be

essential for a given task at all. But overall, behavior alone might not have the specificity

needed to effectively tailor interventions for at-risk children because many different

theories about interactions between brain processes rely on similar behavioral
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     26

predictions (White & Poldrack, 2013). For these reasons, insights into neural processes

holds promise to help us understand questions such as when in development children

are most vulnerable, when interventions may effect maximal change, which processes

are amenable to remediation, and how much interventions are needed to effect change.



(3) Brain physiology may predict behavior better than available behavioral

measures



       Functional MRI is usually used in clinical research to show differences between

groups. But patterns of brain activity can prospectively predict important behavioral

outcomes across a range of domains, with increasing evidence that neuroimaging data

(and potentially other brain physiology measures) serves as a better predictor of future

behavior than traditional behavioral measures such as self-reports, clinical rating scales,

or scores on educational or neuropsychological tests (Gabrieli, Ghosh, & Whitfield-

Gabrieli, 2014). Therefore, there is good reason to suggest that future studies might

leverage neuromarkers for individualized predictions of educational or health outcomes

for children living in poverty. Such data could be used to develop novel intervention

strategies, or perhaps individually optimize the type of timing of educational and clinical

practices for children most susceptible to poor outcomes.

       There are three different ways that prediction can be useful for studies of child

poverty. The first is the approach most often used in research. That is, prediction is

used simply to refer to correlation between two contemporaneous values, such as a

score on some task (such as a measure of impulsivity) being associated with some
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     27

individual difference variable (such as regional brain activation). This type of study is

useful in uncovering mechanisms underlying maladaptive behaviors. But that is not our

primary focus here.

       Prediction can also refer to within-sample changes over time. For example, task

performance when a cohort is aged 5 years predicting an outcome when that cohort is

aged 10 years. This is a very different kind of analysis from the first, and more common,

use of prediction because significant group differences (detected via t tests) are more

likely to occur when there is high within-group homogeneity. In contrast, factors

associated with the likelihood of predicting future outcomes harness heterogeneity

within a sample. Indeed, variables that significantly differentiate between groups are

often weak predictors of future behavior (Lo, Chernoff, Zheng, & Lo, 2015). To explore

the utility of this predictive approach, Jollans & Whelan (2016) reviewed studies that

used neuroimaging measures to predict treatment response and disease outcomes in a

range of psychiatric and neurological illnesses. They found that many of the studies

were able to predict behavioral outcomes, with neuroimaging data often augmenting the

prediction compared to clinical or psychometric data alone. Based upon their meta-

analytic review, they report that brain measures explain a significant amount of variance

where clinical and behavioral variables fail to do so, with brain measures accounting for

up to 40% of the variance in clinical outcomes. Moreover, in a number of studies that

Jollans & Whelan reviewed, it was only the neuroimaging variables that successfully

predicted clinical outcomes. In this regard, although measures of brain physiology may

be expensive or difficult to collect, the benefit may exceed the cost of unsuccessful

interventions and educational failure for children.
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    28

       A third way that neuroimaging data can be used holds tremendous promise for

policy and intervention development. This approach involves predicting outcomes for

new individuals based upon previously collected data from other individuals. In this

case, prediction refers to a generalizable model; a study with a sample that is used to

predict the behavior of individuals who were not part of that original sample (Berkman &

Falk, 2013). In this manner, a relatively small (easily collected, less expensive) sample

is used to make predictions or treatment decisions for a larger population (Falk et al.,

2012). This may represent a powerful and feasible way to evaluate prevention and

intervention programs for children in poverty.

       Below we provide just a few illustrative examples of how neuroimaging has been

used to make educationally or clinically useful predictions. We draw these samples from

a range of different domains that are relevant to poverty studies.

       Prediction of Reading Development. Neuroimaging measures have been shown

to enhance and even outperform traditional behavioral measures in forecasting

children's reading abilities. In studies such as these, children are identified by their

teachers as having reading problems and then evaluated with behavioral tests of

reading and reading-related skills as well as fMRI tasks. One longitudinal study

examined how the behavioral measures, fMRI activation for a word-rhyming task, and

DTI (diffusion tensor imaging) indices of white matter organization predicted reading

difficulties three grade years ahead (Hoeft et al., 2011). This study reported that none of

the behavioral measures correlated with future reading gains, but the brain measures

did. High levels of activation in the right prefrontal cortex and white matter organization

of the right superior longitudinal fasciculus predicted, with 72% accuracy, whether
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development       29

children's reading problems persisted. In another longitudinal study, 9-15 year old

children were initially assessed for reading skill and performed an fMRI rhyming

judgment task. The patterns of brain activation in the fMRI task predicted the type of

difficulties that children encountered in their reading six years later. Increased activity

relative to peers in neural circuits associated with phonological recoding (i.e., inferior

frontal gyrus and basal ganglia) predicted which children would show greater gains in

reading fluency among the younger children, whereas increased activity relative to

peers in orthographic processing circuits (i.e., fusiform gyrus) was predictive of smaller

gains in fluency for older children (McNorgan et al., 2011). The results suggest that

younger children who are more sensitive to phonological word characteristics make

greater reading proficiency gains, whereas older children who focus more on whole-

word orthographic representations make smaller proficiency gains. A third example is a

study involving kindergarteners who were not yet reading. They were administered a

combination of behavioral measures, event-related potentials (ERPs), and fMRI

responses to presentations of printed letters; these measures, in combination, explained

88% of the variance in reading ability when those children reached second grade (Bach

et al., 2013). These data suggest that neuromarkers can be used to identify children

who will encounter difficulties learning to read even before reading instruction begins in

school. As Gabrieli et al. (2014) point out, this is important because current reading

interventions are most effective in young, beginning readers, and effective intervention

prior to reading failure may not only be more effective but also spare children the sense

of failure that often accompanies early struggles in reading. Using fMRI or ERPs in a

predictive manner could also help tailor the kinds of educational interventions that may
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    30

be most beneficial for individual children and are certainly amenable to cost-benefit

types of analyses.

       Prediction of Substance Abuse. In a longitudinal study, 12- to 14-year-olds with

little or no history of substance abuse performed a go/no-go task of response inhibition

while undergoing fMRI (Norman et al., 2011). About 4 years later, those fMRI results

accurately predicted those adolescents who did or did not transition to heavy use of

alcohol. Reductions in activation within the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices

predicted adolescents who later transitioned to heavy alcohol use relative to those who

did not. A separate study reported highly convergent results. Among adolescents 16­19

years of age with an ongoing history of substance use disorders, those who exhibited

less prefrontal and greater parietal activation on a similar go/no-go the task had higher

levels of substance use 18 months after scanning (Mahmood et al., 2013).

       Prediction of Depression. fMRI data has successfully predicted disease course in

patients with depression. One study reported that clinical variables, such as the number

of previous depressive episodes, depression symptom severity, and time in remission,

did not alone predict whether patients remained in remission after 14 months. However,

outcome predictions reached 75% accuracy on the basis of fMRI data gathered during a

self-versus other-blaming task (Lythe, Moll, Gethin, Workman, Green, & Ralph, 2015).

Another study found that activation in the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex during an

emotion information processing task measured prior to treatment predicted which

depressed patients had the most improvement following a cognitive behavioral

treatment (Siegle, Thompson, Collier, Berman, Feldmiller, Thase, & Friedman, 2012). A

similar study found the same pattern of results-- and it is noteworthy that only the brain
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     31

physiology variables successfully predicted clinical outcomes (Gong, Wu, Scarpazza,

Lui, Jia, Marquand, & Mechelli, 2011). Thus, brain physiology appears to provide a

clinically applicable way of assessing neural systems associated with treatment

response.

       Prediction of Healthy Eating. Healthy eating to avoid or reduce obesity is also a

major public health concern. Neuroimaging studies have reported that fMRI activations

in response to food-related pictures forecast future changes in body mass index (BMI).

One study examined the relation between baseline fMRI activations and weight gain

over the following year in adolescent females ranging from lean to obese using an

attention task involving food and neutral stimuli. fMRI measures of activation in brain

regions including the anterior insula/frontal operculum, lateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC),

ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), and superior parietal lobe correlated with future

increases in BMI 1-year later (Yokum et al., 2011). These are networks tied to attention

and reward processing. None of the behavioral measures predicted future weight gain.

Many people who engage in weight loss interventions fail to reach targeted goals or

maintain their efforts. A recent study used neuroimaging to predict success in healthy

eating based upon the idea of identifying individuals most amenable to behavioral

change. fMRI data was prospectively collected prior to a behavioral weight loss

intervention involving overweight adults. Machine learning and functional brain networks

predicted which adults would continue to follow through with the intervention 18 months

later with 95% accuracy (Mokhtari, Rejeski, Zhu, Wu, Simpson, Burdette, & Laurienti,

2018). Connectivity patterns that contributed to the prediction consisted of brain
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   32

networks that are associated with self-regulation, body awareness, and the sensory

features of food.

       In sum, the potential to tailor personalized treatment plans or early interventions,

to identify individuals in need of most intensive interventions, or to identify larger

populations of individuals who can benefit from a treatment based upon smaller

samples could have considerable implications for the economic cost of health care and

educational practice. Of course, it is reasonable to consider whether using brain

measures as part of educational planning is practical given the costs and need for

children to visit imaging facilities. As noted above, cost-benefit analyses would help

determine whether brain physiology techniques are approipriate, justified, and feasible.

Other less costly indices of brain function, such as ERPs, may also be useful in this

regard. ERPs are far less costly and the equipment is relatively easily transported to

school and community settings. But given the long-range costs of educational deficits,

and the non-negligible costs of traditional psychological and educational assessments

and of interventiosn with modest efficacies, such an option may pass a cost-benefit test,

especially for severely delayed learners.




(4) Neural measures may allow us to evaluate interventions and policies earlier.

(including "shadow effects")

       When a new program or intervention is introduced, even with an experimental

design, the evaluation of that program is usually focused on relatively short term

outcomes. Rarely are studies designed (or funded) to measure long term outcomes
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   33

such as future earnings of children enrolled in a preschool program. Researchers and

funders are rarely willing to wait for a decade or more to measure potential outcomes.

Today, it is possible to use administrative records (along with consent agreements) to

gather such data. But still, researchers must wait a long time to access such data, and

participant attrition may reduce reliability. One example of the importance of measuring

longer terms outcomes associated with an intervention (also called shadow effects) is

the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) study. MTO is an experimental program that offered

some families the opportunity to move out of high poverty neighborhoods (Chetty et al.,

2016). Earlier research had found that this housing experiment had only small effects on

children, and it appeared that these effects faded over time. But more recent

examination of the data revealed shadow effects that were not apparent until the

children were older. Among the positive effects associated with childrens' families

moving to low poverty neighborhoods before the children were 13 years of age included

an increased probability of attending college and higher earnings during their mid-20s.

This result did not hold for children who moved when they were older. The study used

tax data to discover the longer term results. For this reason, these effects of the

intervention could not be seen when children were young, but only after they had

entered the workforce. It is possible that the use of neuroscience approaches might

allow us to capture early signs of these long run outcomes, and thereby identify

programs that are likely to be effective.



(5) Bootstrapping Extant Neuroscience Knowledge
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   34

       We currently understand little about how and why poverty can have such

devastating effects on children's healthy development. But the neuroscience literature

provides some insight into factors that may serve as causal mechanisms linking poverty

to poor health and educational outcomes. Therefore, we can draw from literatures on

the effects of extreme stress and adversity, ranging from exposure to toxins to

nutritional restriction to housing and food instability to limited family resources to

dangerous neighborhoods to parental stress. These studies of various forms of stress

can provide insight into the mechanisms that may affect children living in poverty.

       There are consistent relationships between high levels of stress exposure and

disruption of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis (Koss & Gunnar, 2017;

Strüber, Strüber, & Roth, 2014), autonomic nervous system (Esposito, Koss, Donzella,

& Gunnar, 2016), and immune system functioning (Danese & Lewis, 2017; Danese -cite

this issue; Miller & Chen, 2010; Müller et al., 2019), as well as epigenetic changes,

especially in the glucocorticoid receptor gene (Papale, Seltzer, Madrid, Pollak, & Alisch,

2018; Romens & Pollak, 2015; Turecki & Meaney, 2016; Tyrka, Price, Marsit, Walters, &

Carpenter, 2012). These are systems that have implications for issues of behavioral

regulation, academic performance, and health. A recent, and important, longitudinal

study demonstrates that such effects on the HPA system remain open to recalibration in

humans if environmental factors improve (Gunnar, DePasquale, Reid, & Donzella,

2019). This suggests that anti-poverty intervention efforts should include a focus on the

prepubertal and peripubertal period in order to maximize their impact on recalibrating

systems like the HPA axis.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      35

       In addition, physiological alterations in the stress system appear to be linked to

functional and structural changes in a number of brain regions (Fan et al., 2014; Gorka

et al., 2014; Palacios-Barrios & Hanson, 2019; Tottenham & Sheridan, 2009). To

illustrate, chronic stress is associated with global changes in dendritic branching and

synaptic plasticity throughout the prefrontal cortex (PFC), amygdala, and

hippocampus--circuitry that has been implicated in alterations in learning, memory, and

stress responsivity (Hostinar & Gunnar, 2013; Ironside, Kumar, Kang, & Pizzagalli,

2018; McEwen & McEwen, 2017; Novick et al., 2018 ). All of these domains have arisen

in descriptions of outcomes associated with child poverty. Recent studies suggest that

early adversity may lead to altered connectivity between the amygdala and PFC (Gee et

al., 2013; VanTieghem & Tottenham, 2018). Comparable alterations in development of

the hippocampus are observed in children who experienced a variety of experiences

including abuse, neglect, poverty, and general chronic stress (Gorka, Hanson, Radtke,

& Hariri, 2014; Hanson, Nacewicz, et al., 2015; Teicher et al., 2018). These stress-

related changes all appear to be similarly, and at least partially, mediated by

corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and glucocorticoids, key regulators of the HPA

axis (Koss & Gunnar, 2017; McEwen & Morrison, 2013; Vazquez et al., 2006; Wang et

al., 2011).

       There are some other promising lines of research on the neurobiology of stress

that are highly relevant to the experiences of children living in poverty. We highlight

some of these briefly below.

       Perceptions of Insecurity. Children's perceptions of scarcity or insecurity

associated with family poverty might influence their neurobiology (Brosschot, Verkuil, &
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    36

Thayer, 2017; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984; B. S. McEwen, 2019; Peters, McEwen, &

Friston, 2017; Sapolsky, 2015). This type of effect depends upon how organisms

perceive the controllability and predictability of stressors (Bollini, Walker, Hamann, &

Kestler, 2004; Muller, 2012). In humans, individual differences in perceptions of control

have been linked to differential cortisol responses to acute laboratory stress, differences

in brain volume, and differences in brain reactivity to stress in regions including the

hippocampus, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex (Harnett et al., 2015; Hashimoto et al.,

2015). This may be a critical factor in cases where housing and food are insecure.

       Yet, it is not simply the case that how a potential stressor is perceived attenuates

or exacerbates physiological responses. Rather, individual's perceptions of their own

circumstances trigger different patterns of responses across neural systems. As an

illustrative example, if individuals construe their personal resources as sufficient to

outweigh a situational demand, they evince increased sympathetic cardiac activation,

accompanied by increased cardiac output and decreased vascular resistance. In

contrast, if individuals perceive that same situation as outweighing their personal

resources, their increased sympathetic cardiac activity is accompanied by decreased

cardiac efficiency, including changes in cardiac output and increased vascular

resistance (Mendes & Park, 2014; Sammy et al., 2017). These cardiovascular patterns

have been linked to distinct patterns of HPA activation (Seery, 2011). This basic science

has clear applicability to individuals developing within under-resourced environments.

Other factors that influence how individuals interpret potential stressors include whether

individuals perceive themselves to be in a safe or dangerous environment (Blascovich,
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      37

2008; Jamieson, Hangen, Lee, & Yeager, 2018), which may account for the effects of

children living in dangerous or loud neighborhoods.

       Intensity and Cumulative Stress. Humans also evince increases in sympathetic

noradrenergic, adrenomedullary, and HPA responses for a range of stressors that vary

according to the intensity of the stressor (Ouellet-Morin et al., 2019), and stressors

perceived as more intense are associated with larger cortisol responses (Skoluda et al.,

2015). For this reason, it is important to remember that the context of poverty does not

involve any single stressor for children, but a wide net of different sources of stress over

protracted periods of time. One study reported that children with high levels of chronic

life stress had smaller amygdala and hippocampal volumes than children exposed to

less intense levels of early adversity (Hanson, Nacewicz, et al., 2015). Germaine to this

this discussion, it is noteworthy that children with reports of child abuse, neglect, and

those living in poverty all showed similar effects on brain structure, suggesting a

common stress-related mechanism across these early life experiences. Yet another

study found that individuals who experienced high levels of adversity when they were

children demonstrated altered activation in circuits involved in risk-taking and decision-

making when they were young adults (Birn et al., 2017). These effects were not

explained by the stress in the participant's current adult lives, but only their childhood

experiences.

       Environmental Instability. Recent research also suggests that predictability in the

environment shapes children's cognitive outcomes (Davis et al., 2017; Also Davis - this

issue). Longitudinal research finds that unpredictability, including factors highly relevant

to poverty such as frequent changes in maternal employment, residence, and
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development       38

cohabitation, was associated with increased externalizing behaviors in adolescence

(Doom, Vanzomeren-Dohm, & Simpson, 2016). Similarly, research in rodents indicates

that these observed effects are a result of altered functioning in prefrontal-hippocampal-

amygdala circuits, finding that lack of stability in the early environment is associated

with altered connectivity between the medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala (Bolton et

al., 2018), as well as decreased dendritic arborization in the hippocampus (Molet et al.,

2016). Together, this body of work is consistent with the view that better assessment of

variation in the predictability, stability, and/or degree of contingent responding of adult

caregivers to the needs of the developing child will provide insight into developmental

alterations in prefrontal cortical and subcortical stress response circuits (for discussion,

see Smith and Pollak, In press).

       In sum, there is not likely to be a brain signature specific to poverty. For one, the

experience of poverty involves many different kinds of experiences converging on

children and their families over time. But also, the brain is unlikely to respond in distinct

ways to the variety of adversities that humans might encounter. For these reasons, it

will be productive to apply and built from the extant body of knowledge about the

neurobiology of stress to further our understanding of the effects of family poverty on

children's development.



Conclusion

       Child poverty represents a worldwide humanitarian, public health, and pragmatic

problem. Poverty affects the lives of millions of children and needs more progress and

new ideas based upon a variety of scientific evidence. From a humanitarian
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     39

perspective, poverty represents not merely low income, but a deprivation of children's

human capabilities (Sen, 1999). From an economic perspective, the cost of poverty is

high. For example, problems associated with poverty, including child maltreatment,

crime and incarceration, reduced earnings, health problems, and child homelessness

cost the United States $1.03 trillion dollars in 2016 (McLaughlin & Rank, 2018). The

number represented 28% of the entire federal budget that year. But the impact of most

early childhood anti-poverty programs is quite modest (Duncan & Magnuson, 2011). We

know that impoverished children are likely to grow up with fewer skills to contribute to

society because of educational under-attainment and are disproportionately likely to

experience more serious health problems. These costs are borne by the children

themselves, but by the wider society as well.

       For these reasons, neuroscientific approaches may be successfully married with

social science approaches to generate new clues about possible prevention and

intervention policies and programs. It is not that there will be a clear brain signal that is

diagnostic of poverty, or that any single neural process affected by poverty will be a

direct cause of poor outcomes among impoverished children. Poverty represents many

different kinds of social interactions, challenges, and stressors over the course of a

child's development. But developmental neuroscience does have a rich corpus of data

that can help.

       At the same time, the use of neuroscience to better understand poverty must be

undertaken in a way that is mindful of three important issues. The first is the fact that

most neuroscience techniques, such as fMRI and ERPs, are well suited to questions

with few variables that can be examined with a limited range of response options. But
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    40

the effects of poverty likely involve very complex problems with multiple variables. The

second is that the brain is unlikely to be wired in a way that specifically responds to

different aspects of the wide variety of possible human experiences. Therefore, brain

effects are likely not going to be specific to poverty, per se, but to generalize broadly to

the effects of chronic adversity on child development.

       The third is that biological correlates of poverty may represent powerful

opportunities for policy, but the biology-policy links will be non-obvious or direct. In

general, policymakers care about broad social metrics such as improving health or

mortality rates, increasing high school graduation rates, or positive employment

outcomes. Developmental psychologists study constructs such as executive functions,

self-regulation, and phonemic awareness. And neuroscientists study phenomena such

as brain connectivity, hippocampal volume, hormone fluctuations, and synapses. Simple

solutions should not be expected, and simple causal explanations perhaps viewed with

skepticism. But with thoughtful, integrative and cross-disciplinary work, linking these

levels of analyses shows great promise for targeting and refining new and effective

interventions, programs, and policies. We place great hope on using new ways to

combine scientific tools and multi-disciplinary insights to ensure equity in children's

health, success, and wellbeing.



References

       Bach, S., Richardson, U., Brandeis, D., Martin, E., and Brem, S. (2013). Print

specific multimodal brain activation in kindergarten improves prediction of reading skills

in second grade. Neuroimage, 82, 605­615.
                                  Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   41

      Barch, D., Pagliaccio, D., Belden, A., Harms, M.P., Gaffrey, M., Sylvester, C.M.,

Tillman, R., Luby, J., 2016. Effect of hippocampal and amygdala connectivity on the

relationship between preschool poverty and school-age depression. American Journal

of Psychiatry, 173, 625­634.

      Baulch, B., & Hoddinott, J. (2000). Economic mobility and poverty dynamics in

developing countries. The Journal of Development Studies, 36(6), 1-24.

      Beck, D. M. (2010). The appeal of the brain in the popular press. Perspectives on

Psychological Science, 5(6), 762-766.

      Berkman, E. T., & Falk, E. B. (2013). Beyond brain mapping: Using neural

measures to predict real-world outcomes. Current Directions in Psychological

Science, 22(1), 45-50.

      Berkman, E. T., & Falk, E. B. (2013). Beyond brain mapping: Using neural

measures to predict real-world outcomes. Current Directions in Psychological

Science, 22(1), 45-50.

      Birn, R. M., Roeber, B. J., & Pollak, S. D. (2017). Early childhood stress

exposure, reward pathways, and adult decision making. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences, 114(51), 13549­13554.

      Blair, C., & Raver, C. C. (2016). Poverty, stress, and brain development: New

directions for prevention and intervention. Academic Pediatrics, 16(3), S30-S36.

      Blascovich, J. (2008). Challenge and threat. In A. J. Elliot (Ed.), Handbook of

approach and avoidance motivation (pp. 431­446). New York: Psychology Press.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     42

       Bollini, A. M., Walker, E. F., Hamann, S., & Kestler, L. (2004). The influence of

perceived control and locus of control on the cortisol and subjective responses to stress.

Biological Psychology, 67, 245­260.

       Bolton, J. L., Molet, J., Regev, L., Chen, Y., Rismanchi, N., Haddad, E., ...

Baram, T. Z. (2018). Anhedonia Following Early-Life Adversity Involves Aberrant

Interaction of Reward and Anxiety Circuits and Is Reversed by Partial Silencing of

Amygdala Corticotropin-Releasing Hormone Gene. Biological Psychiatry, 83(2), 137­

147.

       Brito, N. H., & Noble, K. G. (2014). Socioeconomic status and structural brain

development. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 8, 276.

       Brody, G. H., Gray, J. C., Yu, T., Barton, A. W., Beach, S. R., Galván, A., ... &

Sweet, L. H. (2017). Protective prevention effects on the association of poverty with

brain development. JAMA Pediatrics, 171(1), 46-52.

       Brosschot, J. F., Verkuil, B., & Thayer, J. F. (2017). Exposed to events that never

happen: Generalized unsafety, the default stress response, and prolonged autonomic

activity. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 74, 287­296.

       Buttrick, N. R., & Oishi, S. (2017). The psychological consequences of income

inequality. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 11(3), e12304.

       Cauthen, N.K., & Fass, S. (2008). Measuring Income and Poverty in the United

States. New York, NY: National Center for Children in Poverty, Columbia University,

Mailman School of Public Health. Retrieved December 2017

from http://www.nccp.org/publications/pub_825.html.
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   43

        Chetty, R., & Hendren, N. (2018). The impacts of neighborhoods on

intergenerational mobility I: Childhood exposure effects. The Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 133(3), 1107-1162.

        Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Jones, M. R., & Porter, S. R. (2018). Race and

economic opportunity in the United States: An intergenerational perspective (No.

w24441). National Bureau of Economic Research.

        Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence Katz. 2016. "The Effects of

Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to

Opportunity Project." American Economic Review, 106 (4), 855-902.

        Danese, A., & J Lewis, S. (2017). Psychoneuroimmunology of early-life stress:

The hidden wounds of childhood trauma? Neuropsychopharmacology, 42(1), 99­114.

        Davis, E. P., Stout, S. A., Molet, J., Vegetabile, B., Glynn, L. M., Sandman, C. A.,

... Baram, T. Z. (2017). Exposure to unpredictable maternal sensory signals influences

cognitive development across species. Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences, 201703444.

        Doom, J. R., Vanzomeren-Dohm, A. A., & Simpson, J. A. (2016). Early

unpredictability predicts increased adolescent externalizing behaviors and substance

use: A life history perspective. Development and Psychopathology, 28(4pt2), 1505­

1516.

         Duncan, Greg J., and Katherine Magnuson. 2013. "Investing in Preschool

Programs." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27 (2): 109-32.
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     44

        Ellwood-Lowe, M.E., Humphreys, K.L., Ordaz, S.J., Camacho, M.C., Sacchet,

M.D., Gotlib, I.H. (2018). Time-varying effects of income on hippocampal volume

trajectories in adolescent girls. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, (30), 41 ­ 50.

        Esposito, E. A., Koss, K. J., Donzella, B., & Gunnar, M. R. (2016). Early

deprivation and autonomic nervous system functioning in post-institutionalized children.

Developmental Psychobiology, 58(3), 328­340.

        Evans, G. W. (2016). Childhood poverty and adult psychological well-being.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(52), 14949-14952.

        Falk, E. B., Berkman, E. T., & Lieberman, M. D. (2012). From neural responses

to population behavior: Neural focus group predicts population-level media

effects. Psychological Science, 23(5), 439-445.

        Fan, Y., Herrera-Melendez, A. L., Pestke, K., Feeser, M., Aust, S., Otte, C., ...

Grimm, S. (2014). Early life stress modulates amygdala-prefrontal functional

connectivity: Implications for oxytocin effects. Human Brain Mapping, 35(10), 5328­

5339.

        Farah, M. J. (2018). Socioeconomic status and the brain: Prospects for

neuroscience-informed policy. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 19(7), 428-438.

        Fernandez-Duque, D., Evans, J., Christian, C., & Hodges, S. D. (2015).

Superfluous neuroscience information makes explanations of psychological phenomena

more appealing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(5), 926-944.

        Finn, A. S., Minas, J. E., Leonard, J. A., Mackey, A. P., Salvatore, J., Goetz, C., .

. . Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2017). Functional brain organization of working memory in
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   45

adolescents varies in relation to family income and academic achievement.

Developmental Science, 20, no. 5 (2017): e12450.

       Fortenbaugh, F. C., DeGutis, J., & Esterman, M. (2017). Recent theoretical,

neural, and clinical advances in sustained attention research. Annals of the New York

Academy of Sciences, 1396(1), 70.

       Gabrieli, J. D., Ghosh, S. S., & Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. (2015). Prediction as a

humanitarian and pragmatic contribution from human cognitive neuroscience. Neuron,

85(1), 11-26.

       Gee, D. G., Gabard-Durnam, L. J., Flannery, J., Goff, B., Humphreys, K. L.,

Telzer, E. H., ... Tottenham, N. (2013). Early developmental emergence of human

amygdala-prefrontal connectivity after maternal deprivation. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110(39), 15638­15643.

       Gershman SJ, Niv Y. (2010). Learning latent structure: Carving nature at its

joints. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 20, 251­256.

       Gong, Q., Wu, Q., Scarpazza, C., Lui, S., Jia, Z., Marquand, A., ... & Mechelli, A.

(2011). Prognostic prediction of therapeutic response in depression using high-field MR

imaging. Neuroimage, 55(4), 1497-1503.

       Gorka, A. X., Hanson, J. L., Radtke, S. R., & Hariri, A. R. (2014). Reduced

hippocampal and medial prefrontal gray matter mediate the association between

reported childhood maltreatment and trait anxiety in adulthood and predict sensitivity to

future life stress. Biology of Mood & Anxiety Disorders, 4(1), 12.
                                     Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    46

       Gunnar, M. R., DePasquale, C. E., Reid, B. M., & Donzella, B. (2019). Pubertal

stress recalibration reverses the effects of early life stress in post-institutionalized

children. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(48), 23984-23988.

       Hair, N.L., Hanson, J.L., Wolfe, B.L., Pollak, S.D., 2015. Association of child

poverty, brain development, and academic achievement. JAMA Pediatrics 169, 822­

829.

       Halfon, N., Larson, K., Son, J., Lu, M., & Bethell, C. (2017). Income inequality

and the differential effect of adverse childhood experiences in US children. Academic

Pediatrics, 17(7), S70-S78.

       Hanson, J. L., Nacewicz, B. M., Sutterer, M. J., Cayo, A. A., Schaefer, S. M.,

Rudolph, K. D., ... Davidson, R. J. (2015). Behavioral Problems After Early Life Stress:

Contributions of the Hippocampus and Amygdala. Biological Psychiatry, 77(4), 314­

323.

       Hanson, J. L., van den Bos, W., Roeber, B. J., Rudolph, K. D., Davidson, R. J., &

Pollak, S. D. (2017). Early adversity and learning: implications for typical and atypical

behavioral development. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58(7), 770-778.

       Hanson, J.L., Chandra, A., Wolfe, B.L., Pollak, S.D., 2011. Association between

income and the hippocampus. PLoS One, 6, e18712.

       Hanson, J.L., Hair, N., Shen, D.G., Shi, F., Gilmore, J.H., Wolfe, B.L., Pollak,

S.D., 2013. Family poverty affects the rate of human infant brain growth. PLoS, One 8,

e80954.

       Hanson, J.L., Nacewicz, B.M., Sutterer, M.J., Cayo, A.A., Schaefer, S.M.,

Rudolph, K.D., Shirtcliff, E.A., Pollak, S.D., Davidson, R.J., 2015. Behavioral problems
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   47

after early life stress: contributions of the hippocampus and amygdala. Biological

Psychiatry, 77, 314­323.

       Harms, M. B., Shannon Bowen, K. E., Hanson, J. L., & Pollak, S. D. (2018).

Instrumental learning and cognitive flexibility processes are impaired in children

exposed to early life stress. Developmental Science, 21(4), e12596.

       Harnett, N. G., Wheelock, M. D., Wood, K. H., Ladnier, J. C., Mrug, S., & Knight,

D. C. (2015). Affective state and locus of control modulate the neural response to threat.

NeuroImage, 121, 217­226.

       Hashimoto, T., Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Sekiguchi, A., Nouchi, R., Kotozaki, Y., ...

Kawashima, R. (2015). Neuroanatomical correlates of the sense of control: Gray and

white matter volumes associated with an internal locus of control. NeuroImage, 119,

146­151.

       Henson, R. (2005). A mini-review of fMRI studies of human medial temporal lobe

activity associated with recognition memory. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental

Psychology Section B, 58(3-4), 340-360.

       Hoeft, F., McCandliss, B.D., Black, J.M., Gantman, A., Zakerani, N., Hulme, C.,

Lyytinen, H., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Glover, G.H., Reiss, A.L., and Gabrieli, J.D.

(2011). Neural systems predicting long-term outcome in dyslexia. Proceedings of the

National Academy of Sciences, 108, 361­366.

       Holz, N.E., Laucht, M., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., 2015. Recent advances in

understanding the neurobiology of childhood socioeconomic disadvantage. Current

Opinion in Psychiatry, 28, 365­370.
                                     Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      48

       Hostinar, C. E., & Gunnar, M. R. (2013). The developmental psychobiology of

stress and emotion in childhood. In I. Weiner, D. Freedbheim, & R. Lerner (Eds.),

Handbook of Psychology (2nd ed., pp. 121­141). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

       Ironside, M., Kumar, P., Kang, M.-S., & Pizzagalli, D. A. (2018). Brain

mechanisms mediating effects of stress on reward sensitivity. Current Opinion in

Behavioral Sciences, 22, 106­113.

       Jamieson, J. P., Hangen, E. J., Lee, H. Y., & Yeager, D. S. (2018). Capitalizing

on appraisal processes to improve affective responses to social stress. Emotion

Review, 10(1), 30­39.

       Javanbakht, A., King, A.P., Evans, G.W., Swain, J.E., Angstadt, M., Phan, K.L.,

Liberzon, I., 2015. Childhood poverty predicts adult amygdala and frontal activity and

connectivity in response to emotional faces. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 9,

154.

       Jednorog, K., Altarelli, I., Monzalvo, K., Fluss, J., Dubois, J., Billard, C., . . .

Ramus, F. (2012). The influence of socioeconomic status on children's brain structure.

PLoS ONE, 7. https://doi.org/10.1371/ journal.pone.0042486

       Johnson, S. B., Riis, J. L., & Noble, K. G. (2016). State of the art review: poverty

and the developing brain. Pediatrics, 2000-2015.

       Jollans, L., & Whelan, R. (2016). The clinical added value of imaging: a

perspective from outcome prediction. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and

Neuroimaging, 1(5), 423-432.
                                  Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   49

      Karuza, E. A., Emberson, L. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2014). Combining fMRI and

behavioral measures to examine the process of human learning. Neurobiology of

Learning and Memory, 109, 193-206.

      Keehner, M., Mayberry, L., & Fischer, M. H. (2011). Different clues from different

views: The role of image format in public perceptions of neuroimaging

results. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(2), 422-428.

      Kim, P., Evans, G.W., Angstadt, M., Ho, S.S., Sripada, C.S., Swain, J.E.,

Liberzon, I., Phan, K.L., 2013. Effects of childhood poverty and chronic stress on

emotion regulatory brain function in adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences, 110, 18442­18447.

      Koball, H. & Jiang, Y. (2018). Basic facts about low-income children. National

Center for Children in Poverty; http://www.nccp.org/publications/pub_1195.html).

      Koss, K. J., & Gunnar, M. R. (2017). Annual Research Review: Early adversity,

the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis, and child psychopathology. Journal of

Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 59(4), 327­346.

      Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Carving a system at its joints. In image and brain: The

resolution of the mental imagery debate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

      Krishnadas, R., McLean, J., Batty, G. D., et al. (2013). Socioeconomic

deprivation and cortical morphology: psychological, social, and biological determinants

of ill health study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 75(7), 616­623.

      Lawson, G. M., Duda, J. T., Avants, B. B., Wu, J., & Farah, M. J. (2013).

Associations between children's socioeconomic status and prefrontal cortical thickness.

Developmental Science, 16, 641­652.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     50

      Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York:

Springer.

      Leonard, J. A., Mackey, A. P., Finn, A. S., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2015). Differential

effects of socioeconomic status on working and procedural memory systems. Frontiers

in Human Neuroscience, 9, 554.

      Lo, A., Chernoff, H., Zheng, T. ,Lo, S.H. (2015): Why significant variables aren't

automatically good predictors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112:

13892­13897.

      Luby, J., Belden, A., Botteron, K., Marrus, N., Harms, M.P., Babb, C., Nishino, T.,

Barch, D., 2013. The effects of poverty on childhood brain development: the mediating

effect of caregiving and stressful life events. JAMA Pediatrics, 167, 1135­1142.

      Luo, T. Z., & Maunsell, J. H. (2019). Attention can be subdivided into

neurobiological components corresponding to distinct behavioral effects. Proceedings of

the National Academy of Sciences, 116(52), 26187-26194.

      Lythe, K.E, Moll, J., Gethin, J.A, Workman, C.I., Green, S., & Ralph,

M.A.L(2015): Self-blame­Selective hyperconnectivity between anterior temporal and

subgenual cortices and prediction of recurrent depressive episodes. JAMA Psychiatry,

72:1119­1126.

      Mackey, A. P., Finn, A. S., Leonard, J. A., Jacoby Senghor, D. S., West, M. R.,

Gabrieli, C. F. O., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2015). Neuroanatomical correlates of the income

achievement gap. Psychological Science, 26, 925­933.

      Mahmood, O.M., Goldenberg, D., Thayer, R., Migliorini, R., Simmons, A.N.,

and Tapert, S.F. (2013). Adolescents' fMRI activation to a response inhibition
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   51

task predicts future substance use. Addictive Behavior, 38, 1435­1441.

       Maunsell, J. H. (2015). Neuronal mechanisms of visual attention. Annual Review

of Vision Science, 1, 373-391.

       McCabe, D. P., & Castel, A. D. (2008). Seeing is believing: The effect of brain

images on judgments of scientific reasoning. Cognition, 107(1), 343-352.

       McEwen, B. S. (2019). Resilience of the brain and body. Stress: Physiology,

Biochemistry, and Pathology, 19­33.

       McEwen, B. S., & Morrison, J. H. (2013). The brain on stress: Vulnerability and

plasticity of the prefrontal cortex over the life course. Neuron, 79(1), 16­29.

       McEwen, C. A., & McEwen, B. S. (2017). Social structure, adversity, toxic stress,

and intergenerational poverty: An early childhood model. Annual Review of Sociology,

43, 445­472.

       McLaughlin, M., & Rank, M. R. (2018). Estimating the economic cost of childhood

poverty in the United States. Social Work Research, 42(2), 73-83.

       McNorgan, C., Alvarez, A., Bhullar, A., Gayda, J., & Booth, J. R. (2011).

Prediction of reading skill several years later depends on age and brain region:

implications for developmental models of reading. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(26),

9641-9648.

       Mendes, W. B., & Park, J. (2014). Neurobiological concomitants of motivational

states. In A. J. Elliot (Ed.), Advances in Motivation Science (Vol. 1, pp. 233­270).

       Merz, E.C., Tottenham, N., Noble, K.G., 2018. Socioeconomic status, amygdala

volume, and internalizing symptoms in children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical

Child and Adolescent Psychology, 47, 312­323.
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development      52

      Michael, R. B., Newman, E. J., Vuorre, M., Cumming, G., & Garry, M. (2013). On

the (non) persuasive power of a brain image. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20(4),

720-725.

      Miller, G. E., & Chen, E. (2010). Harsh family climate in early life presages the

emergence of a proinflammatory phenotype in adolescence. Psychological Science,

21(6), 848­856.

      Mokhtari, F., Rejeski, W. J., Zhu, Y., Wu, G., Simpson, S. L., Burdette, J. H., &

Laurienti, P. J. (2018). Dynamic fMRI networks predict success in a behavioral weight

loss program among older adults. Neuroimage, 173, 421-433.

      Molet, J., Maras, P. M., Kinney-Lang, E., Harris, N. G., Rashid, F., Ivy, A. S., ...

Baram, T. Z. (2016). MRI uncovers disrupted hippocampal microstructure that underlies

memory impairments after early-life adversity. Hippocampus, 26(12), 1618­1632.

      Muller, M. J. (2012). Will it hurt less if I believe I can control it? Influence of actual

and perceived control on perceived pain intensity in healthy male individuals: A

randomized controlled study. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 35, 529­537.

      Müller, N., Krause, D., Barth, R., Myint, A.-M., Weidinger, E., Stettinger, W., ...

Schwarz, M. J. (2019). Childhood adversity and current stress are related to pro- and

anti-inflammatory cytokines in major depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 253,

270-276.

      Muscatell, K.A., Morelli, S.A., Falk, E.B., Way, B.M., Pfeifer, J.H., Galinsky, A.D.,

Lieberman, M.D., Dapretto, M., Eisenberger, N.I., 2012. Social status modulates neural

activity in the mentalizing network. Neuroimage, 60, 1771­1777.
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     53

       National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2019. A Roadmap

to Reducing Child Poverty. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

       Noble, K.G., Houston, S.M., Brito, N.H., Bartsch, H., Kan, E., Kuperman, J.M.,

Akshoomoff, N., Amaral, D.G., Bloss, C.S., Libiger, O., Schork, N.J., Murray, S.S.,

Casey, B.J., Chang, L., Ernst, T.M., Frazier, J.A., Gruen, J.R., Kennedy, D.N., Van Zijl,

P., Mostofsky, S., Kaufmann, W.E., Kenet, T., Dale, A.M., Jernigan, T.L., Sowell, E.R.,

2015. Family income, parental education and brain structure in children and

adolescents. Nature Neuroscience, 18, 773­778.

       Norman, A.L., Pulido, C., Squeglia, L.M., Spadoni, A.D., Paulus, M.P., and

Tapert, S.F. (2011). Neural activation during inhibition predicts initiation of substance

use in adolescence. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 119, 216­223.

       Novick, A. M., Levandowski, M. L., Laumann, L. E., Philip, N. S., Price, L. H., &

Tyrka, A. R. (2018). The effects of early life stress on reward processing. Journal of

Psychiatric Research, 101, 80­103.

       Ouellet-Morin, I., Robitaille, M.-P., Langevin, S., Cantave, C., Brendgen, M., &

Lupien, S. J. (2019). Enduring effect of childhood maltreatment on cortisol and heart

rate responses to stress: The moderating role of severity of experiences. Development

and Psychopathology, 31(02), 497­508.

       Palacios-Barrios, E. E., & Hanson, J. L. (2019). Poverty and self-regulation:

Connecting psychosocial processes, neurobiology, and the risk for psychopathology.

Comprehensive Psychiatry, 90, 52­64.
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development    54

       Papale, L. A., Seltzer, L. J., Madrid, A., Pollak, S. D., & Alisch, R. S. (2018).

Differentially Methylated Genes in Saliva are linked to Childhood Stress. Nature

Scientific Reports, 8(1), 1­8.

       Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: Why it

causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Progress in Neurobiology, 156,

164­188.

       Pickett, K. E., & Wilkinson, R. G. (2015). Income inequality and health: a causal

review. Social Science & Medicine, 128, 316-326.

       Pollak, S.D., and Wolfe, B. (In press). Maximizing research on the adverse

effects of child poverty through consensus measures. Developmental Science.

       Romens, S. E., McDonald, J., Svaren, J., & Pollak, S. D. (2015). Associations

between early life stress and gene methylation in children. Child Development, 86(1),

303-309.

       Romeo, R. R., Leonard, J. A., Robinson, S. T., West, M. R., Mackey, A. P.,

Rowe, M. L., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2018). Beyond the 30-million-word gap: Children's

conversational exposure is associated with language-related brain function.

Psychological Science, 29, 700­710.

       Sammy, N., Anstiss, P. A., Moore, L. J., Freeman, P., Wilson, M. R., & Vine, S. J.

(2017). The effects of arousal reappraisal on stress responses, performance and

attention. Anxiety, Stress, & Coping, 30(6), 619­629.

       Sapolsky, R. M. (2015). Stress and the brain: Individual variability and the

inverted-U. Nature Neuroscience, 18(10), 1344­1346.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     55

       Schweitzer, N. J., Baker, D. A., & Risko, E. F. (2013). Fooled by the brain: Re-

examining the influence of neuroimages. Cognition, 129(3), 501-511.

       Seery, M. D. (2011). Challenge or threat? Cardiovascular indexes of resilience

and vulnerability to potential stress in humans. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral

Reviews, 35(7), 1603­1610.

       Sen, A. (1999). Commodities and capabilities. OUP Catalogue. Oxford University

Press, number 9780195650389.

       Siegle, G. J., Thompson, W. K., Collier, A., Berman, S. R., Feldmiller, J., Thase,

M. E., & Friedman, E. S. (2012). Toward clinically useful neuroimaging in depression

treatment: prognostic utility of subgenual cingulate activity for determining depression

outcome in cognitive therapy across studies, scanners, and patient

characteristics. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69(9), 913-924.

       Skoluda, N., Strahler, J., Schlotz, W., Niederberger, L., Marques, S., Fischer, S.,

... Natar, U. M. (2015). Intra-individual psychological and physiological responses to

acute laboratory stressors of different intensity. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 51, 227­

236.

       Sripada, R.K., Swain, J.E., Evans, G.W., Welsh, R.C., Liberzon, I., 2014.

Childhood poverty and stress reactivity are associated with aberrant functional

connectivity in default mode network. Neuropsychopharmacology, 39, 2244­2251.

       Strüber, N., Strüber, D., & Roth, G. (2014). Impact of early adversity on

glucocorticoid regulation and later mental disorders. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral

Reviews, 38(1), 17­37.
                                    Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     56

       Teicher, M. H., Anderson, C. M., Ohashi, K., Khan, A., McGreenery, C. E.,

Bolger, E. A., ... Vitaliano, G. D. (2018). Differential effects of childhood neglect and

abuse during sensitive exposure periods on male and female hippocampus.

NeuroImage, 169, 443­452.

       Tottenham, N., & Sheridan, M. A. (2009). A review of adversity, the amygdala

and the hippocampus: a consideration of developmental timing. Frontiers in Human

Neuroscience, 3, 68.

       Turecki, G., & Meaney, M. J. (2016). Effects of the social environment and stress

on glucocorticoid receptor gene methylation: A systematic review. Biological Psychiatry,

79(2), 87­96.

       Turk-Browne NB, Scholl BJ, Johnson MK, Chun MM. Implicit perceptual

anticipation triggered by statistical learning. Journal of Neuroscience. 2010;30:11177­

11187.

       Tyrka, A. R., Price, L. H., Marsit, C., Walters, O. C., & Carpenter, L. L. (2012).

Childhood Adversity and Epigenetic Modulation of the Leukocyte Glucocorticoid

Receptor: Preliminary Findings in Healthy Adults. PLoS ONE, 7(1), e30148.

       VanTieghem, M. R., & Tottenham, N. (2018). Neurobiological programming of

early ife stress: Functional development of amygdala prefrontal circuitry and

vulnerability for stress related psychopathology. Current Topics in Behavioral

Neuroscience, 38, 117­136.

       Vazquez, D. M., Bailey, C., Dent, G. W., Okimoto, D. K., Steffek, A., López, J. F.,

& Levine, S. (2006). Brain corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) circuits in the

developing rat: Effect of maternal deprivation. Brain Research, 1121(1), 83­94.
                                  Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development     57

      Waelti P, Dickinson A, Schultz W. Dopamine responses comply with basic

assumptions of formal learning theory. Nature. 2001;412:43­48.

      Wang, X.-D., Chen, Y., Wolf, M., Wagner, K. V., Liebl, C., Scharf, S. H., ...

Schmidt, M. V. (2011). Forebrain CRHR1 deficiency attenuates chronic stress-induced

cognitive deficits and dendritic remodeling. Neurobiology of Disease, 42(3), 300­310.

      Weisberg, D. S., Keil, F. C., Goodstein, J., Rawson, E., & Gray, J. R. (2008). The

seductive allure of neuroscience explanations. Journal of Cognitive

Neuroscience, 20(3), 470-477.

      Welcome, S. E., & Joanisse, M. F. (2012). Individual differences in skilled adult

readers reveal dissociable patterns of neural activity associated with component

processes of reading. Brain and Language, 120(3), 360-371.

      White, C., & Poldrack, R. (2013). Using fMRI to Constrain Theories of

Cognition. Perspectives on Psychological Science,8(1), 79-83.

      Yokum, S., Ng, J., & Stice, E. (2011). Attentional bias to food images associated

with elevated weight and future weight gain: an fMRI study. Obesity, 19(9), 1775-1783.
                                  Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   58




Figure 1. Among all children under 18 years in the U.S., 41 percent are low-income

children and 19 percent--approximately one in five--are poor. This means that children

are overrepresented among our nation's poor; they represent 23 percent of the

population but comprise 32 percent of all people in poverty. Many more children live in

families with incomes just above the poverty threshold. The percentage of low-income

children under age 18 years surpasses the percentage of low-income adults.
                                 Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   59




Figure 2. Brain regions that appear to consistently show negative associations between

child poverty and gray matter development.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   60




Figure 3. Differences in trajectory of brain growth among infants from low (blue), middle

(red) and high (green) income families. There is no statistical difference between the

growth rates of those from middle and high income families. Reprinted from: Hanson et

al. (2013).
                                  Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   61




Figure 4. Data from Hair et al. (2015) is used to show the relationships between low

family income, children's brain growth, and children's subsequent performance on Math

Computation and Reading Comprehension achievement tests.
                                   Pollak & Wolfe, Child Poverty and Brain Development   62




Figure 5. Volumetric comparisons for the left amygdala (panel A) and hippocampus

(Left hippocampus shown in Panel B; Right hippocampus in Panel C). For each graph,

standardized residuals controlling for total gray matter, pubertal stage, and sex are

shown on the vertical axis, while group is shown on the horizontal axis. In the bottom

corner of the figure are example hand-tracings of the amygdala (outlined in red) and

hippocampus (outlined in blue). Reprinted from Hanson et al. (2015) with permission.
