                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE WEAK STATE TRAP

                                     Leopoldo Fergusson
                                      Carlos A. Molina
                                     James A. Robinson

                                     Working Paper 26848
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26848


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank Marcus Alexander, Pranab Bardhan, Nicholas Christakis, Omar García-Ponce, Joana
Naritomi, Felipe Valencia, Hans-Joachim Voth, Leonard Wantchekon and seminar participants at
the 2017 LSE-Stanford Long Range Development in Latin America Conference, Universidad de
los Andes, and Yale University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Leopoldo Fergusson, Carlos A. Molina, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Weak State Trap
Leopoldo Fergusson, Carlos A. Molina, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 26848
March 2020
JEL No. D72,D73,H26

                                         ABSTRACT

Development outcomes come in `clusters' that seem difficult to exit. Using original data from
Colombia, we present evidence of the interconnection between two critical political components:
state weakness and clientelism. State weakness creates the right environment for clientelism to
flourish. Clientelism sets in place a structure of incentives for politicians and citizens that is
detrimental to building state capacity. We show that vote buying, as a measure of clientelism, and
tax evasion, as a measure of state weakness, are highly correlated at the micro level. We also
report evidence that both practices are widely accepted in society, a result consistent with a
deeply entrenched relationship of mutually reinforcing influences. Finally, we propose a set of
mechanisms that underlie the hypothesis that a weak state and widespread clientelism are part of
a political equilibrium with multiple feedback loops. Our results suggest that state weakness is a
trap that is likely hard to exit.

Leopoldo Fergusson                              James A. Robinson
Universidad de los Andes                        University of Chicago
Department of Economics                         Harris School of Public Policy
Cra 1 No 18A - 12                               1155 East 60th Street
Bogotá, Colombia                                Chicago, Illinois 60637
lfergusson@uniandes.edu.co                      and NBER
                                                jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu
Carlos A. Molina
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139
camolina@mit.edu
1     Introduction
The absence of essential state capacities (such as the ability to control violence, enforce
laws, tax and regulate economic activity, and provide public goods to a broad cross-section
of society) is a major obstacle for economic development and political stability in many
countries in the world (Acemoglu, 2005; Besley & Persson, 2009, 2010; Fearon & Laitin,
2003). Despite the potential first-order benefits, many fragile states face significant challenges
in building these capabilities. While it is widely believed that political incentives help explain
the persistence of weak states, and we now have quite an extensive set of models of theoretical
mechanisms, we have few empirically detailed descriptions of these incentives or the type of
obstacles they produce to building state capacity.
    In this paper, we focus on perhaps the salient aspect of the politics of a weak state
­ it is clientelistic. We conceive of clientelism as the exchange of votes for particularistic
benefits like money, jobs, and other private rewards. Using original Colombian data, we
provide the first micro evidence that there is a robust and significant correlation at this
level between state weakness, measured by tax evasion, and the propensity to engage in
clientelistic relationships, who refer to as clients. We show that clients of political patrons
are more likely to evade taxes. Critically, our results with list experiments are identical to
those with direct questions; there seems to be no ethical inhibition in admitting to engaging
in either tax evasion or clientelism. It is just how politics works in countries with weak
states.
    We then show, again at the micro level, that tax evasion and clientelism robustly correlate
with a cluster of other phenomena that justify the description of state weakness as a trap.
Tax evading clients are in places with lower levels of public good provision. They are more
likely to think it legitimate to break the rules, bribe and take justice into their own hands.
However, they are pro-social in the sense of more reciprocal (as in Finan and Schechter
(2012); Lawson and Greene (2014)). They articulate less belief in democracy and are less
likely to protest, yet they are not alienated from the political system, since it is this that
provides clientelism. Indeed, they are more likely to have had contact with politicians, to
have a party identity and even a well-defined political ideology. Nevertheless, they are also
less well informed about politics.
    Taken together, these phenomena add up to a trap. A clientelistic weak state may be
individually rational, but it leads to a very sub-optimal outcome collectively. To build a
state would require breaking out of the logic of clientelism and state weakness either from


                                                1
the demand side or the supply side. On the demand side, this would entail making people
see that by engaging in such relationships and evading taxes, they undermine the supply of
public goods. But, according to our data, clients do not see their actions as wrong. They are
also more politically engaged, so it is not merely a matter of reducing their alienation from
politics or promoting participation or accountability. Besides, they are more ambivalent
about rules, so they seem unlikely to behave differently in response to changes in the rules.
Most likely they are demanding clientelism because they see this as the rational strategy.
Also, they are less likely to protest and they are less informed about politics, two likely
further obstacles to organize things differently.
    On the supply side, politicians have incentives to pay attention to the most politically
active people. In this case, the tax-evading clients who, being more reciprocal, are probably
more reliable political interlocutors. Our findings show how difficult it is in practice to build
what Acemoglu (2005) calls a "consensually strong state" because it relies on a type of
coordination which seems very unlikely in the empirical context we characterize here.
    Our paper is related to extensive literatures in political science, sociology and history,
and a more recent one in economics. A long tradition dating back to Weber (1920) contrasts
a state which is organized "patrimonially" to one organized according to "rational-legal"
principles. In the former, the state is organized "not on the official's commitment to an
impersonal purpose and not on obedience to abstract norms, but on a strictly personal
loyalty" (p. 1006) and power is wielded with "discretion and, above all, unencumbered by
rules" (p. 1006) and it allows the use of "rents or emoluments in exchange for the rendering
of certain services" (p. 595). Officials of patrimonial states, therefore, use public resources in
their own interests. Weber did not speak of patrimonial states as weak, but he regarded them
as highly ineffectual and argued that they tended to be naturally replaced by rational-legal
states, characterized by rules and bureaucracy because

      The decisive reason for the advance of bureaucratic organization has always been
      its purely technical superiority over any other form of organization. The fully
      developed bureaucratic apparatus compares with other organizations exactly as
      does the machine with the non-mechanical modes of production. Precision, speed,
      unambiguity, knowledge of the files, continuity ... reduction of friction and of
      material and personal costs ­ these are raised to the optimum point in the strictly
      bureaucratic administration. (p. 973)

   Since Weber wrote, political scientists have tended to emphasize the stability of pat-

                                                2
rimonial states (sometimes called "neo-patrimonial" (Bratton & Van de Walle, 1997), or
"sultanistic" (Chehabi & Linz, 1998)) because dispensing patronage is good politics. Fol-
lowing Bates (1981), they have also tended to associate patrimonialism with a generic under-
provision of public goods since these cannot be targeted at supporters and withheld from
opponents (an idea formalized by Lizzeri and Persico (2001)). In its most recent incarnation,
this literature has focused on democratic politics and studied how the exchange of "rents or
emoluments in exchange for the rendering of certain services", as Weber put it, operates in
electoral environments (see Kitschelt (2000); Kitschelt and Wilkinson (2007); Stokes (2007);
Hicken (2011) for surveys). Here the word most used is clientelism, which can take many
forms, including vote buying, or the distribution of jobs and contracts. This literature has
focused on issues of the enforceability and credibility of such relations (Stokes, 2005; Keefer
& Vlaicu, 2007; Finan & Schechter, 2012; Robinson & Verdier, 2013; Lawson & Greene,
2014), why they take the form they do (Szwarcberg, 2015; Nichter, 2018), who is targeted
and the industrial organization of clientelism (Baland & Robinson, 2008; Stokes, Dunning,
Nazareno, & Brusco, 2013; Gans-Morse, Mazzuca, & Nichter, 2014; Larreguy, Marshall, &
Querubin, 2016), how much they get (Corstange, 2016), what are the spillover effects into
other areas of public policy (Diaz-Cayeros, Estevez, & Magaloni, 2016; Corstange, 2016),
and how and why clientelism disappears (Weitz-Shapiro, 2014).
    Though there are now quite a few empirical papers using various survey instruments and
even list experiments to look at these different aspects of clientelism, to our knowledge ours
is the first paper that makes the micro empirical link to state weakness. Possibly, this is
because scholars have regarded state weakness as a more aggregate property. Our paper
therefore innovates in mapping this weakness onto individual behavior. Ultimately, the
effectiveness of the fiscal system in, say Besley and Persson (2009), relies on people deciding
to pay taxes. The implicit model the authors have in mind is one where payment is induced
either by the threat of punishment or by "tax morale" so that people voluntarily pay taxes
to a state they regard as legitimate (see Besley and Persson (2019) for a model). In either
case, it is likely theoretically that there is a link between clientelism and tax evasion at the
individual level. If one believes that enforcement is the issue, then one favor that a patron
can dispense is impunity from the law. If the issue is tax morale, then the personalized and
contractual nature of clientelism likely implies that citizens do not conceive of themselves
paying taxes to a legitimate state to provide socially desirable public goods. Instead, they
see themselves as giving political support to a person in exchange for "rents or emoluments".
Political support, not taxes, is their part of the bargain.


                                               3
    Our argument that clientelistic politics creates state weakness complements existing for-
mal work by economists on this topic. A variety of mechanisms have been suggested that
can explain state weakness. Besley and Persson (2009) emphasize that incumbents will not
build a state if they worry that it will be used to tax them if they lose power. Acemoglu,
Robinson, and Santos (2013) and Fergusson, Robinson, Torvik, and Vargas (2016) argue that
incumbents keep the state weak because non-state armed actors are either an effective way
of influencing election results or create other forms of incumbency advantage. Acemoglu,
Robinson, and Torvik (2016) instead argue that state weakness can be explained by state
elites not wanting to risk politically mobilizing society. None of these papers directly model
the micro connection between clientelism and state weakness. Besley (in press) does model
the idea that if the state does not provide public goods people may refuse to pay taxes, but
he does not close the circle and connect this to any form of clientelism.
    Our paper also innovates relative to the literature by placing clientelism and state weak-
ness in a much broader empirical setting. Though Finan and Schechter (2012) collected
micro-level data on how reciprocal individual clients are, there has been little work inves-
tigating at a micro level what other behavioral patterns are associated with clientelism.
Some findings mirror our own. Stokes et al. (2013), Khemani (2015) and Diaz-Cayeros et
al. (2016) find empirical connections between clientelism and low levels of public good pro-
vision. Fergusson, Larreguy, and Ria~   no (2015) argue theoretically that clientelistic parties,
especially when confronted with political competition, have incentives to weaken state ca-
pacity to deliver public goods to retain their electoral comparative advantage. Empirical
evidence from Mexico concurs with the model's prediction. The inverse relationship between
clientelism and public good provision is also evident in Bobonis, Gertler, Gonzalez-Navarro,
and Nichter (2017) who show that reduced household vulnerability following the allocation
of residential water cisterns in drought-prone areas significantly decreased requests for pri-
vate benefits from local politicians, especially by citizens likely to be involved in clientelistic
relationships.1 Stokes et al. (2013) also associate clientelism with party identity showing
that it is "core" voters who are clients, something we also find in Colombia. Wang (2018)
similarly finds that clientelism is associated with a lack of support for democracy. Closest
to our paper Sy-Sahande (2017) conducted a survey experiment in Benin and showed that
people who thought their patron would not win power were less in favor of taxes.
   1
     Also focusing on the positive side of this symbiotic relationship, Santos (2007) argues that an increase
in public good provision in the capital city of Bogot´ a in Colombia in the early 1990s was a result of the
collapse of a clientelistic political machine.



                                                     4
    In addition to our evidence from Colombia, we use data for a set of African countries
available from the Afrobarometer. We show that clientelistic vote buying (in Africa) is more
prevalent in places where tax evasion is also more common, and that this correlation is not
likely to be explained by omitted factors.
    In the next section, we describe the data we use in detail. Section 3 then examines the
micro correlation between clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia. Section 4 delves into the
correlates of this behavior and uses them to describe the trap in more detail. Section 5 turns
to the African evidence and Section 6 concludes.


2       Data: key concepts and measurement
As noted in the introduction, to measure state strength we rely on tax evasion. There is
a long tradition relating state capacity to the development of an effective tax capacity (see
Besley and Persson (2009) for a discussion). Indeed, the incidence of tax evasion is a good
indicator of the state's enforcement ability and its capacity to mobilize resources. But more
importantly for us, it is also influenced by general trust in the state and compliance with
the implicit `social contract' in society: citizens pay taxes, the state works for citizens and
delivers public goods.
    On the other hand, we define the clientelistic exchange as the delivery of any type of
particularistic benefit to voters contingent on their support. In this definition, we emphasize
that we talk of particularistic benefits, delivered to a voter or his inner circle, and that there
is a quid-pro-quo nature to the transfer ­it is given in exchange for political support. In
this sense, this definition excludes the allocation of public funds to certain municipalities
or geographical areas in hopes of obtaining electoral support (Stokes, 2007; Hicken, 2011).
While targeted in the expectation of increasing electoral success, these benefits are not
contingent on the delivery of support in the same way as the clientelistic exchange is, as
the politician cannot easily deprive a single citizen of a given area of these transfers if she
declines her support. Notice also that, in principle, "support" may be broader than voting
(activities, campaigning). However, we focus on clientelistic vote-buying as it is not only
an essential form of support, but it is also more concrete and more likely to be interpreted
equally by all respondents.
    We use two main datasets.2 Our most detailed data comes from Colombia, drawn from
    2
    Appendix A.1 describes all variables and sources used in the analysis. Here we focus on our main
variables of interest.


                                                 5
the Politics Module of the Encuesta Longitudinal Colombiana de la Universidad de los Andes
(Bernal et al., 2014), or Elca3 . The Elca is the first large-scale household panel survey in
Colombia, with roughly 10.000 households, representative of urban Colombia and five rural
macro regions. The baseline was taken in 2010. In 2013, the first follow-up included a
Politics Module applied to one member of the household (the household head or its partner,
randomly assigned when both were available).
    The survey includes questions on political participation and interest, sources of infor-
mation, ideological positions, and crucially, two questions we specifically designed to study
vote buying and tax evasion. The latter were designed to cope with a critical obstacle for
empirical research in this area: eliciting honest answers in surveys about these sensitive
issues. Indeed, respondents may avoid truthful answers when asked, and the nature of the
behavior implies that there are few other records. To cope with these difficulties, several
techniques have been developed. Among these, list experiments of the kind used in the Elca
have received considerable attention and have been used in a variety of applications.4
    To implement our list experiments, households were randomly assigned to three groups
in each case: treatment (list including a sensitive item), control 1 (list without the sensitive
item, followed by direct question), and control 2 (only direct question).5
    Our question for vote buying is similar to existing designs in the literature to evaluate
this issue. In the treatment group, households are told "I will read a list of five (5) things
people have in mind when deciding who to vote for. I want you to tell me how many of these
five things you have taken into account when voting for a candidate. Do not tell me WHICH,
ONLY HOW MANY". Then respondents are handed a card with the following options:

   1. The information about the candidate on the radio or television,

   2. What you read about his government plan,

   3. The benefits, gifts, or jobs the candidate offered you in exchange for your
      vote,

   4. The conversations you had with your friends about the candidate,
   3
     Some features of this module are described in Fergusson and Ria~ no (2014).
   4
     Studies of electoral behavior using list experiments include Gonzalez-Ocantos, de Jonge, Mel´ endez,
Osorio, and Nickerson (2012); Holbrook and Krosnick (2010); Corstange (2010, 2012). In the Colombian
context, they have been used recently to study support towards specific groups, in particular the military
and rebel groups (Matanock & Garc´   ia-Sanchez, 2011a, 2011b; Steele & Shapiro, 2012).
   5
     We don't find any difference on the direct question between control 1 and control 2.



                                                    6
   5. The candidate's party.

    In the first control group, respondents confront a similar prompt and list, only that the
sensitive behavior (item 3 marked in bold above) is not on the list. The question asked
directly to control 1 and control 2 reads: "Could you tell me if when deciding whom to
vote for, you have taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate offered in
exchange for your vote?".
    Turning to tax evasion, we focus on the VAT for several reasons. First, it is the most
important indirect tax in Colombia (representing 28.69% of all government revenues in 2015)
and the most familiar one for most respondents. Corporate taxes are limited to formal
entrepreneurs, while direct taxation is very weak and only relevant for the relatively wealthy
(Comisi´ on de expertos para la equidad y la competitividad tributaria, 2015). This is true
not only in Colombia but, in fact, a common feature in many developing countries (Keen
& Lockwood, 2010; De Jantscher, 1986; Besley & Persson, 2014). Second, VAT evasion
is an important concern in Colombia and other developing countries (Avila & Cruz, 2012;
Corbacho, Fretes, & Lora, 2013; G´  omez-Sabaini & Jim´  enez, 2011). Third, while in theory the
VAT promotes enforcement, incentivizing a third-party reported paper trail on transactions
between firms, this is not the case for sales to final consumers. This enforcement "Achilles'
heel" (Slemrod, 2007) arises because, unlike firms in the chain, final consumers do not need
a receipt to deduct input costs from their VAT bill.6 Finally, consistent with this, even
though firms are responsible for the VAT before tax authorities, final consumers play an
active role in contributing to evasion. Specifically, since the VAT is explicit in the final sale
receipt, consumers and firms collude by not producing a receipt: the consumer gets a cheaper
product and the firm remains under the radar of tax authorities. Campaigns from the tax
authorities have long urged consumers to demand a receipt and avoid being complicit with
VAT evasion, often emphasizing the civic duty and "tax morale" logic emphasized in the
notion of consensual state capacity we focus on.7 In short, our tax evasion question enquires
about a practice that is familiar enough to respondents that they can realistically reflect
   6
     A field experiment of Chilean firms by Pomeranz (2015) is consistent with the critical role of VAT
evasion in final sales. Naritomi (2019) also studies the role of consumers, yet the emphasis is on their role
as whistleblowers of firm's final sales transactions in Brazil, in exchange for monetary rewards as part of an
anti-tax evasion program.
   7
     An example from a 1999 TV commercial is available in https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ai-c
 4xI1bI. The camera displays a striped shirt bought "with a receipt", yet as it zooms out, the shirt is
truly a convict's shirt with handcuffs and the sign changes to "without a receipt". A voiceover says, "If you
buy without a receipt you are complicit in evasion and are violating the law (...) Don't cheat on Colombia.
Always demand a receipt."


                                                      7
on whether they are willing to engage in it to save on their purchases, and is particularly
well-suited to capture the notion of state capacity we emphasize.
    The question design for tax evasion is similar to the vote buying list experiment. In the
treatment group, households are told "I will read a list of five (5) actions that people follow
to save money when shopping. I want you to tell me how many of these five things you do
regularly. Do not tell me WHICH, ONLY HOW MANY". Then respondents are handed a
card with the following options:

   1. You choose the cheapest brand even if it is lower quality,

   2. You wait for sales in the best brands,

   3. You buy in cheaper outlets even if they are far from your home,

   4. You accept buying without a receipt to avoid paying the VAT,

   5. You buy bulk.

    In the first control group, the sensitive item (marked in bold above) is not on the list. The
direct question, in this case, is: "Could you tell me if you normally accept buying without a
receipt, to avoid the VAT".
    The central premise of the experiments is that when asking the sensitive item indirectly
with a list that protects their privacy in answers to individual items, individuals are willing
to answer truthfully even if social norms suggest that there is a "correct" answer. Comparing
the frequency with which individuals in the control and treatment group report adopting
the actions listed when voting (or saving on expenditures), the researcher can estimate the
proportion of individuals using vote buying (or VAT avoidance) as one of the strategies.
Indeed, in this case, the difference in means between treatment and control groups is an
unbiased estimator of the incidence of the sensitive item.
    Let Yi (0) = J   j =1 Zij (0) and Yi (1) =
                                                 J +1
                                                 j =1 Zij (1) be the potential answer i would give
                                               8
under control or treatment, respectively. Formally, the difference in means estimator is
(where N1 and N0 are the sizes of treatment and control groups, and Ti indicates the treat-
   8
    In this notation, there are j = 1, ..., J control items and one (j = J + 1) sensitive item, and Zij (t)
indicates i's preference for j under treatment status t  {0, 1}, where t = 0 denotes the control list and t = 1
the treatment list.




                                                      8
ment status):

                                      N                  N
                               1                    1
                            ^=             Ti Y i -            (1 - Ti )Yi .               (1)
                               N1    i=1
                                                    N0   i=1

    Several assumptions underlie the validity of the list experiments to capture the behavior
of interest faithfully. The first central assumption is that of no design effects, stating that
the addition of a sensitive item does not affect the response on the sum of control items.
Notice that this does not require individuals to answer truthfully to control items, only that
the answer does not change when confronted with the treated and control prompts. The
second assumption, the no liar condition, states that respondents answer the sensitive item
truthfully. Fergusson, Molina, and Ria~    no (2018, 2019) test the validity of the underlying
assumptions and find support for them. Finally, multivariate analysis methods have been
developed to study the determinants of sensitive items asked via a list experiment (see Blair
and Imai (2012)).
    Apart from estimating incidence and its correlates, investigating the extent of the social
desirability bias (and its potential correlates) is also possible when the experimental design
also involves the direct question of the sensitive item, as we did in the Elca. In this design,
only individuals who are not facing the treatment list (as having observed the sensitive item
in the list may predispose them) are asked directly about the sensitive behavior. Comparing
the incidence using equation (1) with the direct answer gives a measure of the average social
desirability bias in the population, indicating the extent to which individuals want to conceal
their behavior when asked directly. This measures the extent to which citizens internalize
social rules of conduct and whether or not they believe that clientelism and tax evasion are
looked down upon.
    In addition to the Colombian data, we use the fifth round of the Afrobarometer survey. We
code clientelistic vote buying as a simple dummy variable that equals one if the respondent
answers "Once or twice", "A few times" or "Often" to the question "And during the last
national election in [20xx], how often, if ever did a candidate or someone from a political
party offer you something, like food or a gift or money, in return for your vote?" To measure
state capacity, we use the question: "Here is a list of actions that people sometimes take as
citizens. For each of these, please tell me whether you, personally, have done any of these
things during the past year. If not, would you do this if you had the chance?" We code tax
evasion as a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent answers: "No, but would do
if had the chance", "Yes, once or twice", "Yes, several times" or "Yes, often". This gives us


                                                 9
measures of clientelism and evasion of taxes and fees for 28 out of the 34 countries in the
Afrobarometer 9 .


3       The link between clientelism and tax evasion
We now use the data described in the previous section to examine the prevalence of clien-
telism, tax evasion, and more importantly their correlation. We emphasize that we document
a correlation; the very argument we are making implies that both directions of causality, from
tax evasion to clientelism and vice versa, are at play. We do, however, include a rich set
of fixed effects and pre-determined household and individual controls to make sure that the
correlation we uncover is not an obvious spurious reflection of otherwise omitted character-
istics.10 Of course, even in our most demanding specifications unobservables that we cannot
account for may contaminate our estimates. We will show below that the combination of very
detailed micro-level data and the stability of the key coefficients suggest that it is unlikely
they are merely an artifact of unobservable selection.
     To do this more systematically, we also follow the literature on bias from unobservable
selection.11 For each regression we report the following set of indicators: the original (un-
corrected) Altonji value, Oster's modified  ratio, and Oster's  lower bound for the effect
of interest. Roughly, the ratios tell us the degree of selection on unobservables relative to
observables sufficient to explain away the estimated relationship between the variables of
interest. They thus suggest that the correlation is not likely reflecting unobservables when
they are either larger than one (suggesting that unobservables must be proportionally more
important than observables), or negative (reflecting that controlling for observables tends to
strengthen the correlation and unobservables should be selected in a different direction than
observables to eliminate the effect).
     We now use the Colombian data to show that both tax evasion and clientelism are highly
prevalent, with substantial variation across regions and households. We also argue that
they are highly accepted practices exhibiting no apparent social desirability bias in survey
responses. We document a positive correlation between the prevalence of both phenomena,
    9
     Burundi, Benin, Burkina Faso, Botswana, Cameroon, Ivory Coast, Cape Verde, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mali, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, South Africa,
Senegal, Sierra Leona, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
  10
     When including controls in our regressions, we focus on plausibly exogenous variables that do not respond
to either clientelism and tax evasion to avoid a "bad control" problem (Angrist & Pischke, 2008).
  11
     See Murphy and Topel (1990); Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005); Bellows and Miguel (2009); Altonji,
Conley, Elder, and Taber (2011); Oster (2019). Appendix A.2 briefly reviews those methods.


                                                     10
and confirm that it is unlikely that omitted factors explain this correlation. Taken together,
these results suggest that within Colombia, clientelism and tax evasion are part of a hard-
to-change political equilibrium.
    Figure 1 shows the municipal-level prevalence of clientelism (vertical axis) and VAT
evasion (horizontal axis) as measured in our survey12 . By mere visual inspection, places
with a higher share of reported clientelism also tend to be the areas of the country with
more tax evasion. Also, while the phenomena are widespread, there is important regional
variation, with municipality-level incidence ranging from 0% to 50%13 . The incidence of
both phenomena is slightly larger in rural areas. Clientelism reaches 21.9% in rural areas
and 14.8% in urban areas, for an overall average of 18.4%. The corresponding numbers for
tax evasion are close: 17%, 21.6% and 19.2%, respectively.


3.1     (No) social desirability bias
These estimates rely on direct questions about clientelism and tax evasion, potentially
plagued with social desirability bias in respondent answers. However, Figure 2 shows that
there is no significant difference between the answers to these direct questions and the list-
based estimates. This is the case both for clientelism (upper panel) and tax evasion (lower
panel), and for each area (rural or urban) considered independently. Both estimates are very
close to each other, and their difference is small and not statistically significant. We can
interpret this difference as an estimate of the extent of Social Desirability Bias (SDB), since
it compares the extent to which respondents admit to each behavior when asked directly
versus when their answers are private with the list.
    This result is important and underscores how widely accepted clientelism and tax evasion
are as part of the normal state of things, consistent with our view that the practices are deeply
embedded in society in an entrenched equilibrium. Put simply, clientelism and tax evasion
are not only prevalent in Colombia. They also appear not to oppose any social norms of
conscientious voting and "tax morale" (Luttmer & Singhal, 2014). Hence, respondents in
our survey are not ashamed of evading taxes or selling their vote and are equally likely to
admit to this behavior regardless of privacy in their responses.14
  12
     Panel A in Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the main variables in the Colombian data used in the
analysis.
  13
     The survey is not representative at the municipality level, so this figure is merely illustrative of the
correlation that we explore in more detail below.
  14
     In other contexts where clientelistic vote buying is prevalent, researchers have found both underreporting
in direct questions relative to the list (Gonzalez-Ocantos et al., 2012; Corstange, 2012), and similar rates of


                                                      11
    While this is the most straightforward interpretation of the result, other mechanisms
aside from absence may lead the list and the direct responses to look similar. Specifically,
list experiments work best when the social desirability effect works in a single direction.
Thus far, we have implicitly assumed that vote buying and evasion carry, if any, a negative
stigma. It is possible, for instance, that some respondents want to overreport that they sell
their votes when asked directly to signal that they do not believe in democracy, or that
they evade taxes to convey an impression of rebelliousness or resistance to the state that
they are proud of. This may create offsetting effects that complicate the interpretation by
inflating direct responses.15 Nevertheless, it seems hard to believe, given that the treatment
and control groups were chosen randomly, that these mechanisms are sufficiently prevalent
and distributed in such a way as to produce our null result.16
    An additional question is whether this is a feature of the Colombian population or it
occurs merely in our sample. On the one hand, the Elca is representative of urban Colombia
and five major rural macro-regions, which gives ample external validity to the exercise. On
the other hand, the Politics Module is administered as the final part of a very comprehensive
questionnaire, and for a set of households participating in a long-term panel study. Thus,
one potential concern is that these activities do carry a stigma, but respondents and survey
officers familiarized with each other, so the former are willing to admit to the sensitive
actions. While we do not know of a comparable survey for tax evasion, this possibility seems
unlikely for clientelism because other, much shorter and cross-sectional surveys in Colombia
produce similar results.17
reporting as we do (Cruz, 2013).
  15
     See also Andrew Gelman (2014),"Thinking of doing a list experiment? Here's a list of reasons why you
should think again", Available at http://andrewgelman.com/2014/04/23/thinking-list-experiment
-heres-list-reasons-think/.
  16
     Simpser (2017) presents a model in which, because a person's answer in a survey influences the in-
terviewer's opinion of the person, second-order beliefs that respondents have about how interviewers view
them play may bias their responses to list experiments. Presumably, individual (unobserved) second-order
beliefs should vary depending on (observable) individual circumstances. Nevertheless, we find that for both
practices the lack of bias holds for individuals with varying observable features. These findings resonate with
the idea that these behaviors are widely perceived as normal, and is inconsistent with the notion that the
lack of bias is an artifact of second-order beliefs.
  17
     For instance, the 2015 round of the Latin American Opinion Project (Lapop) includes, in addition to
vote buying, other clientelistic strategies and voter manipulation in a sample of Colombian municipalities
with high incidence of historical violence and illegal economies. In particular, it contains list experiments
to test for vote buying, positive (and negative) patronage ­promising to give (or threatening to remove,
respectively) benefits contingent on electoral support­, and direct intimidation. The resulting estimates
suggest no significant evidence of vote buying (or of negative patronage, though the incidence of intimidation
and positive patronage is approximately 7% of voters in both cases). This difference likely reflects the
particular sample in Lapop, but there is a similarity with our results: while estimates are much noisier


                                                      12
    In short, while alternative interpretations are not easy to entirely rule out, the weight of
the evidence favors the view that a similar response rates for the list experiment and direct
question reflects the absence of stigma, leading respondents to willingly admit to tax evasion
and vote buying.
    Another reality check for our clientelism measure comes from a comparison with prefer-
ential voting for individual members of party lists in (open) lists to congress. As famously
shown in Putnam, Leonardi, and Nanetti (1994), preferential voting is a good indicator of a
highly personalistic and clientelistic pattern of political exchange in democracies. In Figure
3 we follow Putnam's logic and show the municipal-level proportion of preferential voting
in the Congressional elections in 2014 in the vertical axis, plotted against our measure of
clientelistic vote buying in the horizontal axis. There is an evident positive correlation,
again suggesting that our variable is indeed capturing the prevalence of typical clientelistic
exchanges.


3.2     The Weak State Trap
Within Colombia, we find a significant and very robust correlation between our measures
of tax evasion and clientelism.18 Table 2 runs an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression
of clientelism on tax evasion and adds several additional controls. Column 1 shows the
bivariate relation, and column 2 presents results for the same model restricted to the set
of observations for which we have information on the additional covariates. The remaining
columns add sets of controls. In column 3, we include municipality fixed effects. In column
4, the set of individual controls include age, age squared, gender, race and ethnicity. In
column 5, we include in addition geographic controls (agricultural suitability, elevation,
rainfall, ruggedness, temperature, and distance from each household's location to the coast,
the closest main city, and the nearest main port city).
    One clear message stands out: the significant relationship between the two phenomena
does not disappear despite the changes in these sets of controls. While the magnitude of the
correlation changes somewhat, the coefficient in the most conservative coefficient in column
5 indicates that clientelism for tax evaders is larger by 8.4 percentage points, or 46.7% of the
given their smaller sample, there is no evidence of social desirability bias either. See Garc´
                                                                                             ia, Montalvo, and
Seligson (2015).
  18
     Aside from the importance of the result, one practical implication of documenting no social desirability
bias is that we can rely on the direct questions as reliable measures of the incidence. Therefore, to maximize
statistical power and rely on the simplest empirical methods possible, in what follows we report results from
regressions using the direct questions.


                                                     13
average and 21.5% of a standard deviation. A one-standard deviation increase in tax evasion
(0.4) is associated with an increase in clientelism 18.8%, as large as the mean incidence and
8.8% of a standard deviation.19


4      The nature of the trap: clientelism and weak states
       in equilibrium
In this section, we establish some basic patterns in our data which we organize into a set of
theoretically distinct mechanisms that help explain why the trap is so hard to break. To do
so, we run OLS regressions for both clientelism and tax evasion as a function of key variables
that should be relevant if the corresponding mechanism is at play. We report simple bivariate
correlations as well as multivariate regressions controlling for (plausibly exogenous) controls.


4.1     Public versus particularistic goods
A first basic fact to document is a negative correlation between the incidence of clientelism
and tax evasion and public good provision. There are some direct connections here. For
example, lower tax revenues imply fewer resources for public provision. But there are also
more subtle mechanisms. As Bates (1981) noted, public goods cannot be targetted, so public
goods are strategically under-supplied where clientelism is more intense (though see Bardhan
and Mookherjee (2013)). Likewise, they will be under-demanded since clients want private
goods. Other mechanisms include the idea that the under-provision of public goods makes
clientelism cheaper for politicians (Robinson and Verdier (2013); Fergusson et al. (2015)).
    The broad negative correlation between clientelism and tax evasion and the delivery of
public goods and services is apparent in our Colombian data, as shown in Table 3. This
table and those that follow have a similar structure. Column 1 has a simple regression for
clientelism with no additional controls, column 2 restricts the sample to those observations
for which we have the demographic and geographic controls, and column 3 includes these
controls.20 Columns 4 to 6 are the corresponding specification for tax evasion as a dependent
  19
     Regarding the possible role of unobservable selection, our results are very reassuring that there is a real
relationship between clientelism and tax evasion. Not only is the Altonji ratio much larger than one for all
specifications, but even in the estimate of column 5, Oster's measure suggests that unobservables would need
to be almost 4.3 times as important as observables to produce a zero correlation between these two variables.
  20
     Column 3 also reports Altonji's ratio, Oster's  ratio, and Oster's lower bound of the effect of interest,
to help assess the potential relevance of unobservable selection.



                                                      14
variable. The key independent variables in each panel are indicator variables for whether
the household has access to the following public services: aqueduct, electricity, gas system
for cooking, landline, sewage and trash collection. For all specifications, the simple bivari-
ate correlation between public service delivery and either clientelism or tax evasion is, as
expected, negative. The result is also robust to including basic predetermined household
and geographic controls in the case of electricity, landline, and, in the case of clientelism,
sewage.21


4.2     Personal over institutional links: displacing formal relation-
        ships with the state
With prevalent clientelism, citizens' relationship with the state is via personal interaction
with politicians or their brokers. These informal relationships may displace potential formal
relationships with the state to demand rights and services. In an extreme case, the state does
not exist as an apparatus to be controlled by citizens, therefore becoming less effective. As a
result, voters become more dependent on informal relationships for benefits, again producing
a vicious cycle of more clientelism, less state capacity, more clientelism, and so on.
    One crucial implication of relying on personal links is that interpersonal reciprocity be-
comes a valuable trait. This is obviously the case for vote buying: especially with a secret
ballot, politicians would like to target reciprocal voters. Reciprocal voters would more likely
vote for them in exchange for the direct benefits despite not being directly monitored, thus
reducing the inherent commitment problem in clientelistic exchanges (Robinson & Verdier,
2013). More generally, politicians and their brokers may more easily build a long-term re-
lationship with reciprocal voters, enabling them to both better predict their voting decision
and to sustain a cooperative repeated interaction. Existing evidence supports the idea that
more reciprocal people are more likely to be involved in clientelism (Finan & Schechter,
2012; Lawson & Greene, 2014). Moreover, there is very little evidence of individual-level
monitoring and enforcement (Hicken & Nathan, 2019), reinforcing the potential relevance of
mechanisms such as reciprocity.
    Personalistic relationships sustained by feelings of reciprocity not only erode institutional
  21
     Altonji's ratio for the importance of unobservable selection is smaller than one in some of these cases,
raising concerns that these correlations are spurious. However, Oster's corrected measure is always larger
than one and the lower bound for the coefficient of interest indicates a negative correlation. Taken together
these results suggest that the negative correlation of tax evasion and clientelism with the delivery of these
public services is unlikely to be an artifact of unobservable selection.



                                                     15
pressure to strengthen the state. They are also problematic because they make clientelism
particularly persistent. Specifically, clientelism will not necessarily disappear with simple
institutional innovations as the secret ballot (e.g., Wantchekon, 2003; Vicente, 2014).
     Our Colombian data includes some variables that help assess the relevance of these mech-
anisms, with questions on both positive and negative reciprocity. We measure positive reci-
procity with a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent "totally agrees" or "agrees"
with the statement "You always have to help those who help you". Negative reciprocity is
an indicator variable that equals one if the respondent "totally agrees" or "agrees" with the
the statement "whoever harms me pays for it (el que me la hace la paga)".
     Table 4 examines the correlation between clientelism (columns 1 to 3) and tax evasion
(columns 4 to 6) with these measures of reciprocity (positive in the upper panel and negative
in the lower panel). In general, clientelism and tax evasion are indeed more important
for more reciprocal individuals. The sole exception is tax evasion and positive reciprocity,
which appear to be unrelated. For every other specification, there is a positive and robust
correlation that is not significantly affected by unobservable selection.
     The lack of a correlation between tax evasion and positive reciprocity may reflect it is an
indirect part of a clientelistic relationship. If a patron delivers to his client, then the client
reciprocates (positive reciprocity). While if the patron does not deliver a promise (a job, a
contract), then the client retaliates (negative reciprocity). It could be that avoiding taxes is
something promised by a patron as well, as we noted in the introduction. More plausibly,
it is just a side effect of the equilibrium and not part of an explicit political exchange. This
could also explain why the "tax morale" channel - the state gives me something and I give
taxes in return - does not seem to operate in our data. The Colombian "social contract"
does not seem to feature such a mechanism.
     Perhaps more directly relevant to the idea that individual exchanges might displace other
more institutionalized relationships with the state, Table 5 explores whether clientelism and
tax evasion correlate with personal appeals to politicians (congressmen, in the upper panel,
and local mayors or local councilors, in the lower panel). In each case, we find a positive
and robust correlation that again does not seem to be significantly affected by unobservable
selection. This is consistent with the notion that prevalent clientelism exacerbates personal
over institutional links and that where this happens the state is less able to raise taxes.
     One interpretation of these findings is that these appeals to politicians may, in fact, reflect
reaching out to public institutions or perhaps be accountability in action. But Table 6 shows
one result that is hard to reconcile with this alternative interpretation. If this were the case,


                                                16
one would also expect a positive correlation with people's trust in democracy. Instead, this
table reports a robust, statistically significant, and negative correlation between the belief
in democracy (specifically, the importance of having popularly-elected leaders) and both
clientelism and tax evasion.
    Given that patrons disperse clientelism in the context of democratic voting, it might sound
odd that clients do not evince support for democracy. Isn't this why they get their rents?
Possibly, clients see their relationship as not particularly tied to a specific set of political
institutions and merely taking a different form in the absence of democracy. Alternatively,
they are cynical about the rhetoric of democracy, given the fundamentally non-democratic
nature of their interaction with the state. As Lawson and Greene (2014) put it, "curbing
clientelism requires a normative component­specifically, that citizens must reject clientelist
exchanges on principle because they feel a greater obligation to vote in accordance with their
conscience, obey the law, and support democratic institutions" (p. 62). That individuals
more engaged in clientelistic relationships support democratic institutions less is consistent
with this claim.22 Finally, it could also be the case that they face greater competition from
other potential clients under democracy. Hence, they imagine that their rents would be even
higher under non-democratic political institutions.
    The displacement of institutional connections with the state is, in short, another potential
threat to building a strong and democratically-responsive state in the presence of clientelism.


4.3     Personal over institutional links: fragmenting society
By personalizing links with politicians, the agents of the state, clientelism also contributes to
society's fragmentation. Instead of having common goals and aims in their relationship with
institutions, making them accountable and responsive, and seeking to defend their general
rights, each fragmented voter seeks some specific benefit from politicians or their brokers.
A fragmented society of this kind, in turn, may also be more easily captured with targeted
transfers, and fragmentation weakens collective action and political control over the state.
The consensually strong state solves the fundamental dilemma of state power (that a state
powerful enough to deliver goods is also powerful enough to inflict harm (Levinson, 2014)),
by making control and power complements; because the citizens control the state, they are
willing to vest it with more power. Instead, with fragmented voters rather than increasing
  22
    Lawson and Greene (2014) also find more support for clientelism among voters randomly assigned to an
anti-civic prime (asked whether they agreed that people did not get ahead unless they took advantage of
others) relative to a civic prime (asked whether they believed that it is important to live in a democracy).


                                                    17
in a symbiotic relationship, we see the negative version of this feedback loop: citizens have
less control over the state and therefore grant it less power.
    In short, we have again a vicious cycle whereby clientelism produces fragmentation, in
turn reducing citizen's control of the state. When this occurs, in turn, citizens are unwill-
ing to give the state apparatus more power as it does not respond to citizens' demands.
Some related ideas in the context of Colombia appear in Archer (1990), Escobar (2002) and
Robinson (2015). Archer (1990) argues, in particular, that the system of highly particularis-
tic clientelistic networks in Colombia creates an "atomized citizenry" that relates to the state
on a personal basis with a patron, rather than through any other collective demands they
might have. Moreover, citizens' expectations of immediate material rewards hampers the
state's ability to implement costly reforms with future benefits, constraining the actions of
"potential reformers and institution builders". In line with our emphasis on the detrimental
effects of clientelism on state legitimacy, he concludes:

      "The traditional parties' ability to channel support through clientelist structures,
      while providing an impressive degree of regime stability, at the same time under-
      mined the authority and legitimacy of the political elite and the state and made
      the state's task of providing for the social, political, and economic development
      of the Colombian people nearly impossible in the long term. The Colombian
      people, disarticulated and disaggregated through the mechanism of broker clien-
      telism, have been unable to create functional organizations that might better
      represent their interests and needs before the state." (p. 38)

    Similarly, studying the case of the northern department of Sucre, Escobar (2002) argues
that clientelism has remained strong in Colombia, hurting citizens' ability to collectively
improve political participation and value broader and longer-run benefits over immediate
rewards for their votes. Moreover, this persistence is despite democratizing reforms of the
late 1980s and early 1990s (among others, popular election of local mayors since 1988 and
the promotion of new political parties and movements since the 1991 Constitution).
    Table 7 investigates a potential symptom of society's fragmentation, namely that the
ability to mobilize and protest collectively is weaker in those areas with more clientelism
and a weaker state. To do so, we run regressions for clientelism (columns 1 to 2) and tax
evasion (columns 3 to 4) on municipal-level protests as recorded by Colombian NGO Cinep
(between 2005 and 2014). They code three types of social struggles: labor struggles, peas-
ant and indigenous struggles, and civil struggles. For each protest, there is information on


                                              18
the place (municipality) and date, actors involved, modes of struggle, conveners, and ad-
versaries. Using the information on adversaries, we examine the correlation between tax
evasion and clientelism with the total number of protests against (local or national) author-
ities and armed groups. Odd columns include no controls, and even columns include our
usual demographic and geographic controls, as well as municipal population to account for
scale effects. Regardless of the specification, there is a negative and statistically significant
correlation. These findings suggest that clientelism might indeed fragment society in ways
that weaken collective action, further consolidating state weakness. It also falls in line with
Tilly's (1995) observation for Great Britain, where a strengthening of the state changed the
nature of popular contention, creating a public sphere and producing collective action for
broad claims on the state.


4.4     The social contract: both sides mutually justified in defaulting
The social contract in the ideal type of a "consensually strong state" a la Acemoglu gives
roles to each side: citizens pay taxes and obey the law, politicians use public resources for the
common good. Our data do not suggest that the Colombian social contract is of this form. A
clientelistic party buying votes sends the signal that it derives a private benefit from public
office. Indeed, by the mere fact that the politician is willing to pay for a vote voters infer
that politicians are plausibly deriving some private rents from power. But the politician's
action justifies the citizen's decision to not align themselves with the more idealistic form of
social contract.23 Moreover, when citizens do not pay taxes and break the law, they have no
stakes in defending an ideal social contract and controlling politicians and the state (Garc´  ia-
Villegas & Revelo Rebolledo, 2010; De Le´    on Monsalvo, 2011; Hern´  andez, 2010). This helps
consolidate the equilibrium with a consensually weak state and prevalent clientelism.24
    Table 8 presents some results consistent with the relevance of this mechanism. In particu-
lar, we investigate the correlation between clientelism and tax evasion with various measures
of the extent to which citizens are willing to break norms. We take this as a measure of
  23
     Cullen, Turner, and Washington (2018) show suggestive evidence that people in the US evade more
income taxes when the government's preferences do not align with theirs. This is consistent with the idea
that citizens are sensitive to whether or not they feel well represented by the government. However, notice
that we are emphasizing a mutual justification in "defaulting" on some ideal social contract that is distinct
to a disagreement about the correct policies.
  24
     Garc´ia-Villegas (2009, 2017) argues that this is particularly the case in Latin America, where following
a Hispanic heritage the law is interpreted as stemming from a "pact" between "equals". According to this
"pactist" tradition, when one side defaults the other has the right to default as well. The law (unlike religion
or morals) does not hold a higher status than the individual.


                                                      19
the degree to which they consider defaulting on an ideal social contract to be justified. We
examine three indicator variables, one for each one of the three panels in the Table: Breaking
the law equals one if respondents "totally agree" or "agree" with the statement: "To cap-
ture criminals, authorities should sometimes break the law"; Agree with bribery equals one
if respondents "totally agree" or "agree" with the statement: "Considering how things are,
sometimes paying a bribe is justified"; and Justice into own hands equals one if respondents
"totally agree" or "agree" with the statement: "When the government does not punish crim-
inals, it is okay that people take justice into their own hands". All estimates are positive
and statistically significant (and have Altonji and Oster  ratios exceeding one).
    Notice also that in the context of these mutual justifications between politicians and
citizens, there can also be negative spillovers between citizens. Indeed, a law-abiding citizen
may be discouraged from obeying the law if he observes that others instead take advantage
of it. Consistent with these ideas, Buffat and Senn (2017) show that cooperation in a public
good game falls in the presence of corruption (in the form of bribes to the punishment
authority). Similarly, in a field experiment Beekman, Bulte, and Nillesen (2014) show that
corruption in the form of missing inputs for a development intervention discourages individual
voluntary contributions to local public goods. Interestingly, in the Buffat and Senn (2017)
experiment, cooperation diminishes not just because the punishment of low contributors
falls with corruption. In line with these possible negative spillovers within citizens, bribery
discourages initially high contributors who gradually decrease their contributions down to
the level of initially low contributors. A similar mechanism in the context of tax evasion can
likely arise: initially honest taxpayers may reduce their level of contributions after observing
that others can get away with cheating. This effect goes beyond the idea that citizens may
be discouraged when observing that the state is not accountable, and implies a sort of "social
multiplier" effect.


4.5    The social contract: undermining the role of elections
Closely connected with the previous phenomenon, clientelistic vote buying undermines the
ideal role of elections. Ideally, politicians and parties are accountable to voters, who decide
to keep them or remove them based on their performance in the office. In a clientelistic rela-
tionship, rather than voting and controlling the winner (demanding him to fulfill his promises
while in office, and not voting for him in the future if necessary) voters give their vote, get
their money or direct benefit, and the deal is over. A key implication is that the incentives to


                                              20
gather information are weak, and in fact one of the prevailing ideas to overcome clientelism
is improving voter knowledge (Fujiwara & Wantchekon, 2013). Admittedly, one caveat is
that some types of "relational" clientelism require a constant relationship beyond elections,
and delivery of transfers off the election cycle (particularly to brokers and dealers). But even
when this is the case, citizens need only be informed about the particularistic benefits they
receive, not about the politician's overall performance in office. Also, this exchange suffers
from the set of problems discussed above. Among others, this implies that the exchange
reduces public goods and investments in state capacity, benefits are not demanded by an
organized cohesive citizenry but instead operates with a fragmented citizenry, and rents are
often diverted (illegally or otherwise) to produce private gains.
    Table 9 examines our data from Colombia, exploring the correlation between clientelism
and tax evasion with three measures of political interest and engagement, together with
one proxy for the extent to which voters are well informed. The three measures of political
engagement are the following indicator variables: Party Identity equals one if the respondent
answers "yes" to the question: "Do you remember which party you voted for mayor of your
city or municipality?"; Persuasion equals one if the respondent has tried to convince others
to vote for a particular party or candidate; and Ideology equals one if the respondent claims to
have a defined ideology (left, left-center, center, right-center or right) following the question:
"Often, people speak of political leanings from left and right. According to the meaning
that the terms "left" and "right" have for you, what political tendency sympathizes with
you?". On the other hand, our proxy for voter knowledge is the variable information sources,
which sums the sources that the respondent claims to use (among radio, newspapers, internet
magazines, books and television) to know about the country's situation.
    There is a positive and robust relationship between each of the measures of political
engagement with the clientelism and tax evasion measures. In contrast, if anything these
phenomena are negatively correlated with "information sources". This could be surprising
at first in the sense that more politically engaged individuals should, in principle, be more
active citizens demanding accountability from politicians. Also, the literature on vote buy-
ing and directed transfers often emphasizes that strategic politicians should direct rewards
to "swing" voters rather than "partisan" supporters. However, this pattern is consistent
with situations where clientelism is a common form of political engagement and voters are
"endogenously" loyal (Diaz-Cayeros et al., 2016) towards clientelistic parties. Political in-
volvement with highly clientelistic parties creates political engagement, but disincentivizes
voters from gathering information.


                                               21
5       Africa
Though we do not have other similarly rich data sources to examine whether our findings
hold up elsewhere in the world, readily existing data for Africa on both vote buying and tax
evasion does allow us to get a sense of whether the fundamental relationship between state
weakness and clientelism holds.
    Panel B in Table 1 summarizes, for countries in the Afrobarometer surveys, the prevalence
of tax evasion and clientelism. 26% of respondents point out that they did not (or had no
intention to) pay taxes or fees to the government. Turning to clientelism, around 16%
of respondents state that during the last national election a candidate or someone from a
political party offered them something, like food or a gift or money, in return for their vote.
    Figure 4 reveals substantial variation across countries in the incidence of clientelistic vote
buying and tax and fees evasion in Africa. Reported levels are as low as 0.59% in Namibia
and as high as 40.95% in Uganda for clientelism, whereas tax evasion ranges from 4.33%
(Mauritius) to 49.17% (Togo).
    Table 10 reports the results of correlating clientelistic vote buying with a dummy variable
for whether respondents evade government taxes and fees (tax evasion). All regressions in
this table report robust standard errors clustered at the country level. We find a positive
and significant correlation between clientelistic vote buying and tax evasion. The correlation
is apparent when not including any additional controls (column 1), and is robust (both in
magnitude, which decreases only slightly, and statistical significance, which remains at more
than the 99% confidence level) to including several additional controls and fixed effects in
columns 2 to 4. In particular, column 2 includes respondent age, gender, and zone (urban,
semi-urban, or rural areas). Column 3 also includes racial, ethnic and language group fixed
effects. Finally, column 4 adds fixed effects for regions within countries.25 The magnitude
of the correlation (choosing the coefficient in column 4, which includes the complete set of
controls) implies that a one-standard deviation increase in tax evasion (0.44) is associated
with an increase in clientelism 14.8% as large as the mean incidence and 6.6% of a standard
deviation.
    These results provide prima facie evidence of a symbiotic relationship between clientelism
and the quality of democracy more generally and the state's consensual strength reflected in
  25
    The lower part of the panel reports the relevant coefficients of unobservable selection and Oster's lower
bound for the  of interest. Both the Altonji's ratio and Oster's delta are larger than one, suggesting this
is unlikely to be driven by omitted variables. Also, the lower bound of the effect is positive and not much
smaller than the estimated coefficient.



                                                     22
its ability to successfully impose taxes and fees on citizens that goes beyond the Colombian
case. Indeed, there is a robust and quantitatively important correlation between the degree
to which citizens are willing to pay taxes and fees and clientelistic vote buying.26


6      Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented evidence that there is an intimate connection at the micro
level between state weakness, measured by the propensity to evade taxes, and clientelism.
Though scholars have developed several models which can explain why states remain weak,
the case study and historical evidence suggests that this is intimately related to clientelis-
tic politics. Clientelism, as a personalized relationship between an individual citizen and a
politician, is anathema to the provision of public goods. Patrons and clients deal in private
goods, so clients see no interest in paying taxes to a state to provide public goods, while
patrons see no incentive to build state institutions to provide public goods. At the same
time, the weakness of the state facilitates this type of exchange. We not only documented
this connection, but we also showed that such behavior is associated with many other phe-
nomena that justify calling this a trap. People who engage in clientelism and tax evasion are
reciprocal, and thus good interlocutors for political exchanges. They are relatively embedded
in the political system, in contact with politicians and have well-defined ideologies. So this
is not some simple issue of political alienation. However, they are also relatively uninformed
about politics, because they know what they want and how to get it. They are willing to
break the rules probably because the world they live in is one of expediency and little state
legitimacy. Finally, while they are relatively unfavorable to democracy, they are less likely
to protest, most likely because clientelism fragments society and undermines the propensity
for collective action.
    Looked at either from the supply or demand side, in this situation there will be little
pressure to make the state stronger. If that were to happen, it would be more difficult to
evade taxes and distribute clientelism. The upside would be better public good provision,
but providing these is not rational for politicians (they cannot be targeted at supporters and
withheld from opponents) and demanding them is not a best response for citizens engaged
in clientelism.
  26
    Of course, our Colombian data has the advantage of dealing directly with potential biases in survey
respondents and also of including a rich collection of additional household and individual information, which
helps us control for relevant factors more convincingly and explore the potential mechanisms underpinning
these correlations as in the previous sections.


                                                     23
References
Acemoglu, D. (2005). Politics and economics in weak and strong states. Journal of Monetary
      Economics , 52 (7), 1199-1226.
Acemoglu, D., Robinson, J., & Santos, R. J. (2013). The monopoly of violence: evidence
      from Colombia. Journal of the European Economic Association , 11 (01), 5-44.
Acemoglu, D., Robinson, J. A., & Torvik, R. (2016). The political agenda effect and state
      centralization (Working Paper No. 22250). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Altonji, J. G., Conley, T., Elder, T. E., & Taber, C. R. (2011). Methods for using selection
      on observed variables to address selection on unobserved variables.
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., & Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved
      variables: Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools (Vol. 113; Tech. Rep. No. 1).
Angrist, J., & Pischke, J. (2010). The credibility revolution in empirical economics: how
      better research design is taking the con out of econometrics. The Journal of Economic
      Perspectives , 24 (2), 3-30.
Angrist, J., & Pischke, J.-S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's com-
      panion. Princeton university press.
Archer, R. P. (1990). The transition from traditional to broker clientelism in Colombia:
      political stability and social unrest. University of Notre Dame, Helen Kellogg Institute
      for International Studies.
Avila, J., & Cruz, A. (2012). Elementos para la discusi´       on de una reforma del IVA en
      Colombia (Tech. Rep.). Direcci´    on de Impuestos y Aduanas Nacionales de Colombia.
      (Cuadernos de Trabajo No. 046)
Baland, J. M., & Robinson, J. A. (2008). Land and power: Theory and evidence from Chile.
      The American Economic Review , 98 (5), 1737­1765.
Bardhan, P., & Mookherjee, D. (2013). Political clientelism and capture: Theory and
      evidence from West Bengal, India (Working Papers). eSocialSciences.
Bates, R. (1981). Markets and states in tropical Africa: the political basis of agricultural
      policies. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Beekman, G., Bulte, E., & Nillesen, E. (2014). Corruption, investments and contributions to
      public goods: Experimental evidence from rural Liberia. Journal of Public Economics ,
      115 , 37­47.
Bellows, J., & Miguel, E. (2009). War and local collective action in Sierra Leone. Journal
      of Public Economics , 93 (11), 1144-1157.


                                             24
Bernal, R., Cadena, X., Camacho, A., C´     ardenas, J., Fergusson, L., & Ib´an
                                                                              ~ez, A. (2014).
      Encuesta longitudinal de la Universidad de los Andes (ELCA) ­ 2013. Documento
      CEDE 42/2014, Universidad de Los Andes .
Besley, T. (in press). State capacity, reciprocity and the social contract. Econometrica .
Besley, T., & Persson, T. (2009). The origins of state capacity: Property rights, taxation,
      and politics. American Economic Review , 99(4) , 1218-1244.
Besley, T., & Persson, T. (2010). State capacity, conflict, and development. Econometrica ,
      78(1) , 1-34.
Besley, T., & Persson, T. (2014). Why do developing countries tax so little? The Journal
      of Economic Perspectives , 28 (4), 99-120.
Besley, T., & Persson, T. (2019). Democratic values and institutions. American Economic
      Review: Insights , 1 (1), 59­76.
Blair, G., & Imai, K. (2012). Statistical analysis of list experiments. Political Analysis ,
      20 (1), 47-77.
Bobonis, G. J., Gertler, P., Gonzalez-Navarro, M., & Nichter, S. (2017). Vulnerability and
      clientelism (Tech. Rep.). NBER Working Paper No. 23589.
Bratton, M., & Van de Walle, N. (1997). Democratic experiments in Africa: Regime transi-
      tions in comparative perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Buffat, J., & Senn, J. (2017). Corruption and cooperation (Tech. Rep.). Department of
      Economics-University of Zurich.
Chehabi, H., & Linz, J. (1998). Sultanistic regimes. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
      Press.
Comisi´ on de expertos para la equidad y la competitividad tributaria. (2015). Informe final
      presentado al Ministro de Hacienda y Cr´    edito P´
                                                         ublico. Presidente: Santiago Rojas,
      Miembros: Ricardo Bonilla, Rosario C´    ordoba, Alfredo Lewin, Oscar Dar´   io Morales,
      Soraya Montoya, Guillermo Perry, Julio Roberto Piza, Miguel Urrutia, Leonardo Vil-
      lar .
Corbacho, A., Fretes, V., & Lora, E. (2013). Recaudar no basta: los impuestos como
      instrumento de desarrollo. Inter-American Development Bank .
Corstange, D. (2010). Vote buying under competition and monopsony: evidence from a
      list experiment in Lebanon. Paper prepared for the 2010 Annual Conference of the
      American Political Science Association, Washington, D.C..
Corstange, D. (2012). Vote trafficking in Lebanon. International Journal of Middle East
      Studies , 44 (3), 483-505.


                                             25
Corstange, D. (2016). The price of a vote in the Middle East: Clientelism and communal
     politics in Lebanon and Yemen. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cruz, C. (2013). Social networks and the targeting of vote buying. In Annual meeting of
     the american political science association.
Cullen, J. B., Turner, N., & Washington, E. L. (2018). Political alignment, attitudes toward
     government and tax evasion (Working Paper No. 24323). National Bureau of Economic
     Research.
De Le´on Monsalvo, A. (2011). Penumbras y demonios en la pol´         itica colombiana: un an´   alisis
     sobre el clientelismo. Bogot´ a: Ediciones desde abajo.
De Jantscher, C. (1986). Problems of administering a value-added tax in developing coun-
     tries. IMF Working Paper, 15/1986 .
Diaz-Cayeros, A., Estevez, F., & Magaloni, B. (2016). The political logic of poverty relief:
     electoral strategies and social policy in Mexico. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press.
Escobar, C. (2002). Clientelismo y ciudadan´    ia: los l´
                                                         imites de las reformas democr´     aticas en
     el departamento de Sucre. An´    alisis Pol´
                                                itico (27), 36-54.
Fearon, J. D., & Laitin, D. D. (2003). Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war. American
     Political Science Review , 97 (1), 75-90.
Fergusson, L., Larreguy, H., & Ria~ no, J. F. (2015). Political competition and state capacity:
     evidence from a land allocation program in Mexico. CAF Working paper No. 2015/03 .
Fergusson, L., Molina, C. A., & Ria~  no, J. F. (2018). I sell my vote, and so what? incidence,
     social bias and correlates of clientelism in Colombia. Econom´        ia , 19 (1), 181­218.
Fergusson, L., Molina, C. A., & Ria~ no, J. F. (2019). Consumers as vat "evaders": Incidence,
     social bias, and correlates in colombia. Econom´     ia , 19 (2), 21­67.
Fergusson, L., & Ria~  no, J. (2014). La pol´  itica Colombiana a la luz de la Elca: entre el
     desinter´es y el clientelismo. In X. Cadena (Ed.), Colombia en movimiento 2010-2013.
     Bogot´ a: Ediciones Uniandes.
Fergusson, L., Robinson, J., Torvik, R., & Vargas, J. F. (2016). The Need for Enemies.
     Economic Journal , 126 (593), 1018-1054.
Finan, F., & Schechter, L. (2012). Vote-buying and reciprocity. Econometrica , 80 (2),
     863-881.
Fujiwara, T., & Wantchekon, L. (2013, October). Can informed public deliberation overcome
     clientelism? Experimental evidence from Benin. American Economic Journal , 5 (4),
     241-55.


                                                  26
                ¨
Galor, O., & Ozak,      ¨ (2016). The agricultural origins of time preference. American
                       O.
      Economic Review , 106 (10), 3064-3103.
Gans-Morse, J., Mazzuca, S., & Nichter, S. (2014). Varieties of clientelism: machine politics
      during elections. American Journal of Political Science , 58 (2), 415-432.
Garc´ia, M., Montalvo, J., & Seligson, M. (2015). Cultura pol´        itica de la democracia en
      Colombia, 2015: actitudes democr´    aticas en zonas de consolidaci´ on territorial. Bogot´
                                                                                                a:
      Universidad de los Andes, Observatorio de la democracia, Lapop, Americas Barometer.
Garc´ia-Villegas, M. (2009). Normas de papel: La cultura del incumplimiento de reglas.
      Bogot´ a: Siglo del Hombre Editores.
Garc´ia-Villegas, M. (2017). El orden de la libertad. Bogot´  a: Fondo de Cultura Econ´    omica.
Garc´ia-Villegas, M., & Revelo Rebolledo, J. E. (2010). Estado alterado. Clientelismo, mafias
      y debilidad institucional en Colombia. Bogot´   a: Centro de estudios de Derecho, Justicia
      y Sociedad DEJUSTICIA.
G´
 omez-Sabaini, J., & Jim´   enez, J. (2011). Estructura tributaria y evasi´      on impositiva en
      Am´ erica Latina. Working paper, Development Bank of Am´        erica Latina .
Gonzalez-Ocantos, E., de Jonge, C., Mel´    endez, C., Osorio, J., & Nickerson, D. (2012). Vote
      buying and social desirability bias: experimental evidence from Nicaragua. American
      Journal of Political Science , 56 (1), 202-217.
Hern´andez, L. H. (2010). Colombia: mafia y sistema pol´     itico. In O. Mej´ ia Quintana (Ed.),
      ¿estado y cultura mafiosa en Colombia? (p. 127-147). Bogot´       a: Universidad Nacional
      de Colombia, Instituto Unidad de Investigaciones Jur´     idico-Sociales Gerardo Molina.
Hicken, A. (2011). Clientelism. Annual Review of Political Science , 14 (1), 289-310.
Hicken, A., & Nathan, N. L. (2019). Clientelisms red herrings: Dead ends and new directions
      in the study of non-programmatic politics. Annual Review of Political Science .
Holbrook, A., & Krosnick, J. (2010). Social desirability bias in voter turnout reports: tests
      using the item count technique. Public Opinion Quarterly , 74 (1), 37-67.
Keefer, P., & Vlaicu, R. (2007, 12). Democracy, Credibility, and Clientelism. The Journal
      of Law, Economics, and Organization , 24 (2), 371-406.
Keen, M., & Lockwood, B. (2010). The value added tax: Its causes and consequences.
      Journal of Development Economics , 92 (2), 138 - 151.
Khemani, S. (2015). Buying votes versus supplying public services: Political incentives to
      under-invest in pro-poor policies. Journal of Development Economics , 117 , 84­93.
Kitschelt, H. (2000). Linkages between citizens and politicians in democratic politics. Com-
      parative Political Studies , 33 (6-7), 845-79.


                                               27
Kitschelt, H., & Wilkinson, S. I. (2007). Patrons, clients and policies: Patterns of democratic
      accountability and political competition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Larreguy, H., Marshall, J., & Querubin, P. (2016). Parties, brokers, and voter mobilization:
      How turnout buying depends upon the partys capacity to monitor brokers. American
      Political Science Review , 110 (1), 160­179.
Lawson, C., & Greene, K. (2014). Making clientelism work: how norms of reciprocity
      increase voter compliance. Comparative Politics , 47 (1), 61-77.
Levinson, D. J. (2014). Incapacitating the State. William & Mary Law Review , 56 (1),
      182-226.
Lizzeri, A., & Persico, N. (2001). The provision of public goods under alternative electoral
      incentives. American Economic Review , 91 (1), 225­239.
Luttmer, E., & Singhal, M. (2014). Tax morale. Journal of Economic Perspectives , 28 (4),
      149-168.
Matanock, A., & Garc´   ia-Sanchez, M. (2011a). Fighting for hearts and minds: examining
      popular support for the military in Colombia. Presented at the Governance, Develop-
      ment, and Political Violence Conference at the University of California at San Diego .
Matanock, A., & Garc´   ia-Sanchez, M. (2011b). A tangled web: measuring and explaining
      popular support for the military and the paramilitaries in Colombia. (Unpublished
      manuscript)
Murphy, K. M., & Topel, R. H. (1990). Efficiency wages reconsidered: Theory and evidence.
      In Advances in the theory and measurement of unemployment (p. 204-240). Springer.
Naritomi, J. (2019). Consumers as tax auditors. American Economic Review , 109 (9),
      3031­72.
Nichter, S. (2018). Votes for survival: Relational clientelism in Latin America. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.
Nunn, N., & Puga, D. (2012). Ruggedness: the blessing of bad geography in Africa. Review
      of Economics and Statistics , 94 (1), 20-36.
Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence.
      Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , 37 (2), 187­204.
Pomeranz, D. (2015). No taxation without information: deterrence and self-enforcement in
      the value added tax. American Economic Review , 105 (8), 2539-2569.
Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R., & Nanetti, R. Y. (1994). Making democracy work: civic
      traditions in modern Italy. Princeton university press.
Robinson, J. (2015). La miseria en Colombia. Desarrollo y Sociedad , 76 (1), 9-90.


                                              28
Robinson, J., & Verdier, T. (2013). The political economy of clientelism. Scandinavian
      Journal of Economics , 115 (2), 260-291.
Santos, R. (2007). Bogot´   a: the collapse of a political machine (Documentos CEDE No.
      2007-15). Universidad de los Andes-CEDE.
Simpser, A. (2017). When do sensitive survey questions elicit truthful answers? Theory and
      evidence with application to the rrt and the list experiment.
Slemrod, J. (2007). Cheating ourselves: the economics of tax evasion. The Journal of
      Economic Perspectives , 21 (1), 25-48.
Steele, A., & Shapiro, J. (2012). State-building, counterinsurgency, and development in
      Colombia. (Unpublished manuscript)
Stokes, S. (2005). Perverse accountability: a formal model of machine politics with evidence
      from Argentina. American Political Science Review , 99 (3), 315-25.
Stokes, S. (2007). Political clientelism. In C. Boix & S. Stokes (Eds.), Oxford handbook of
      comparative politics (p. 604-27). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stokes, S., Dunning, T., Nazareno, M., & Brusco, V. (2013). Brokers, voters, and clientelism:
      the puzzle of distributive politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sy-Sahande, S. (2017). Taxing clients: The effects of clientelism on citizen tax attitudes
      (Tech. Rep.). Working Paper.
Szwarcberg, M. (2015). Mobilizing poor voters: Machine politics, clientelism, and social
      networks in Argentina. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tilly, C. (1995). Popular contention in Great Britain, 1758-1834. Cambridge: Harvard
      University Press.
Vicente, P. C. (2014). Is vote buying effective? Evidence from a field experiment in West
      Africa. The Economic Journal , 124 (574), F356-F387.
Wang, Y.-T. (2018). Clientelistic parties and satisfaction with democracy. Party Politics ,
      1354068818784965.
Wantchekon, L. (2003). Clientelism and voting behavior: evidence from a field experiment
      in Benin. World Politics , 55 (April), 399-422.
Weber, M. (1920). Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology.
Weitz-Shapiro, R. (2014). Curbing clientelism in Argentina: Politics, poverty, and social
      policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                             29
 Figure 1: Municipality-level correlation between Clientelism and Tax Evasion
                                Colombia, 2013


                         0.5



                         0.4

                                                             Clientelism=0.106+0.297*Evasion
                                                                          (0.02) (0.09)
                         0.3
           Clientelism




                         0.2



                         0.1



                         0.0
                               0.0        0.2                    0.4                     0.6
                                                      Evasion


Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent
has taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax
evasion is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell
me if you normally accept buying without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?"




                                                     30
                           Figure 2: Clientelism and tax evasion estimates
                                           Colombia, 2013
                                                            Clientelism
                                    Urban                         Rural                          All
                    0.30


                    0.25


                    0.20


                    0.15


                    0.10


                    0.05


                    0.00


                   -0.05


                   -0.10

                                                     List      Direct       SDB
                                                        Tax Evasion
                                    Urban                         Rural                          All
                    0.30


                    0.25


                    0.20


                    0.15


                    0.10


                    0.05


                    0.00


                   -0.05


                   -0.10

                                                     List      Direct       SDB



Notes: Incidence of clientelism (upper panel) or tax evasion (lower panel) as implied by the list experiment (diamond), direct
question (square), and the difference between these two measures, capturing the extent of Social Desirability Bias (SDB,
triangle). Lines mark 95% confidence bounds. Estimates in this figure control for age, gender, education level, wealth, color
skin and dummy variables for: employed, voted in the last elections, had political leanings, believes voting is secret, is catholic,
and faced an adverse shock.


                                                                31
    Figure 3: Municipality-level correlation between preferential voting and
                            clientelism in Colombia


                                              1.0
          Proportion of preferential voting




                                              0.8




                                              0.6




                                              0.4

                                                    0.0   0.1   0.2              0.3   0.4   0.5
                                                                      Clientelism


Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent
has taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote.
Preferential voting share for Congressional votes in 2014.




                                                                      32
                            Figure 4: Clientelism and Tax evasion incidence
                                                 Africa




                              Clientelism                                               Tax evasion
       Namibia                                                    Mauritius
      Mauritius                                                  Botswana
       Lesotho                                                        Niger
   South Africa                                                Cape Verde
     Botswana                                                       Zambia
  Mozambique                                                         Liberia
   Cape Verde                                                           Mali
         Ghana                                                      Malawi
  Cote D'Ivoire                                                    Burundi
           Togo                                                 Zimbabwe
        Guinea                                                 South Africa
       Senegal                                                Burkina Faso
   Madagascar                                                        Ghana
        Zambia                                                     Lesotho
      Tanzania                                                  Cameroon
    Cameroon                                                         Kenya
        Malawi                                                Mozambique
       Burundi                                                      Nigeria
    Zimbabwe                                                  Sierra Leone
        Nigeria                                                    Namibia
  Burkina Faso                                                      Guinea
  Sierra Leone                                                     Uganda
          Niger                                               Cote D'Ivoire
            Mali                                                   Senegal
         Liberia                                               Madagascar
         Kenya                                                        Benin
          Benin                                                   Tanzania
       Uganda                                                          Togo


                   0   10     20    30       40      50                        0   10    20      30       40      50



                                                       Incidence (%)


Notes: Fifth round of Afrobarometer. Clientelism is measured as a dummy variable that equals one if ever received private
benefits from politician in return for vote. Tax evasion is measured as a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent has
or would Refuse to pay a tax or fee to government following a prompt asking whether he has personally done it during the past
year or would do it given the chance.




                                                             33
                                Table 1: Summary Statistics



                                           Observations       Mean      Median        SD      Min       Max

                                 Panel A. Colombia (167 municipalities)
Clientelism                                  5,095       0.18       0.00              0.39     0.00      1.00
Tax evasion                                  5,398       0.19       0.00              0.39     0.00      1.00

Aqueduct                                        8,429           0.82       1.00       0.39     0.00      1.00
Agree with bribery                              8,429           0.14       0.00       0.34     0.00      1.00
Breaking the law                                8,429           0.34       0.00       0.47     0.00      1.00
Electricity                                     8429            0.99       1.00       0.12     0.00      1.00
Gas system for cooking                          8,429           0.41       0.00       0.49     0.00      1.00
Ideology                                        8,429           0.38       0.00       0.48     0.00      1.00
Information sources                             8,429           1.75       2.00       1.22     0.00      7.00
Justice into own hands                          8,429           0.29       0.00       0.46     0.00      1.00
Landline                                        8,429           0.25       0.00       0.43     0.00      1.00
Negative reciprocity                            8,429           0.19       0.00       0.39     0.00      1.00
Party identity                                  8,429           0.47       0.00       0.50     0.00      1.00
Persuasion                                      8,429           0.16       0.00       0.36     0.00      1.00
Popular vote                                    8,429           0.39       0.00       0.49     0.00      1.00
Positive reciprocity                            8,429           0.97       1.00       0.16     0.00      1.00
Protest against local government                8420            0.17       0.00       0.38     0.00      1.39
Protest against national government             8420            1.16       1.10       0.96     0.00      3.18
Protest against armed groups                    8420            0.34       0.00       0.55     0.00      1.79
Reach a congressman                             8,429           0.08       0.00       0.27     0.00      1.00
Reach a mayor/councilor                         8,429           0.23       0.00       0.42     0.00      1.00
Sewage                                          8,429           0.50       0.00       0.50     0.00      1.00
Trash collection                                8,429           0.54       1.00       0.50     0.00      1.00

Agricultural suitability                        3,130          0.73       0.74       0.16      0.37     1.00
Rainfall                                        3,130          0.04       0.02       0.09      0.01     1.00
Ruggedness                                      3,130         123.17      78.09     129.74     1.00    744.60
Elevation                                       3,130          1.36       1.36       1.01      0.02     3.17
Temperature                                     3,130          0.21       0.23       0.06      0.07     0.29
Night light intensity                           3,130          30.00      19.00      26.01     0.00     63.00
Distance to main city                           3,130          1.55       1.27       1.20      0.00     5.38
Distance to port city                           3,130          2.26       1.97       1.12      0.01     4.63
Distance to river                               3,130          0.44       0.30       0.37      0.00     1.77
Distance to the coast                           3,130          1.79       1.67       1.10      0.00     4.05

                                       Panel B. Africa (28 countries)
Clientelism                                   44,234         0.16     0.00            0.36     0.00      1.00
Tax evasion                                   44,234         0.26     0.00            0.44     0.00      1.00


Notes: Sources are ELCA 2013 (Panel A) and Fifth round of Afrobarometer (Panel B). See Table A-1 for definitions
of each of the variables.




                                                      34
            Table 2: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia


                                    (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)                  (5)
                                                Dependent variable: Clientelism

Tax Evasion                      0.114***     0.117***      0.0834***      0.0840***     0.0840***
                                 (0.0175)     (0.0181)       (0.0184)       (0.0183)      (0.0183)

Municipality fixed effects           No           No            Yes           Yes            Yes
Individual controls                  No           No            No            Yes            Yes
Geographic controls                  No           No            No            No             Yes

Observations                       3,256        3,168          3,168         3,168          3,168
R-squared                          0.053        0.015          0.119         0.132          0.132

Unobservable selection
Altonji                                                       2.480          2.528         2.551
Delta Oster                                                   3.116          3.862         4.055
Beta Oster                                                    0.0664         0.0718        0.0730

Notes: The dependent variable, clientelism, is a dummy variable that equals one if, when
deciding who to vote for, the respondent has taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a
candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax evasion is a dummy variable that equals one
if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell me if you normally accept buying
without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Individual controls are age, age squared, gender, race and
ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability, elevation, rainfall, ruggedness,
temperature, and (geodesic) distance from household location to: the coast, the closest main
city (Bogot´a, Medell´
                     in, or Cali), and the nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa
Marta, or Buenaventura). Standard errors clustered at the community level. * is significant at
the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                 35
              Table 3: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia
                    Delivery of public goods and services


                                     (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)                (6)
Dependent variable is...                       Clientelism                                     Tax Evasion

Aqueduct                         -0.0861***     -0.0865***        0.00375      -0.0694***      -0.0691***          0.0177
                                  (0.0171)       (0.0172)         (0.0172)      (0.0156)        (0.0158)          (0.0185)

R-squared                           0.008          0.008            0.106         0.005           0.005             0.092
Altonji                                                            -0.042                                           -0.204
Delta Oster                                                        -0.015                                           -0.059
Beta Oster                                                          0.593                                           0.869
Electricity                      -0.181***       -0.188***        -0.0898*      -0.156***      -0.161***           -0.102*
                                  (0.0490)        (0.0505)        (0.0506)       (0.0585)       (0.0572)          (0.0557)

R-squared                           0.003          0.003            0.107         0.002           0.002            0.092
Altonji                                                             0.916                                          1.712
Delta Oster                                                         1.090                                          1.122
Beta Oster                                                          -0.013                                        -0.069
Gas system for cooking           -0.0556***     -0.0589***         -0.0134     -0.0501***      -0.0499***        -0.00611
                                  (0.0120)       (0.0123)         (0.0180)      (0.0124)        (0.0130)         (0.0180)

R-squared                           0.005          0.006            0.106         0.004           0.004            0.092
Altonji                                                             0.293                                          0.139
Delta Oster                                                         1.015                                          0.016
Beta Oster                                                         -0.011                                          0.002
Landline                         -0.0924***     -0.0927***        -0.0306*     -0.0677***      -0.0667***        -0.0335*
                                  (0.0123)       (0.0124)         (0.0169)      (0.0131)        (0.0139)         (0.0195)

R-squared                           0.010          0.010           0.107          0.005           0.005             0.092
Altonji                                                            0.493                                            1.011
Delta Oster                                                        1.045                                            1.381
Beta Oster                                                         -0.010                                          -0.021
Sewage                           -0.0895***     -0.0942***      -0.0865***     -0.0620***      -0.0606***          0.0163
                                  (0.0123)       (0.0125)        (0.0203)       (0.0127)        (0.0133)          (0.0233)

R-squared                           0.013          0.015            0.108         0.006           0.006             0.092
Altonji                                                             11.300                                         -0.212
Delta Oster                                                          2.075                                         -0.017
Beta Oster                                                          -0.012                                          9.057
Trash collection                 -0.0836***     -0.0872***         -0.0391     -0.0569***      -0.0589***          0.0316
                                  (0.0130)       (0.0131)         (0.0240)      (0.0144)        (0.0145)          (0.0223)

R-squared                           0.012          0.013           0.107          0.005           0.006             0.092
Altonji                                                            0.811                                           -0.349
Delta Oster                                                        1.661                                           -0.030
Beta Oster                                                         -0.029                                           8.372
Municipality fixed effects           No             No              Yes            No              No                Yes
Individual controls                  No             No              Yes            No              No                Yes
Geographic controls                  No             No              Yes            No              No                Yes
Observations                        5,095          4,949           4,949          5,398           5,250             5,250

Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent has taken into
account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax evasion is a dummy variable
that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell me if you normally accept buying without a
receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Aqueduct, Electricity, Gas system for cooking, Landline, Sewage and Trash collection are dummy
variables that equal one if the dwelling has the respective service. Individual controls are age, age squared, gender, race and
ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability, elevation, rainfall, ruggedness, temperature, and (geodesic)
distance from household location to: the coast, the closest main city (Bogot´       a, Medell´
                                                                                             in, or Cali), and the nearest main
port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta, or Buenaventura). Standard errors clustered at the community level. * is
significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
                                                             36
                    Table 4: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia
                                 The role of reciprocity


                                    (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)
Dependent variable is...                     Clientelism                                Tax Evasion

Positive reciprocity            0.0916***     0.0915***       0.0679**       0.0220         0.0221       0.00647
                                 (0.0225)      (0.0225)       (0.0265)      (0.0331)       (0.0331)      (0.0344)

R-squared                          0.002         0.002          0.108         0.000         0.000          0.091

Altonji                                                         2.879                                      0.414
Delta Oster                                                     1.580                                      0.180
Beta Oster                                                     0.0274                                     -0.0296

Negative reciprocity            0.0792***     0.0793***       0.0649*** 0.0820***         0.0820*** 0.0666***
                                 (0.0142)      (0.0142)        (0.0147)  (0.0140)          (0.0140)  (0.0174)

R-squared                          0.006         0.006          0.111         0.007         0.007          0.095

Altonji                                                         4.520                                     4.349
Delta Oster                                                     2.372                                     1.731
Beta Oster                                                     0.0398                                     0.0302
Municipality fixed effects          No            No             Yes           No            No            Yes
Individual controls                 No            No             Yes           No            No            Yes
Geographic controls                 No            No             Yes           No            No            Yes
Observations                       5,095         4,945         4,945          5,398         5,245         5,245

Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent has
taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax evasion
is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell me if you
normally accept buying without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Positive reciprocity : equals one if "totally agree"
or "agree" with statement "You always have to help those who help you". Negative reciprocity : equals one if
"totally agree" or "agree" with statement "whoever harms me pays for it (el que me la hace la paga)". Individual
controls are age, age squared, gender, race and ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability,
elevation, rainfall, ruggedness, temperature, and (geodesic) distance from household location to: the coast, the
closest main city (Bogot´ a, Medell´ in, or Cali), and the nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa
Marta, or Buenaventura). Standard errors clustered at the community level. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is
significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                         37
                  Table 5: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia
                           Personally reaching politicians


                                    (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)
Dependent variable is...                    Clientelism                              Tax Evasion

Reach a congressman              0.183***     0.183***       0.169***     0.0459**      0.0408**      0.0387**
                                 (0.0259)     (0.0264)       (0.0268)     (0.0203)      (0.0202)      (0.0196)

R-squared                          0.018        0.018         0.121         0.001         0.001         0.092

Altonji                                                       12.22                                      18.45
Delta Oster                                                   3.777                                      7.344
Beta Oster                                                    0.143                                     0.0336

Reach a mayor/councilor          0.120***     0.115***       0.110***    0.0463***      0.0427***      0.0227*
                                 (0.0153)     (0.0157)       (0.0156)     (0.0131)       (0.0132)      (0.0127)

R-squared                          0.017        0.016         0.120         0.002         0.002         0.092

Altonji                                                       25.11                                     1.131
Delta Oster                                                   9.706                                     0.468
Beta Oster                                                    0.102                                    -0.0265
Municipality fixed effects          No           No            Yes           No            No            Yes
Individual controls                 No           No            Yes           No            No            Yes
Geographic controls                 No           No            Yes           No            No            Yes
Observations                       5,095        4,945         4,945         5,398         5,245         5,245

Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent
has taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax
evasion is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell
me if you normally accept buying without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Reach a politician (congressman
or mayor/councilor) : equals one if answering "yes" to: "In order to solve some problems, have you ever
requested help or cooperation from... a congressman or his collaborators (congressman) ... any local authority
such as mayor or councilor (mayor/councilor)". Individual controls are age, age squared, gender, race and
ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability, elevation, rainfall, ruggedness, temperature,
and (geodesic) distance from household location to: the coast, the closest main city (Bogot´    a, Medell´
                                                                                                         in, or
Cali), and the nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta, or Buenaventura). Standard
errors clustered at the community level. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level,
*** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                        38
                   Table 6: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia
                                  Belief in democracy


                                    (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)               (6)
Dependent variable is...                    Clientelism                              Tax Evasion

Popular vote                     -0.0206*     -0.0207*    -0.0201*      -0.0518***     -0.0542***     -0.0475***
                                 (0.0108)     (0.0108)    (0.0105)       (0.0119)       (0.0127)       (0.0137)

Municipality fixed effects          No           No            Yes          No             No              Yes
Individual controls                 No           No            Yes          No             No              Yes
Geographic controls                 No           No            Yes          No             No              Yes

Altonji                                                        31.28                                     7.162
Delta Oster                                                      17                                      2.822
Beta Oster                                                    -0.0189                                   -0.0314
Observations                       5,095       4,945           4,945      5,398           5,245          5,245
R-squared                          0.001       0.001           0.107      0.004           0.004          0.094

Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent
has taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax
evasion is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell me
if you normally accept buying without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Popular vote equals if "totally agree" with
statement: "It is important that rulers are elected by popular vote". Individual controls are age, age squared,
gender, race and ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability, elevation, rainfall, ruggedness,
temperature, and (geodesic) distance from household location to: the coast, the closest main city (Bogot´       a,
Medell´ in, or Cali), and the nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta, or Buenaventura).
Standard errors clustered at the community level. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5%
level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                         39
          Table 7: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia
                              Protests


                                                   (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)
Dependent variable is...                             Clientelism                     Tax Evasion

Protest against local authorities             -0.0379***      -0.0572***        -0.0180        -0.0330*
                                               (0.0142)        (0.0143)        (0.0174)        (0.0178)
R-squared                                        0.001           0.057           0.000           0.033

Altonji                                                          -2.966                          -2.201
Delta Oster                                                      -3.801                          -3.892
Beta Oster                                                      -0.0631                         -0.0376

Protest against national authorities           -0.0165**       -0.0208**      -0.0160**        -0.0273**
                                               (0.00680)       (0.00982)      (0.00716)         (0.0108)
R-squared                                        0.002           0.056          0.002             0.033

Altonji                                                          -4.868                          -2.412
Delta Oster                                                      -13.29                          -4.916
Beta Oster                                                      -0.0221                         -0.0308

Protest against armed groups                  -0.0606***      -0.0681***      -0.0224*        -0.0849***
                                               (0.00968)       (0.0221)       (0.0133)         (0.0192)
R-squared                                        0.007           0.057          0.001            0.035

Altonji                                                          -9.078                          -1.359
Delta Oster                                                      -8.776                          -0.519
Beta Oster                                                      -0.0707                          -0.104
Individuals controls                              No               Yes           No               Yes
Geographic controls                               No               Yes           No               Yes
Municipality population                           No               Yes           No               Yes
Observations                                     4,945            4,945         5,245            5,245

Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent
has taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax
evasion is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you
tell me if you normally accept buying without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Individual controls are age,
age squared, gender, race and ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability, elevation,
rainfall, ruggedness, temperature, and (geodesic) distance from household location to: the coast, the
closest main city (Bogot´a, Medell´in, or Cali), and the nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena,
Santa Marta, or Buenaventura). Protest is the log of (one plus) the total municipal protests carried out
against national authorities, or armed groups between 2005 and 2014. Standard errors clustered at the
community level. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at
the 1% level.




                                                    40
                   Table 8: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia
                                    Breaking norms


                                     (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
Dependent variable is...                      Clientelism                                  Tax Evasion

Breaking the law                 0.0245**       0.0256**       0.0210*       0.0353***      0.0299**        0.0249**
                                 (0.0108)       (0.0113)       (0.0115)       (0.0114)      (0.0120)        (0.0125)
R-squared                          0.001          0.001          0.107          0.002         0.001           0.092

Altonji                                                           4.595                                       5.049
Delta Oster                                                       2.500                                       2.065
Beta Oster                                                       0.0127                                      0.0130
Agree with bribery                0.114***      0.114***       0.0915***     0.0965***      0.0968***      0.0794***
                                  (0.0174)      (0.0181)        (0.0175)      (0.0158)       (0.0159)       (0.0161)
R-squared                           0.010         0.010           0.113         0.007          0.007          0.096

Altonji                                                          4.007                                        4.580
Delta Oster                                                      1.875                                        1.720
Beta Oster                                                      0.0483                                       0.0365
Justice into own hands           0.0481***      0.0454***      0.0291**      0.0784***      0.0753***      0.0555***
                                  (0.0116)       (0.0117)      (0.0113)       (0.0121)       (0.0121)       (0.0120)
R-squared                           0.003          0.003         0.108          0.008          0.008          0.095

Altonji                                                          1.795                                        2.803
Delta Oster                                                      0.974                                        1.107
Beta Oster                                                     -0.000803                                     0.00578
Municipality fixed effects           No            No             Yes            No            No              Yes
Individual controls                  No            No             Yes            No            No              Yes
Geographic controls                  No            No             Yes            No            No              Yes
Observations                        5,095         4,945          4,945          5,398         5,245           5,245
Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent has
taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax evasion is a
dummy variable that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell me if you normally
accept buying without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Breaking the law equals one if "totally agree" or "agree" with
statement: "To capture criminals, authorities should sometimes break the law". Agree with bribery equals one if
"totally agree" or "agree" with statement: "Considering how things are, sometimes paying a bribe is justified".
Justice by herself equals one if "totally agree" or "agree" with statement: "When the government does not punish
criminals, it is okay that people take justice into their own hands". Individual controls are age, age squared, gender,
race and ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability, elevation, rainfall, ruggedness, temperature,
and (geodesic) distance from household location to: the coast, the closest main city (Bogot´   a, Medell´
                                                                                                        in, or Cali), and
the nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta, or Buenaventura). Standard errors clustered at
the community level. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1%
level.




                                                          41
            Table 9: Clientelism and tax evasion in Colombia
                  Political engagement and information


                                      (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)          (5)                (6)
Dependent variable is...                       Clientelism                                   Tax Evasion

Party identity                   0.0669***       0.0678***       0.0485***      0.0445***       0.0464***       0.0211**
                                 (0.00998)        (0.0107)        (0.0108)       (0.0106)        (0.0105)       (0.0107)

R-squared                           0.007           0.008          0.110          0.003           0.003           0.092

Altonji                                                            2.514                                          0.835
Delta Oster                                                        1.294                                          0.344
Beta Oster                                                        0.0117                                         -0.0418
Persuasion                        0.123***       0.123***        0.126***       0.0338**        0.0302**         0.0187
                                  (0.0163)       (0.0167)        (0.0170)       (0.0143)        (0.0145)        (0.0152)

R-squared                           0.014           0.014          0.120          0.001           0.001           0.091

Altonji                                                            -47.29                                         1.619
Delta Oster                                                        -16.40                                         0.671
Beta Oster                                                          0.131                                       -0.00931
Ideology                         0.0437***       0.0441***       0.0348***      0.0316***       0.0322***        0.0221*
                                  (0.0111)        (0.0115)        (0.0118)       (0.0113)        (0.0115)       (0.0122)

R-squared                           0.003           0.003          0.109          0.002           0.002           0.092

Altonji                                                             3.710                                          2.191
Delta Oster                                                         1.972                                          0.903
Beta Oster                                                         0.0175                                        -0.00242
Information sources               -0.0112**     -0.0126***        -0.00275     -0.0139***      -0.0135***      -0.0120***
                                  (0.00453)      (0.00463)       (0.00521)      (0.00373)       (0.00396)       (0.00390)
R-squared                           0.001          0.002            0.107         0.002           0.002            0.092

Altonji                                                           0.279                                           7.779
Delta Oster                                                       0.152                                           3.208
Beta Oster                                                        0.0154                                        -0.00825
Municipality fixed effects           No              No             Yes            No              No              Yes
Individual controls                  No              No             Yes            No              No              Yes
Geographic controls                  No              No             Yes            No              No              Yes
Observations                        5,095           4,945          4,945          5,398           5,245           5,245

Notes: Clientelism is a dummy variable that equals one if, when deciding who to vote for, the respondent has taken
into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate has offered in exchange for the vote. Tax evasion is a dummy
variable that equals one if the respondent answers yes to the question: "Could you tell me if you normally accept
buying without a receipt, to avoid the VAT?" Party Identity equals one if answering "yes" to: "Do you remember
which party you voted for mayor of your city or municipality?". Persuasion equals one if respondent has tried to
convince others to vote for a particular party or candidate. Ideology equals one if respondent has a defined ideology
(left, left-center, center, right-center or right) following the question: "Often, people speak of political leanings from
left and right. According to the meaning that the terms "left" and "right" have for you, what political tendency
sympathizes with you?". Information sources is the sum of sources used (among radio, newspapers, internet magazines,
books and television) to know about the country's situation. Individual controls are age, age squared, gender, race
and ethnicity. Geographic controls include agricultural suitability, elevation, rainfall, ruggedness, temperature, and
(geodesic) distance from household location to: the coast, the closest main city (Bogot´    a, Medell´in, or Cali), and the
nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta, or Buenaventura). Standard errors clustered at the
community level. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                            42
               Table 10: Clientelism and tax evasion
                              Africa


                                     (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)

                                  Dependent variable equals 1 if ever received private
                                      benefits from politician in return for vote

Tax Evasion                      0.0718***     0.0707***     0.0602***         0.0539***
                                  (0.0144)      (0.0141)      (0.0118)          (0.0111)

Age, Gender and Zone                 No            Yes          Yes               Yes
Race fixed effects                   No             No          Yes               Yes
Ethnic group fixed effects           No             No          Yes               Yes
Language fixed effects               No             No          Yes               Yes
Region Fixed Effects                 No             No           No               Yes
Observations                       44,234         44,234       44,234            44,234
Countries                            28             28           28                28

Unobservable selection
Altonji                                           65.63        5.205              3.003
Delta Oster                                       1.870        6.578              7.089
Beta Oster                                        0.0358       0.0530            0.0483


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country level. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is
significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level. Fifth round of Afrobarometer.
Tax evasion is measured as a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent has or would
Refuse to pay a tax or fee to government following a prompt asking whether he has personally
done it during the past year or would do it given the chance.




                                             43
A       Appendix
A.1      Data and variables

                           Table A-1: Variable definition and sources

Variable            Description



                                                    A. Colombia

      Source is Colombian Household Panel Survey-Universidad de los Andes (Elca) unless otherwise stated

Clientelism         Equals one if answering "yes" to: "Could you tell me if when deciding who to vote for, you
                    have taken into account the benefits, gifts or jobs that a candidate offered in exchange for
                    your vote?". Responses based on list experiments are based on the question: "I will read
                    a list of five (5) things people have in mind when deciding who to vote for. I want you
                    to tell me how many of these five things you have taken into account when voting for a
                    candidate. Do not tell me WHICH, ONLY HOW MANY". Then respondents are handed
                    a card with the following options: 1. The information about the candidate in the radio or
                    television; 2. What you read about his government plan; 3. The benefits, gifts, or jobs
                    the candidate offered you in exchange for your vote; 4. The conversations you had
                    with your friends about the candidate; 5. The candidate's party. The item in bold appears
                    only for a randomly selected treatment group of respondents.

Tax evasion         Equals one if answering "yes" to: "Could you tell me if you normally accept buying without a
                    receipt, to avoid the VAT?". Responses based on list experiments are based on the question:
                    "Could you tell me if when deciding who to vote for, you have taken into account the benefits,
                    gifts or jobs that a candidate offered in exchange for your vote?". Then respondents are
                    handed a card with the following options: 1.You choose the cheapest brand even if it is
                    lower quality; 2. You wait for sales in the best brands; 3. You buy in cheaper outlets even
                    if they are far from your home; 4. You accept buying without a receipt, to avoid
                    paying the VAT; 5. You buy bulk. The item in bold appears only for a randomly selected
                    treatment group of respondents.

Age                 Self-reported age (in years).

Agricultural        0-1 index for variation in potential crop yield, measured in calories per hectare per
suitability                                  ¨
                    year. Source: Galor and Ozak (2016), Available at https: / / ozak .github .io/ Caloric
                    -Suitability -Index/

Agree with          Equals one if "totally agree" or "agree" with statement: "Considering how things are, some-
bribery             times paying a bribe is justified".

                                                                                         Continued on next page


                                                      44
              Table A-1 ­ Variable definition and sources, continued from previous page

Variable           Description

Aqueduct           Equals 1 if household dwelling has aqueduct system.

Breaking the       Equals one if "totally agree" or "agree" with statement: "To capture criminals, authorities
law                should sometimes break the law".

Distance to the    Geodesic distance between household and nearest coast.       Source: Socrata, available at
coast              https: / / evergreen .data .socrata .com .

Distance to        Geodesic distance between household and the nearest main city (Bogot´
                                                                                       a, Medell´
                                                                                                in and or
main city          Cali).

Distance to port   Geodesic distance between household and the nearest main port city (Barranquilla, Carta-
city               gena, Santa Marta or Buenaventura).

Electricity        Equals 1 if household dwelling has electric system.

Elevation          Household elevation. Source: Own calculations from Elca and Minnesota Geospatial Infor-
                   mation Office, http: / / www .mngeo .state .mn .us/ chouse/ elevation/ raster .html .

Ethnicity          Dummy variables for each of eight possible ethnic groups (self-reported).

Gas system for     Equals 1 if household dwelling is connected to the gas public network.
cooking

Gender             Equals one if respondent's gender is Male.

Household          Standardized household income. Sum of (monthly) labor and non-labor income.
income

Ideology           Equals one if respondent has a defined ideology (left, left-center, center, right-center or
                   right) when responding to the question: "Often, people speak of political leanings from left
                   and right. According to the meaning that the terms "left" and "right" have for you, what
                   political tendency sympathizes with you?".

Information        Sum of sources used (among radio, newspapers, internet magazines, books and television)
sources            to know about the country's situation.

Justice by         Equals one if "totally agree" or "agree" with statement: "When the government does not
herself            punish criminals, it is okay that people take justice into their own hands".

Landline           Equals 1 if household dwelling has landline.

Negative           Equals one if "totally agree" or "agree" with statement "whoever harms me pays for it (el
reciprocity        que me la hace la paga)".

                                                                                      Continued on next page




                                                   45
               Table A-1 ­ Variable definition and sources, continued from previous page

Variable            Description

Party Identity      Equals one if answering "yes" to: "Do you remember which party you voted for mayor of
                    your city or municipality?".

Persuasion          Equals one if person answered "frequently" or "sometimes" to the question "During elections,
                    some people try to convince others to vote for a particular party or candidate. How often
                    have you tried to convince others to vote for a party or candidate?"

Popular vote        Equals if "totally agree" with statement: "It is important that rulers are elected by popular
                    vote".

Positive            Equals one if "totally agree" or "agree" with statement "You always have to help those who
reciprocity         help you".

Preferential        Proportion of preferential voting in the 2014 Congressional elections (share of total votes
voting              cast for congress that are cast for any specific candidate in an open list). Source: Computed
                    using data from Registradur´ ia Nacional.

Protests            Log of (one plus) the total municipal protests carried out against the local government, na-
                    tional government or armed groups between 2005 and 2014. CINEP, Centro de Investigaci´    on
                    y Educaci´on Popular.

Race                Dummy variables for each possible respondent's race. Respondent's races are Black/African,
                    White/European, Colored/Mixed Race, Arab/Lebanese/North African, South Asian (In-
                    dian, Pakistani, etc.), Eat Asian (Chinese, Korean, Indonesian, etc.) or Other.

Rainfall            Average historical (1960-1990) rainfall on the household location. Source: WorldClim -
                    Global Climate Data, available at http: / / worldclim .org/ current .

Reach a             Equals one if answering "yes" to: "In order to solve some problems, have you ever requested
congressman         help or cooperation from... a congressman or his collaborators".

Reach a             Equals one if answering "yes" to: "In order to solve some problems, have you ever
mayor/councilor     requested help or cooperation from... any local authority such as mayor or councilor
                    (mayor/councilor)".

Ruggedness          I Terrain Ruggedness Index originally devised to quantify topographic heterogeneity in
                    wildlife habitats providing concealment for preys and lookout posts. Sum of squares of
                    differences in elevation among contiguous grids. Source and more details in Nunn and Puga
                    (2012), available at http: / / diegopuga .org/ data/ rugged/ #country

Sewage              Equals 1 if household dwelling has sewage system WorldClim - Global Climate Data, available
                    at http: / / worldclim .org/ current .

Temperature         Average historical (1960-1990) temperature on the household location.

                                                                                        Continued on next page

                                                    46
              Table A-1 ­ Variable definition and sources, continued from previous page

Variable           Description

Trash collection   Equals 1 if household dwelling has trash collection service.

Wealth index       First principal component following a principal component analysis on a set of reported
                   household assets and dwelling characteristics. See Bernal et al. (2014).



                                                   B. Africa

                                  Source is the Fifth Round of Afrobarometer

Clientelism        Equals one if answering "Once or twice", "A few times" or "Often" to: "And during the last
                   national election in [20xx], how often, if ever did a candidate or someone from a political
                   party offer you something, like food or a gift or money, in return for your vote?".

Tax evasion        Equals one if answering "No, but would do if had the chance", "Yes, once or twice", "Yes,
                   several times" or "Yes, often" to: "Here is a list of actions that people sometimes take as
                   citizens. For each of these, please tell me whether you, personally, have done any of these
                   things during the past year. If not, would you do this if you had the chance: Refused to pay
                   a tax or fee to government?".

Age                Self-reported age (in years).

Ethnic group       Dummy variables for self-reported ethnic group. The question is formulated as follows: "Let
                   us get back to talking about you. What is your ethnic community, cultural group or tribe?".
                   There are 532 different ethnic groups in total.

Gender             Equals one if respondent's gender is Male.

Language           Dummy variables for self-reported home language ("Which language is your home lan-
                   guage?"). There are 469 different languages in total.

Race               Dummy variables for self-reported race.          Respondent's races are Black/African,
                   White/European, Colored/Mixed Race, Arab/Lebanese/North African, South Asian (In-
                   dian, Pakistani, etc.), East Asian (Chinese, Korean, Indonesian, etc.) or Other.

Region             Dummy variables for regions within countries. 465 different regions in total.

Zone               Dummy variables for Urban, Semi-urban or Rural.




                                                    47
A.2          Unobservable selection and coefficient stability
A common heuristic for evaluating robustness of results to omitted variable bias is to observe coefficient
movements after inclusion of controls.27 The idea behind this heuristic is that unobservables are related to
some degree with observables. Consider the regression model:

                                           Y = X + W1 + W2 + .

We are interested in the parameter  and variables in W2 are not observed. Denote the coefficient resulting
from the short regression of Y on X as      ° and the R-squared from that regression R   °. Also, define the
coefficient from the intermediate regression of Y on X and W1 (a vector of variables) as ~ and the R-squared
   ~
as R. Finally, define Rmax as the R-squared from a hypothetical regression of Y on X , W1 and W2 .
    The most basic calculation to test coefficient stability was proposed by Altonji et al. (2005) and is
computed as:
                                                           ~
                                               Altonji =       .
                                                         °- 
                                                             ~

If theory suggests that  ° is overestimated (and assuming that the relation between unobservables are ob-
servables exist), the inclusion of observables tends to decrease (in absolute value) the coefficient. Thus,
higher Altonji values are associated with coefficient stability. In practice, an Altonji number smaller than
one ( ~ < 0.5°) suggests that the effect isn't strong enough to not be explained by unobservables. In other
words, Altonji numbers under one lead to skepticism about  truly capturing a relationship between X and
Y rather than reflecting the incidence of omitted factors.
     A problem with this first indicator, however, is that controls unrelated with both the dependent variables
and the interest variable can lead to erroneous conclusions. Indeed, the inclusion of this type of controls
doesn't change the  coefficient, but still leads to large Altonji values. Consequently, following to Bellows
and Miguel (2009) and Altonji et al. (2011), assuming a plausible value for Rmax we can estimate a corrected
Altonji as:
                                                    ~(R~-R °)
                                                                   .
                                              (°-   ~)(Rmax - R ~)

Now, high Altonji values are possible only if the coefficient remains stable while relevant controls are included.
Notice that this ratio gives valuable information when the coefficient in the regression with controls has the
same sign as the coefficient in the baseline (without controls). If this is not the case, then clearly observables
may explain the correlation between the two variables, let alone unobservables.
    Focusing on the case where the sign remains stable, the ratio intuitively tells us the degree of selection
on unobservables relative to observables which would be sufficient to explain away the estimated relationship
between X and Y . If this is the case, large positive values suggest that the correlation is not likely driven
by omitted variables, as unobservable selection must be much larger than selection based on observables.
Negative values may arise too, and would suggest that after controlling for observables, the coefficient tends
to be strengthened. Therefore, unobservables should be selected in a different direction than observables to
eliminate the effect, which seems implausible in most applications. In short, with stable signs, large positive
  27
       Our discussion of the methods follow mainly Oster (2019).



                                                       48
values or negative values for the ratio help rule out that the correlation is spuriously reflecting the role of
unobservables.
    Oster (2019), however, develops the asymptotic properties for this estimator finding that even the cor-
rected Altonji ratio is adequate only with one control. With more controls, one needs to recognize the share
of variation in X accounted for by control variables. To do so, she gives guidelines for choosing values for
Rmax .28 Also, she proposes an alternative estimator for the importance of unobserved to observed variable
selection (onwards  Oster ), and develops an estimator for the lower bound of the effect of interest (onwards
 Oster ). She suggests that a  = 1 (equal selection) may be an appropriate lower bound, since researchers
typically focus their data collection efforts on the controls they believe ex ante are the most important
(Angrist & Pischke, 2010).




  28                                                                    ~ ].
       Using simulations, she shows that an adequate guess is min[1, 1.3R


                                                       49
