                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HAPPINESS AND THE QUALITY OF GOVERNMENT

                                        John F. Helliwell
                                         Haifang Huang
                                          Shun Wang

                                      Working Paper 26840
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26840


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




This paper is a draft chapter for the Oxford Handbook of Quality of Government, edited by
Andreas Bågenholm, Monika Bauhr, Marcia Grimes, and Bo Rothstein. The authors are grateful
to the Gallup Organization for access to data, and to the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research and KDI School of Public Policy and Management for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John F. Helliwell, Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Happiness and the Quality of Government
John F. Helliwell, Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 26840
March 2020
JEL No. H1,H5,I3

                                         ABSTRACT

This chapter uses happiness data to assess the quality of government. Our happiness data are
drawn from the Gallup World Poll, starting in 2005 and extending to 2017 or 2018. In our
analysis of the panel of more than 150 countries and generally over 1,500 national-level
observations, we show that government delivery quality is significantly correlated with national
happiness, but democratic quality is not. We also analyze other quality of government indicators.
Confidence in government is correlated with happiness, however forms of democracy and
government spending seem not. We further discuss three channels (including peace and conflict,
trust, and inequality) whereby quality of government and happiness are linked. We finally
summarize what has been learned about how government policies could be formed to improve
citizens' happiness.

John F. Helliwell                               Shun Wang
Vancouver School of Economics                   KDI School of Public Policy and Management
University of British Columbia                  263 Nansejong-ro
6000 Iona Drive                                 Sejong, Korea 30149
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4                           swang@kdis.ac.kr
CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca

Haifang Huang
Department of Economics
University of Alberta
8-14 HM Tory
Edmonton Alberta T6G 2H4 CANADA
haifang.huang@ualberta.ca
Introduction

This chapter has three main purposes. The first is to explain how and why there is increasing
interest in using happiness data and research to measure the quality of life, to help governments
make policy choices, and to evaluate the effects of government policies. A review of important
milestones marking the changes in policy perspective is presented.

The second purpose is to bring together the largest available sets of existing national-level
measures of the quality of governance, and to assess the extent to which they contribute to
explaining the levels and changes in life evaluations in more than 150 countries over the years
2005-2017, using data from the Gallup World Poll. In our view, happiness data provide the most
appropriate means for learning what types and styles of government are most helpful, as
experienced by each country's residents.

The third purpose is to dig slightly deeper into some of the channels whereby happiness and
government quality are linked. We emphasize three channels: conflict, trust, and inequality.
Conflict and inequality are partly created by governments, and make other policy objectives
harder to reach. Trust is an asset partly due to government actions, and is good for happiness in
its own right as well as aiding the achievement of other policy objectives.

A short concluding section summarizes what has thus far been learned about how governments
could be changed so as to improve well-being in all countries, as measured by people's own
evaluations of their lives.


Setting the Stage

There is now widespread interest in refocusing government policies with the explicit aim of
increasing equitable and sustainable human well-being. This change in policy perspective has
been decades in the making, built on a growing dissatisfaction with using GDP per capita as a
sufficient measure of human progress (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi 2009), inspired by the
Bhutanese choice more than 40 years ago to make happiness a national objective, and fuelled by
decades of research aimed at creating a transdisciplinary science of happiness (Ura et al. 2015).
These converging threads came together on July 19, 2011, when the United Nations General
Assembly adopted a Bhutan-sponsored resolution that "called on United Nations Member States



                                                 1
to undertake steps that give more importance to happiness and well-being in determining how to
achieve and measure social and economic development." 1

That resolution then led to a High Level Meeting on Well-Being and Happiness: Defining a New
Economic Paradigm, 2 convened by Jigme Y. Thinley, Prime Minister of Bhutan, at the United
Nations on April 2, 2012. That meeting marked the release of the first World Happiness Report
(Helliwell, Layard, and Sachs 2012), bringing together the available global data on national
happiness and reviewing related evidence from the emerging science of happiness. That report,
which in turn built on many other reviews of the science of well-being, provided strong support
for the view that the quality of people's lives can be coherently and reliably assessed by a variety
of subjective well-being measures, collectively referred to in this chapter as "happiness". It also
built upon, as did the UN meeting itself, the UK launch of a well-being initiative in November
2010, still unique in combining engagement at the highest level from the political,
administrative, and data-gathering pillars of government. The initial constellation of these three
supporting pillars was probably crucial in establishing widespread data-gathering and
discussions. Once started, these data and discussions have fueled a broad swath of innovations in
firms and communities, and a variety of within-government and cross-pillar organizations, that
have continued to deliver research and applications despite not being a central feature of the
political environment.

Life evaluations were granted a central role in the World Happiness Reports because they
provide an umbrella that can enable comparisons of the relative importance of the supporting
pillars for good lives. The OECD Guidelines on Measuring Subjective Well-Being (OECD 2013)
also emphasize the need to measure life evaluations as a primary indicator, ideally in concert
with monitoring affect (i.e., both positive and negative aspects of people's daily emotions and
experiences); "Eudaimonia" (i.e. measures of life purpose); and other factors that have been
found to support better lives (e.g. income, health, good jobs, family and friends, welcoming
communities, good government, trust, and generosity). Having an umbrella measure of
subjective well-being permits the relative importance of these factors supporting well-being to be

1
    Resolution 65/309. See http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=39084#.Whd0DLYZP3h
2
    For the report of the meeting, see:
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?page=view&type=400&nr=617&menu=35



                                                     2
assessed, making it possible to move beyond a general wish to improve well-being towards some
specific policies with established credentials for supporting better lives.

Both before and after the April 2012 UN meeting, attempts were made to sketch the possible
implications of happiness research for public policies. A number of national and international
efforts also aim to develop a well-being policy framework, as summarized in Durand and Exton
(2019). Using happiness data and research to assess the value of political institutions and policies
seems especially appropriate, since many national constitutions and most policy platforms relate
to the quality of life, and the existence and re-election of democratic governments depend on
maintaining a sufficient level of citizen satisfaction with the quality of life. Nonetheless, until
recently most studies of the sources of electoral support have focused on economic conditions
rather than more general measures of the quality of life. More recently, when comparisons have
been made between economic performance and life satisfaction as determinants of electoral
outcomes, the latter has been found to be more important (Esaiasson, Dahlberg, and Kokkonen
2019; Ward 2019a, 2019b). If these results are confirmed more broadly, they will tend to give
happiness a more central role in political science, political platforms and public policies.

There are three key components required to support systematic attempts to design and evaluate
government institutions and policies in terms of their likely effects on people's own evaluations
of the quality of their lives. The first is the collection of happiness data in sufficient detail to
support research into the reasons why some neighbourhoods and nations are happier than others.
Relatively few countries are yet assessing subjective well-being in enough detail and frequency
to support research sufficient to formulate policies focused on well-being.

Second, governments are unlikely to change their policy objectives unless supported by public
opinion. There is already apparent support, in most countries, for a policy framework designed to
deliver sustainability, as witnessed by the breadth of national commitments to the Paris Accord
establishing the Sustainable Development Goals. Subjective well-being is included among the
many goals, but more importantly has the potential for being used as an umbrella welfare
measure to help to establish the relative importance of what otherwise risk being too many
unrelated goals. In this important area, as in others, the availability of an empirically useful
measure of individual and societal wellbeing can help to galvanize as well as direct public and
political thought and actions.



                                                    3
Third, to convert broad objectives to specific policies, and to effectively rank alternative ways to
design and deliver public services, requires a much broader and more comprehensive form of
cost/benefit analysis. The basic idea is simple. Many policies have expected consequences for a
variety of economic and social outcomes, for a range of beneficiaries, and with various ways of
distributing the costs and efforts of policy design and delivery. Traditional cost/benefit analysis
includes costs and consequences that are directly measured at market prices, with non-market
outcomes, such as the level of social trust in a community, being mentioned in discussions as
being relevant, but being left out of any explicit calculations used to support the ranking of
alternative policies. To go further requires extending the evaluation of alternative policies to
include their expected contributions to subjective well-being, using empirical research to
establish the weights assigned to the various outcomes when measuring the overall costs and
benefits. These practices are increasingly established within the policy green books and
evaluation practices used in departments and cabinet offices in several countries, and probably
represent the most important shift required to implement a well-being approach to the evaluation
and design of government institutions and policies.


Happiness and the Quality of National Governments

We use `happiness' as a shorthand way of describing a three-member family of measures of
subjective well-being comprising life evaluations, positive affect and negative affect (Durand
and Smith 2013; OECD 2013). 3 Happiness as an emotion is part of positive affect, while
happiness about one's overall life is an evaluative judgment. Judgments about life satisfaction or
happiness with life deliver quite different answers than do questions about happiness as an
emotion, with life evaluations being more reflective of a wide range of life circumstances. Most
of the research linking happiness and the quality of government has made use of some form of
life evaluations, whether happiness with life, satisfaction with life, or the Cantril ladder question
asking people to think of their lives as a ladder, with the best possible life for them as a 10 and
the worst possible life as a zero, and to rate their current lives on that scale. There is good reason


3
    The OECD also proposed having a measure of life purpose, and such a question is one of the four key well-being
questions used by the UK Office for National Statistics. In our Aristotelian view, a sense of purpose should be a
strong support for life evaluations, but there is unfortunately not yet such a question in the Gallup World Poll.



                                                           4
for this preference for life evaluations. They vary more across countries than do emotional
measures, and these differences are much more explicable in terms of national variations in the
social, political, and economic circumstances of life than is the case for either positive or
negative emotions. Life evaluations are themselves supported also by positive emotions, without
being strongly affected by negative ones as shown in Table 2.1 of Helliwell, Layard, and Sachs
(2019, 20). Life evaluations thus provide a more powerful tool for assessing the importance of
various aspects of the quality of government. Good government may or may not make you feel
happy, but does, as we shall show, make you happier with your life as a whole.

Most of the existing literature on the empirical linkages between happiness and government
quality have been cross-sectional in nature, mainly because of the relatively short time span of
suitable survey evidence, coupled with the frequently slow pace of change in the quality of the
political institutions being studied. One frequent finding of this research has been that if the six
World Bank measures of government quality (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton 1999) are
divided into two groups, one related to the honesty and effectiveness of policy design and
delivery, and the other related to the quality of the electoral process, that quality of delivery is
more important than democracy as a support for higher life evaluations (e.g. Helliwell and
Huang 2008; Ott 2010), especially for countries with lower levels of delivery quality (Helliwell
et al. 2018).

Only recently has the run of available data come to be long enough to permit the analysis to
focus on the consequences of within-country changes rather than long-standing differences
between countries (e.g. Diaz-Serrano and Rodríguez-Pose 2012; Helliwell et al. 2018; Nikolova
2016; Ovaska and Takashima 2010; Whiteley et al. 2010; Yamamura 2011). The ability to study
changes within a given set of national institutions enables attribution of changes in life
satisfaction to changes in the quality of government within a policy-relevant time horizon, even
if it limits the scope for the study of the effects of broader systemic changes in the nature of
public institutions. These broad systemic changes are perhaps best assessed by cross-sectional
analysis combined with a closer examination of the time series evidence in those cases where an
important institutional change takes place.

Since our interest in this chapter includes the analysis of different types of institutions that
change very slowly, and of changes of government quality that occur reasonably often within the



                                                   5
period covered by the available data, our analysis makes use of pooled samples of data covering
more than a dozen years for more than 150 countries, doing our analysis with and without
country fixed effects, with the latter delivering results that depend on what is happening within
individual countries.

Our main analysis makes use of data from the Gallup World Poll, starting in 2005 and extending
to 2017 or 2018, producing a panel of generally more than 1500 observations. Our analysis ends
in 2017 in those cases where the quality of government variables are not available for 2018.
Table A1 describes the main variables used in analysis and their sources, while Statistical
Appendix 2 of World Happiness Report 2019 (WHR 2019 SA2) has more details and also shows
the correlations among the variables (Helliwell, Huang, and Wang 2019).

Delivery quality and democratic quality

Table 1 shows our latest results comparing the life evaluation effects of the World Bank
government quality variables divided into two groups, as we and others have done in previous
work. This new estimation involves more data than we and others have used previously, and is
mainly based on analysis employing country fixed effects. The new results replicate the basic
earlier finding that within-country differences in the quality of delivery (the average for
effectiveness, rule of law, 4 regulatory quality, and absence of corruption) have significant
linkages to life evaluations. As before, there is no such linkage for differences in democratic
quality, as represented by two measures, one capturing voice and accountability, and the other
stability and freedom from violence. We shall return later to consider the democratic and
violence aspects.

There are three equations in Table 1. The first just includes the delivery and democratic
variables, and shows a substantial link between a country's delivery quality and average life
evaluations, with an increase in governmental quality equal to one standard deviation associated
with a 0.7 point increase in average life evaluations. The second equation adds GDP per capita,
which attracts a significant positive coefficient, and lowers the coefficient on delivery quality by
about one-third. Such a reduction is to be expected, as better government should improve the
ability to produce GDP. The third equation adds the three social variables included in the World
4
    Nikolova (2016) finds the rule of law to help explain changes in the happiness gap between the transition and non-
transition countries of Europe.



                                                            6
Happiness Report framework for explaining this same sample of life evaluations. Healthy life
expectancy is not included, since the country fixed effects estimation excludes the effects of
inter-country differences, and the healthy life expectancy data follow simple time trends and
hence do not add to the explanation of within-country changes. The corruption variable is
excluded because it is a key part of the delivery variable. Adding the social variables reduces the
remaining impact from delivery quality, and for mostly the same reasons as for income. For
example, countries where delivery quality is high are also likely to provide the breadth and
quality of public services that permit higher fractions of the population to feel that they are free
to make key life decisions. Indeed, in these data the simple correlation between delivery and
freedom (+0.48) is even higher than that between democratic quality and freedom (+0.45). In
none of the equations does democratic quality show a significant additional linkage to life
evaluations once the other variables in the equation are taken into account, despite the high
simple correlation (which includes differences among countries as well as over time) between
democratic quality and life evaluations (+0.62), which is nonetheless less than between delivery
quality and life evaluations (+0.71). 5

When we previously divided our sample of countries into those with high and low delivery
quality, we found that the democratic quality variable did have positive linkages to life
evaluations in countries with higher than average delivery quality. However, that result is not
replicated in our new longer data sample, where we find that changes in democratic quality have
no impact in either group of countries. This result is not driven by the infrequency of within-
country changes in democratic quality, since it is also found in a pure cross-sectional analysis. 6




5
    We also ran regressions that replace the democratic and delivery indicator with a single measure of governance, the
absence of corruption from the World Bank government quality indicators. Corruption control has a positive and
statistically significant effect in the simplest specification. But when GDP per person is added to the right-hand side
as a control variable, the estimated effect of corruption control drops by half and the statistical significance
disappears. When other control variables in Table 1 are included, the estimated effect of the corruption variable is
close to zero.
6
    See columns 1 and 2 of Table 14 of Statistical Appendix 2 of World Happiness Report 2019.



                                                            7
Table 1: Subjective Well-being and Quality of Government Measured by WGI Indicators of
Governance, Country Fixed Effects Regressions, Sample Period 2005-2017
                                                                      Dependent Variable
Independent Variable                                   SWB                  SWB                        SWB
Democratic Quality                                     0.19                 0.12                       0.09
                                                        (0.13)                  (0.12)                 (0.11)

Delivery Quality                                        0.69                    0.45                   0.28
                                                       (0.2)***                (0.19)**                (0.17)*

Log GDP per capita                                                              0.84                   0.77
                                                                              (0.23)***               (0.2)***

Freedom to make life choices                                                                           0.92
                                                                                                      (0.21)***

Generosity                                                                                             0.29
                                                                                                       (0.18)

Social support                                                                                         1.61
                                                                                                      (0.29)***

Year fixed effects                                   Included                Included                Included
Country fixed effects                                Included                Included                Included
Number of countries                                     162                     162                     160
Number of obs.                                         1548                    1548                    1469
Within-country R-squared                               0.08                    0.11                    0.19
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are cluster-adjusted at the country level. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels respectively.


Assessing other measures of government quality

Besides the World Bank government quality variables that we use to construct the delivery and
democratic quality measures, the literature has other frequently used measures of government
quality. In chapter 2 of the World Happiness Report 2019 we consider five of them ­ corruption
perceptions, political rights, civil liberties, economic freedom and political freedom 7 ­ in a
regression model identical to those reported in Table 1, except that the variables for delivery and
democratic quality are replaced by the five alternative measures. We find that only the corruption
index has a significant positive effect in the first equation, where no other variables are included.

7
    Political Rights (pr) and Civil Liberties (cl) indices are from the Freedom House. Corruption Perception Index
(cpi) is from the Transparency International. World Press Freedom Index (wpfi) is from the Reporters without
Borders. Index of Economic Freedom (wefi) is from the Heritage Foundation.



                                                            8
The same result is found even if the variables are tested one by one within the fixed effects
framework. This lack of correlation is of course strongly influenced by the use of country fixed
effects, which transfer the cross-country linkages into the country-specific fixed effects. If
instead, we look at the simple correlations for the whole data sample, with most of their variation
coming from differences across countries, then there are significant linkages for each of these
variables, although only for the corruption perceptions index is the correlation with life
evaluations (+0.68) close to that of the delivery variable (+0.70). This similarity is to be
expected, as corruption perceptions are a key variable in explaining life evaluations, and are also
a key element in the delivery quality variable. If we add GDP per capita to the right-hand side of
the regression, even the within-country changes in corruption are no longer significant
incremental contributors to life evaluations, suggesting that much of their influence is mediated
by changes in GDP per capita. When the social variables are added in the third column, they
keep their importance, while the government quality indicators remain insignificant. 8

To confirm the robustness of this empirical preference for delivery quality over the other
measures of the quality of governance, Table 2 shows pure cross-section results for changes from
2005-2008 to 2016-2018. The first column shows life evaluations to have increased more in
countries where delivery quality has increased, even excluding effects flowing through increases
in GDP. Column 2 takes out the delivery quality index, and includes the five alternative quality
measures, for the smaller number of countries for which these variables are available. In this
cross-section, the economic freedom index acquires significance at the 10% level, but this is lost
in column 3 when the delivery quality variable is re-introduced. We therefore conclude that
changes in delivery quality, whether on a year to year basis, or over a decade, contribute to
national average life evaluations, and that nothing further is added from any of the other quality
measures tested in Table 2.




8
    See Table 12 of Statistical Appendix 2 of World Happiness Report 2019.



                                                          9
Table 2: Cross-sectional Regressions of Changes from 2005-08 to 2016-18
                                                                           Dependent Variable
Independent Variable                                                  SWB            SWB                      SWB
Democratic Quality                                                     -.04
                                                                       (0.18)

Delivery Quality                                                       0.53                                    0.68
                                                                     (0.26)**                                 (0.39)*

Log GDP per capita                                                     0.65               1.04                  0.9
                                                                     (0.28)**          (0.33)***          (0.34)***

Corruption Perception Index on standardized scale                                          -.18                 -.43
                                                                                          (0.21)              (0.25)*

Political Rights on standardized scale                                                     -.19                 -.14
                                                                                          (0.31)               (0.31)

Civil Liberties on standardized scale                                                       0.2                0.14
                                                                                          (0.34)               (0.34)

World Press Freedom Index on standardized scale                                            -.06                 -.02
                                                                                        (0.15)                (0.15)
Index of Economic Freedom on standardized scale                                           0.26                  0.16
                                                                                       (0.14)*                (0.15)
Number of countries                                                     128                112                   112
Number of obs.                                                          128                112                   112
R-squared                                                              0.14               0.15                  0.17
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5
percent and 1 percent levels respectively.



Confidence in government

The Gallup World Poll asks respondents, yes or no, whether they have confidence in their
national governments. The fraction of respondents answering `yes' can be used as a
supplementary subjective measure of the quality of governance, as seen by those living within
that system. Table 3 presents some results from country fixed effects regressions showing that
changes within the sample period contribute to average life evaluations above and beyond what
is explained by delivery quality, GDP per capita, and the three social variables. The same pattern
of results holds both with and without adding the social variables, so Table 3 adopts the simpler
structure. Column 1 includes confidence in government on its own, while column 2 adds GDP
per capita, and column 3 adds democratic and delivery quality. Confidence in government retains



                                                      10
explanatory power when delivery quality is introduced. Delivery quality itself has a lower effect
when confidence in government is included. Although the two variables have essentially no
correlation in the full sample, within-country changes are significantly positively related, thereby
increasing confidence in both variables as indicators of changes within a country, and reducing
their coefficients in fixed effects specifications where both are included.

Table 3: Gallup World Poll's Measure of Confidence in National Government; Country Fixed
Effects Regressions; Sample Period 2005-2017/18

                                                                  Dependent Variable
Independent Variable                                   SWB              SWB               SWB
Confidence in national government                      0.83             0.68               0.6
                                                      (0.18)***        (0.15)***         (0.16)***

Log GDP per capita                                                       1.08              0.93
                                                                       (0.28)***         (0.27)***

Democratic Quality                                                                        -.003
                                                                                           (0.11)

Delivery Quality                                                                           0.39
                                                                                          (0.21)*

Year fixed effects                                   Included          Included         Included
Country fixed effects                                Included          Included         Included
Number of countries                                     152               152              152
Number of obs.                                         1504              1504             1388
Within-country R-squared                               0.09              0.13             0.14
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are cluster-adjusted at the country level. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels respectively.


Experiments using the data from one half of each year's sample to measure the average
confidence in government to explain the life evaluations of the other half of the sample would
slightly reduce these effects (as shown in WHR 2018 for other variables), but leave their
structure intact. Here we can report a similar experiment, replacing the confidence measure from
the same survey with the confidence measure from the survey done in the year before. This way
the key explanatory variable (the confidence measure) and the variable to be explained (the
happiness measure) come from different respondents and also different, though adjacent, years.
The estimated effects of the confidence measure drop slightly (by about 20%), but retain all their
statistical significance.




                                                     11
Forms of governments and how governments are elected

Here we return to the question of the structure and operation of the electoral system. The results
reported above attach only modest importance, in life satisfaction terms, to whether a system is
or is not a functioning democracy. Of the total observations in our dataset, slightly more than half
(54%) are recorded as democracies 9, and those recorded as democracies on average have higher
life evaluations than those which are not, 5.9 vs 4.9 on the 0 to 10 scale, using all data from 2005
to 2018. And within democracies, parliamentary democracies with proportional representation
have the highest average life evaluations, averaging 6.4. Digging deeper into these simple
averages, Table 4 contains six equations including the three variables reflecting political
structure: democracy, democracy with proportional representation, and parliamentary democracy,
with year fixed effects (but not with country fixed effects) and a variety of other control
variables. Altman, Flavin, and Radcliff (2017) reported, among the OECD countries, higher life
satisfaction in those with a parliamentary or proportional representation systems. Columns 1 to 3
are without regional control variables, while columns 3 to 6 include them. The first column
includes just the three political structure variables, while column 2 adds GDP per capita and
column 3 also adds delivery quality, perceptions of corruption, and the three social variables. In
all three cases, being democratic is estimated to have a significant positive impact, ranging from
+0.67 in the simplest case to +0.42 in the case with the most controls, but still without regional
fixed effects. Proportional representation and a parliamentary form both add some positive
contribution in the simplest case, with coefficients for the three variables summing to over +1.5
points. 10 But by the time the column 3 controls have been added, the net effect for the
proportional parliamentary democracies is down to +0.3 points. Columns 3 to 6 repeat the same
equations with the addition of control variables for each of the ten global regions. In these
equations, the effects of different political systems are estimated relative to other countries in the
same continental region, as well as the relatively rare within-country changes. In none of the
cases with regional controls are there any significant effects from the political system variables.
Thus we conclude that the effects found in columns 1 to 3 risk being based on differences in life
circumstances across global regions that are possibly attributable to factors beyond the ways in

9
    We follow the regime classification in Authoritarian Regimes Dataset (Hadenius and Teorell, 2007; Wahman,
Teorell, and Hadenius, 2013).
10
     This is consistent with the results of Altman, Flavin, and Radcliff (2017) for the OECD countries.



                                                            12
which governments are elected. We do not present results with country fixed effects, since they
are even less able than columns 3 to 6 to show any impact from systemic variables.

Table 4: Happiness, Forms of Government and Electoral Systems; Pooled Regressions without
and with Regional Fixed Effects; Sample Period 2005-2018

                                                             Dependent Variable
Independent Variable                   SWB         SWB          SWB       SWB           SWB         SWB
Democracy, QGI                          0.67        0.51         0.42      0.28          0.14        0.1
                                     (0.2)***    (0.12)***     (0.12)***    (0.18)       (0.09)      (0.09)
Proportional Representation             0.47        0.16          0.07       0.09        0.07        0.01
                                       (0.2)**      (0.14)        (0.11)    (0.14)       (0.11)       (0.1)
Parliamentary Democracy                 0.35         -.33          -.28       0.1        0.04        0.04
                                        (0.2)*    (0.15)**      (0.13)**    (0.22)       (0.17)      (0.14)
Log GDP per capita                                  0.68          0.45                   0.62        0.35
                                                 (0.04)***     (0.06)***              (0.06)***   (0.07)***
Year fixed effects                Included Included Included Included Included Included
Regional fixed effects                                           Included Included Included
Social variable controls                              Included                       Included
Number of countries                      144      144        136       144       144       136
Number of obs.                         1453     1453       1212       1453     1453       1212
R-squared                               0.28     0.65       0.76        0.6     0.73        0.8
Notes: The social variable controls in columns 4 and 6 are the same ones that are used in Table 1, namely
the perception of corruption, freedom to make life choices, generosity, and social support, all from the
Gallup World Poll. Standard errors in parentheses are cluster-adjusted at the level of countries. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels respectively.


How governments spend

In chapter 2 of the World Happiness Report 2019 we also tested some particular government
expenditure patterns that might have possible implications for average life evaluations. In a full
equilibrium, if every country had the structure of government that was best for the subjective
well-being of its citizens, then spending patterns in each country would simply reflect the
preferences of that country's voters, and international variations would reflect differences in
tastes and circumstances across countries. This may also explain the mixed findings linking
government size to happiness (Bjørnskov, Dreher, and Fischer 2007; Flavin, Pacek, and Radcliff
2014; Ott 2010, 2011, 2015; Persson and Rothstein 2015; Ram 2009; Yamamura 2011). The four
variables we consider are government education spending, government healthcare spending, and
military spending (all as % of GDP) and a cross-sectional measure of the breadth of coverage of


                                                     13
a country's social safety net system, on a scale of 1 to 10. Here we briefly summarize the key
findings. 11 We find that social safety net coverage takes a significant positive coefficient, with or
without regional fixed effects, but only in the simplest form excluding income and other control
variables. Government spending on education has no impact in any of the equations, with or
without regional fixed effects, while healthcare spending has a positive coefficient, and military
spending a negative one in the equations with the largest set of control variables, both with and
without the additional of regional fixed effects. But these effects disappear when country fixed
effects are used. This indicates that statistical significance for healthcare and military spending
mostly arises from differences across countries.



Mediating Factors: Conflict, Trust and Inequality

Here we consider some factors that are important for subjective well-being and are also affected
by the quality of government. We look especially at conflicts, trust and inequality of wellbeing.

War and peace

In this section, we show that conflicts 12 and the global peace index 13 both provide important
channels by which good government helps to support high life evaluations.

One of the benefits of good government should be to reduce the incidence of violence, and more
generally to enable citizens to live in peace. Indeed, the absence of conflict is one of the
components of the World Bank's measure of political stability. Since that measure was not found
earlier to significantly affect life evaluations, we return to the issue here more directly. We look
first at the incidence of violence, and then consider the global peace index. To assess whether the
prevalence of violence is associated with lower life evaluations, we make use of data published
by the Uppsala Conflict Data Program. Table 5 shows two sets of three columns each. In every
column there are two conflict variables, each on a zero to 1 basis. The first conflict variable
indicates a country and year in which there were any conflict deaths recorded, and the second

11
     Detailed estimates are reported in Tables 16-18 of Statistical Appendix 2 of World Happiness Report 2019.
12
     For single country evidence for Ukraine, see Coupe and Obrizan (2016). For estimates of the well-being
consequences of terrorism in France and the United Kingdom, see Frey, Luechinger, and Stutzer (2009).
13
     See http://visionofhumanity.org/indexes/global-peace-index/



                                                           14
takes the value of 1.0 for any country year where the conflict death rate was in the 90th percentile
of all cases where conflict deaths were recorded. In our sample of 2,100 country-years, about 600
had some conflict deaths recorded, while in 60 country-years (the top decile) the conflict death
rates ranged from 7.5 to 70 deaths per 100 thousand population. There were 14 different
countries that had one or more years of conflict deaths in the 90th percentile. 14

The results reported in columns 1-3 of Table 5 are all from regressions that include country fixed
effects. The first column contains only the conflict variables, the second adds the log of GDP per
capita, and the third adds corruption, freedom to make life choices, generosity, and social
support. The estimates suggest negative impacts from any conflict deaths, and a much greater
impact for those countries in the 90th percentile. They also suggest that when GDP and other
social variables are added, there is a substantial reduction in the negative impacts of conflicts,
indicating that some of the adverse effect of conflicts on population happiness is likely due to
weakening economic activity and damage to the social fabric.

Columns 4-6 of Table 5 present the results when the conflict-death variables are replaced by the
Global Peace Index in regressions with country and year fixed effects. The Global Peace Index
takes a negative sign in almost all specifications because the index is defined so that higher
values indicate a less peaceful country. The variable rates each of more than 160 countries in
each year from 2008 to 2018 in three domains: societal safety and security, the extent of
continuing domestic and international conflict, and the degree of militarization. The estimated
happiness effects for the peace index are significant in all three cases, even though with a smaller
estimated effect in the final column with the fullest set of economic and social control variables.
Thus part of the negative effect from conflict and violence flows through the economic and
social channels.




14
     These countries are listed in Table 20 of Statistical Appendix 2. Note that Syria is not one of these countries, since
their data are not included the version 18.1 of the Uppsala data.



                                                             15
Table 5: Happiness, Conflicts and Peace; Country Fixed Effects Regressions; Sample Period
2005-2017

                                                             Dependent Variable
Independent Variable             SWB          SWB              SWB       SWB           SWB         SWB
Having conflict deaths
reported in Uppsala GED           -.08         -.04             -.01
(0 or 1)
                                 (0.04)*       (0.04)          (0.04)
Conflict death rate ranked
above 90th percentile (0 or       -.18         -.02             -.06
1)
                                 (0.09)**      (0.08)          (0.08)

Global Peace Index                                                          -.60        -.37        -.32
                                                                          (0.18)***    (0.17)**    (0.18)*

Log GDP per capita                             1.07            0.95                     1.02       0.95
                                             (0.24)***        (0.26)***               (0.29)***   (0.33)***

Year fixed effects       Included           Included         Included     Included    Included Included
Country fixed effects    Included           Included         Included     Included    Included Included
Social variable controls                                     Included                          Included
Number of countries         161                161              157         154          154      151
Number of obs.             1542               1542             1402        1416         1416     1318
Within-country R-squared   0.04               0.09             0.18        0.05         0.08     0.18
Notes: The social variable controls in columns 4 and 6 are the same ones that are used in Table 1, namely
the perception of corruption, freedom to make life choices, generosity, and social support, all from the
Gallup World Poll. Standard errors in parentheses are cluster-adjusted at the level of countries. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels respectively.


Trust and inequality

We consider trust and inequality together, since some recent evidence shows them to have inter-
related impacts on life evaluations. For example, there is substantial evidence that high trust
societies are more resilient in the face of external shocks including earthquakes, floods and
economic crises (Helliwell, Huang, and Wang 2014). In a parallel way, individuals who feel that
others can be trusted, and have a sense of belonging to their communities, are more resilient in
the face of hardships ranging from unemployment and ill-health to discrimination. Although any
of those adverse situations significantly reduces an individual's life evaluations, the loss is less
for those who live in a high-trust environment (Helliwell, Huang, and Wang 2018). Similarly, the
well-being costs to children facing discrimination because of their disabilities are much less for



                                                        16
those who feel a sense of belonging in their local communities (Daley, Phipps, and Branscombe
2018). Trust and belonging thereby not only raise subjective well-being for all, they reduce
inequality of well-being. They do so by providing larger gains for those who are subject to
conditions ­ such as illness, unemployment and discrimination - that would otherwise be likely
to place them at the bottom of the happiness distribution. 15

Many countries have had sharply growing inequality of income and wealth in the last decades of
the 20th century and the first two decades of this century. These increases have had political
salience in many countries, and have been linked to changes in a variety of measures of well-
being (e.g. Pickett and Wilkinson 2015). However, if income is too narrow a measure for human
progress, then inequality of the distributions of income and wealth is also too narrow an indicator
of inequality. Goff, Helliwell, and Mayraz (2018), making use of individual-level data from three
large international surveys, found that inequality of the distribution of happiness, as measured by
the standard deviation of the within-country distribution of individual life evaluations, is more
closely linked to average life evaluations than are the usual measures of inequality in the
distribution of income. This continues to be the case even when efforts are made to reduce the
risk posed by possible mechanical linkages between the mean and the standard deviation of life
evaluations. Another link between inequality and trust enters here, as the same study finds that
well-being inequality is stronger than income inequality as a predictor of international
differences in average rates of social trust, even when average well-being levels are among the
predictors. This is so despite the fact that income inequality has been found to be a strong
predictor of international trust differences (Rothstein and Uslaner 2005). A final empirical
support for the greater generality of well-being inequality is that it has a greater well-being effect
than does income inequality to an extent that is greater for those who report themselves in
surveys to favour more equality. 16

Another way of measuring well-being inequality is to look at the quantile averages or percentile
boundaries, thereby reducing the possibilities for end-point effects to influence the measure.
Recent research has shown a growing spread of the global distribution of well-being scores,
especially since 2010 (Nichols and Reinhart 2019). And this growing dispersion, which has

15
     See Ovaska and Takashima (2010) for discussion of other likely factors influencing well-being inequality.
16
     All three of these results are from Goff et al. (2018).



                                                               17
happened much more in some countries than others, has been found to significantly reduce
average life evaluations, even more than found for income inequality or the standard deviation of
life evaluations.


Choosing Government Policies to Improve Lives

One advantage of focusing policy attention on well-being inequality rather than income
inequality is that there are many more win-win policy options for reducing well-being inequality.
When it comes to the distribution of income and wealth, most policy options involve targeted
transfer of financial resources from the top to the bottom, sometimes angering those being taxed
and stigmatizing the recipients. By contrast, creating happiness for those who have little does
not require any transfers from those who are already happier. In fact, recent research has shown
that a wide range of prosocial actions are likely to improve the subjective well-being of both the
givers and receivers of such kindness (For a recent survey, see Aknin et al. 2019), especially
when under the volition of the donor.

More generally, changes in the structure of government to increase the options for individuals
and communities to share in the design and implementation of their own institutions is likely to
improve outcomes in several ways, because such collaborations encourage engagement, increase
the scope for innovation, and build social connections that raise subjective well-being above and
beyond what they contribute to solving the specific problems at hand. This may be part of the
reason why studies find that people are happier in more decentralized systems (Flavin, Pacek,
and Radcliff 2014; Rodríguez-Pose and Maslauskaite 2012), especially for the raising of
revenues (DiazSerrano and RodríguezPose 2012), and are happier when they share the political
views of the party in power (Di Tella and MacCullough 2005; Tavits 2008) and are more directly
involved in policy choices (Stutzer and Frey 2006). The large negative effects of corruption on
happiness (Helliwell, Layard, and Sachs 2019, 20) may reflect in part that corruption must lessen
the extent to which citizens see themselves as parts of trustworthy collaborations to improve
lives. Emphasis on the `how' of policy design and delivery is still much less central to policy
thinking than it should be. 17

17
     For evidence showing that procedural utility has empirical relevance, see Stutzer and Frey (2006), and Helliwell et
al. (2014).



                                                            18
There is a growing range of evaluations of government policies intended to improve happiness in
many policy areas. At the broadest level, the OECD has recommended that countries adopt a
whole-of-government approach to improving well-being, supported by broader and more
systematic collection of well-being data, and the development and application of policy
evaluation tools that use subjective well-being as the objective and as the means for comparing
monetary and non-monetary costs and outcomes (Durand and Exton 2019). Within healthcare,
using the happiness lens to evaluate different treatment alternatives has been advocated as a
means of producing much better health and more happiness with less drain on scarce resources
(Peasgood, Foster, and Dolan 2019). Within schools, positive education policies designed to
produce better lives for students have been tested and affirmed in large scale trials in countries
around the world (Seligman and Adler 2019). Finally, a large variety of urban policies, frequently
involving a mix of bottom-up and top-down collaboration to build successful communities, has
exposed the importance and value of enabling people to work together in creating happier
communities, especially in urban areas, where such connections require more innovation to
create (Bin Bishr et al. 2019).

There is a growing body of evidence illustrating feasible changes in the structure of government
that are likely to improve population well-being, as measured by people's own life evaluations
(Diener and Biswas-Diener 2019). What is required to move beyond the possible to the actual?
The case studies reviewed above are replete with reasons why existing policies and approaches
tend to stick to time-tested procedures. Risk minimization is the norm, and innovation remains
exceptional, especially that required to build cross-silo cooperation of the sort required. It is
simply very hard to change the course of the ship of state, especially when it requires top-to-
bottom and ministry-to-ministry collaboration. Add in the growing climate of risk aversion, and
innovation looks to be ever more difficult. One way of establishing entry points, and building up
experience and experimental evidence about what works to deliver more happiness, might be to
establish `partnerships for happiness' (Helliwell 2019). These could take different forms in
different circumstances, but essentially they would typically start small and explicitly
experimental, providing freedom of action and innovation for those willing to collaborate. Such
partnerships would ideally involve cooperation across policy silos and from up and down the
administrative structure. It would probably be important to keep the initial efforts explicitly
experimental, accepting that failures are to be expected in any well-designed learning strategy,


                                                  19
and to give higher levels of government the distance and deniability they may at first require.

From either a scientific or a political perspective, the small scale and flexible nature of
partnerships for happiness make them perhaps the most efficient way of acquiring enough
information to inform future choices. Although the logic of redesigning government to build
happiness may be very strong, there is still much to be learned about the best ways of doing so.
Opening the doors to innovation may be difficult, but it remains the essential next step. The
related research agenda is both pressing and increasingly feasible as the range of available
happiness data continues to grow alongside a parallel growth in policy interest.




                                                  20
References

Aknin, Lara B., Ashley V. Whillans, Michael I. Norton, and Elizabeth W. Dunn. 2019.
"Happiness and Prosocial Behavior: An Evaluation of the Evidence." In World Happiness Report
2019, edited by John F. Helliwell, Richard Layard, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, 67­86. New York: UN
Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Altman, David, Patrick Flavin, and Benjamin Radcliff. 2017. "Democratic Institutions and
Subjective Well-being." Political Studies 65, no. 3: 685­704.

Bin Bishr, Aisha, Ali al-Azzawi, Ger Baron, Charles Montgomery, Mauricio Rodas, and Nicola
Yates. 2019. "Happy Cities Agenda." In Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report 2019,
Global Happiness Council, 112­39.

Bjørnskov, Christian, Axel Dreher, and Justina A. V. Fischer. 2007. "The Bigger the Better?
Evidence of the Effect of Government Size on Life Satisfaction around the World." Public
Choice 130, no. 3-4: 267­92.

Coupe, Tom, and Maksym Obrizan. 2016. "The Impact of War on Happiness: The Case of
Ukraine." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 132: 228­42.

Daley, Angela, Shelley Phipps, and Nyla R. Branscombe. 2018. "The Social Complexities of
Disability: Discrimination, Belonging and Life Satisfaction among Canadian Youth." SSM -
Population Health 5: 55­63.

DiazSerrano, Luis, and Andrés RodríguezPose. 2012. "Decentralization, Subjective Wellbeing,
and the Perception of Institutions." Kyklos 65, no. 2: 179­93.

Diener, Ed, and Robert Biswas-Diener. 2019. "Well-being Interventions to Improve Societies."
In Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report 2019, Global Happiness Council, 95­110.

Di Tella, Rafael, and Robert MacCullough. 2005. "Partisan Social Happiness." Review of
Economic Studies 72, no. 2: 367­93.

Durand, Martine, and Carrie Exton. 2019. Adopting a Well-being Approach in Central
Government: Policy Mechanisms and Practical Tools. In Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy
Report 2019, Global Happiness Council, 140­62.

Durand, Martine, and Conal Smith. 2013. "The OECD Approach to Measuring Subjective Well-
being." In World Happiness Report 2013, edited by John F. Helliwell, Richard Layard, and
Jeffrey D. Sachs, 112­37. New York: UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Esaiasson, Peter, Stefan Dahlberg, and Andrej Kokkonen. 2019. "In Pursuit of Happiness: Life
Satisfaction Drives Political Support." European Journal of Political Research.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12335




                                               21
Flavin, Patrick, Alexander C. Pacek, and Benjamin Radcliff. 2014. "Assessing the Impact of the
Size and Scope of Government on Human Well-being." Social Forces 92, no. 4: 1241­58.

Frey, Bruno S., Simon Luechinger, and Alois Stutzer. 2009. "The Life Satisfaction Approach to
Valuing Public Goods: The Case of Terrorism." Public Choice 138, no. 3/4: 317­45.

Goff, Leonard, John F. Helliwell, and Guy Mayraz. 2018. "Inequality of Subjective Well-being
as a Comprehensive Measure of Inequality." Economic Inquiry 56, no. 4: 2177­94.

Hadenius, Axel, and Jan Teorell. 2007. Pathways from Authoritarianism. Journal of
Democracy 18, no. 1: 143­56.

Helliwell, John F. 2019. "How to Open Doors to Happiness." In Global Happiness and
Wellbeing Policy Report 2019, Global Happiness Council, 9­26.

Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Huang. 2008. "How's Your Government? International Evidence
Linking Good Government and Well-being." British Journal of Political Science 38, no.4: 595­
619.

Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang, Shawn Grover, and Shun Wang. 2014. "Good Governance
and National Well-being: What are the linkages?" OECD Working Papers on Public Governance
No 25. DOI: 10.1787/5jxv9f651hvj-en.

Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang, Shawn Grover, and Shun Wang. 2018. "Empirical Linkages
between Good Governance and National Well-being." Journal of Comparative Economics 46,
no. 4: 1332­46.

Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang. 2014. "Social Capital and Well-being in
Times of Crisis." Journal of Happiness Studies 15, no. 1: 145­62.

Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang. 2018. "New Evidence on Trust and Well-
being." In The Oxford Handbook of Social and Political Trust, edited by Eric M. Uslaner, 409­
46. New York: Oxford University Press.
Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang. 2019. "Changing World Happiness." In
World Happiness Report 2013, edited by John F. Helliwell, Richard Layard, and Jeffrey D.
Sachs, 11­46. New York: UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Helliwell, John F., Richard Layard, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, eds. 2012. World Happiness Report.
New York: UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Helliwell, John F., Richard Layard, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, eds. 2019. World Happiness Report
2019. New York: UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton. 1999. "Governance Matters." Policy
Research Working Paper no. 2196. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.




                                              22
Nichols, Stafford, and R. J. Reinhart. 2019. "Well-being inequality may tell us more about life
than income." Gallup Blog, March 14, 2019.
https://news.gallup.com/opinion/gallup/247754/wellbeing-inequality-may-tell-life-income.aspx

Nikolova, Milena. 2016. "Minding the Happiness Gap: Political Institutions and Perceived
Quality Of Life in Transition." European Journal of Political Economy 45: 129­48.

OECD. 2013. OECD Guidelines on Measuring Subjective Well-being. Paris: OECD Publishing.
http://www.oecd.org/statistics/Guidelines%20on%20Measuring%20Subjective%20Well-
being.pdf

Ott, Jan C. 2010. "Good Governance and Happiness in Nations: Technical Quality Precedes
Democracy and Quality Beats Size." Journal of Happiness Studies 11, no. 3: 353­68.

Ott, Jan C. 2011. "Government and Happiness in 130 Nations: Good Governance Fosters Higher
Level and More Equality of Happiness." Social Indicators Research 102, no. 1: 3­22.

Ott, Jan C. 2015. "Impact of Size and Quality of Governments on Happiness: Financial
Insecurity as a Key-Problem in Market-Democracies." Journal of Happiness Studies 16, no. 6:
1639­47.

Ovaska, Tomi, and Ryo Takashima. 2010. "Does a Rising Tide Lift All the Boats? Explaining the
National Inequality of Happiness." Journal of Economic Issues 44, no. 1: 205­24.

Peasgood, Tessa, Derek Foster, and Paul Dolan. 2019. "Priority Setting in Healthcare through the
Lens of Happiness." In Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report 2019, Global Happiness
Council, 27­52.

Persson, Anna, and Bo Rothstein. 2015. "It's My Money: Why Big Government May Be Good
Government." Comparative Politics 47, no. 2: 231­49.

Pickett, Kate E., and Richard G. Wilkinson. 2015. "Income Inequality and Health: A Causal
Review." Social Science & Medicine 128, 316­26.

Ram, Rati. 2009. "Government Spending and Happiness of the Population: Additional Evidence
from Large Cross-Country Samples." Public Choice 138, no. 3/4: 483­90.

Rodríguez-Pose, Andrés, and Kristina Maslauskaite. 2012. "Can Policy Make Us Happier?
Individual Characteristics, Socio-Economic Factors and Life Satisfaction in Central and Eastern
Europe." Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 5, no. 1: 77­96.

Rothstein, Bo, and Eric M. Uslaner. 2005. "All for All: Equality, Corruption, and Social
trust." World Politics 58, no. 1: 41­72.

Seligman, Martin, and Alejandro Adler. 2019. "Positive Education." In Global Happiness and
Wellbeing Policy Report 2019, Global Happiness Council, 53­72.



                                               23
Stiglitz, Joseph, Amartya K. Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi. 2009. The Measurement of Economic
Performance and Social Progress Revisited: Reflections and Overview. Paris: Commission on
the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress.

Stutzer, Alois, and Bruno S. Frey. 2006. "Political Participation and Procedural Utility: An
Empirical Study." European Journal of Political Research 45, no. 3: 391­418.

Tavits, Margit. 2008. "Representation, Corruption, and Subjective Well-being." Comparative
Political Studies 41, no. 12: 1607­30.

Ura, Karma, Sabina Alkire, Tshoki Zangmo, and Karma Wangdi. 2015. Provisional Findings of
2015 GNH Survey. Thimphu, Bhutan: Centre for Bhutan Studies & GNH Research.

Wahman, Michael, Jan Teorell, and Axel Hadenius. 2013. Authoritarian Regime Types Revisited:
Updated Data in Comparative Perspective. Contemporary Politics 19, no. 1: 19­34.

Ward, George. 2019a. "Happiness and Voting Behaviour." In World Happiness Report 2013,
edited by John F. Helliwell, Richard Layard, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, 47­66. New York: UN
Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Ward, George. 2019b. "Happiness and Voting: Evidence from Four Decades of Elections in
Europe." American Journal of Political Science. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12492.

Whiteley, Paul, Harold D. Clarke, David Sanders, and Marianne C. Stewart. 2010. "Government
Performance and Life Satisfaction in Contemporary Britain." The journal of Politics 72, no. 3:
733­46.

Yamamura, Eiji. 2011. "The Influence of Government Size on Economic Growth and Life
Satisfaction: A Case Study from Japan." Japanese Economy 38, no. 4: 28­64.




                                                24
