                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE INTERNATIONAL MARKET FOR CORPORATE CONTROL

                                         Anusha Chari

                                      Working Paper 26843
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26843


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




I thank Sharjil Haque for stellar research assistance. I also thank participants at the Brookings
conference on Multinational Corporations in a Changing Global Economy for helpful comments
and suggestions. Special thanks are due to Jim Hines, Fritz Foley, David Wessel, Steve Kamin,
Lindsey Oldenski, Ron Davies, Fred Bergsten, Dhammika Dharmapala, Peter Merrill, In Song
Kim, Tim McDonald, Ann Harrison, Isil Erel, Michael Weisbach and Yeejin Jang. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anusha Chari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The International Market for Corporate Control
Anusha Chari
NBER Working Paper No. 26843
March 2020
JEL No. F2,F23,F3,G34

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper documents a set of stylized facts about recent trends in cross-border M&A (CBMA)
activity around the world. The facts focus on key features of CBMA such as (i) the magnitude;
(ii) how it varies across industries and locations; (iii) how it compares to levels of greenfield FDI
over time; (iv) horizontal (market access) versus vertical (integrating supply chains) transactions;
(v) the mode of financing;(vi) diversifying transactions versus those in the same industry; (vii)
patterns of control acquisition; and (viii) strategic versus financially motivated transactions. The
paper also examines whether the nature of cross-border M&A activity differs across developed
and emerging markets. Next, it considers the incentives for firms to buy firms in other countries
and to sell divisions to foreign buyers and examines the evidence about post-acquisition
outcomes. The paper concludes with a discussion of policy challenges that confront governments
as they weigh the balance of national security concerns against a desire to increase foreign
investment in their economies.


Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu
1.     Introduction

       Global cross-border M&A volumes have witnessed unprecedented rates of growth
over the past three decades. Since the 1990s, cross-border mergers and acquisitions account
for a very significant fraction of foreign direct investment flows around the world. The
value of cross-border transactions grew from US$ 291.4 billion in 2001 to US$ 728.5
billion in 2017. The growth in the number of deals is also striking- the number of cross-
border M&A transactions worldwide rose from 4,163 in 2001 to 14,196 in 2017. The
volume of worldwide cross-border M&A activity was 48% of total FDI in 2017.
       While cross-border M&As share numerous features in common with domestic
M&As, such as technological synergies and financing considerations, the international
nature of these transactions generates many additional complexities. For example, cross-
border M&As span both acquiring and target firm regulatory institutions and market
frameworks that can vary significantly across countries. In the context of outsourcing
production, "make versus buy" considerations for extending firm boundaries across borders
also impact cross-border M&A activity.
       Explanations for acquiring control across borders, therefore, lie at the intersection of
organizational economics and trade. Here, costly financial contracting, non-verifiable
monitoring of technologies deployed across borders especially in countries with weak
investor protections form the basis for expanding the boundaries of the firm internationally
(make) rather than contracting to suppliers outside the firm (buy). Similar to greenfield FDI
projects, market access (horizontal) or integrating upstream and downstream component of
supply chains across borders (vertical) motivations drive cross-border M&A activity.
       This paper describes the market for international corporate control in three steps. It
documents in some detail a set of facts about the ownership of firms across borders in
recent decades. It also examines the incentives that drive firms to extend their boundaries
across borders. Finally, it surveys the evidence about post-acquisition outcomes and
concludes with some policy considerations.
       The paper begins by documenting the magnitude of cross-border M&A activity,
how it varies across industries and locations and compares to levels of greenfield FDI over
time. The stylized facts provide an overview of cross-border M&As (CBMAs) across time;
whether there are periods of merger waves as in the case of domestic M&As; and the
regional distribution of CBMAs for acquirors and targets by the volume and value of

                                              2
transactions. The facts focus on key features of CBMA such as (i) horizontal (market
access) versus vertical (integrating supply chains) transactions; (ii) the mode of financing;
(iii) diversifying transactions versus those in the same industry; (iv) patterns of control
acquisition; and (v) strategic versus financially motivated transactions. It also examines
whether the nature of cross-border M&A activity differs across developed and emerging
markets.
       Briefly, we see that M&A flows constitute a large part of overall FDI flows where
the number of M&A transactions has tripled over the past two decades. Cross-border M&A
activity is concentrated in relatively few countries, mainly US and Europe. Cross-border
M&A deals occur in waves and megadeals on the rise. Most cross-border M&A deals
involve private firms and private equity transactions have increased significantly over time.
Finally, tax haven countries account for a significant share of cross-border M&A activity.
       Next, we consider the incentives for firms to buy firms in other countries and to sell
divisions to foreign buyers. Existing studies offer several reasons ranging from market
seeking versus efficiency (cost reduction) motives to maintaining control over proprietary
technologies in countries with weak contracting institutions. I examine rationales for
establishing control through mergers and acquisitions, whether it be majority or full control
when firms could easily outsource at an arms-length. Importantly, I discuss how these
incentives differ from those that drive M&A activity within countries.
       Also, financial considerations such as liquidity provision are often a determining
factor in M&A transactions. Here, cheap financial capital based on acquiror-country
valuations can drive international buying sprees. Alternatively, undervalued assets in target
countries provide an important incentive for cross-border M&A activity. These factors can
gain further importance during times of crisis when financial constraints bind.
       The evidence suggests that cross-border M&A deals tend to create surplus value
through various means ­ by increasing productivity, improving governance, and boosting
stock prices. Cross-border M&A deals also take advantage of undervalued companies in
target countries as well as cheap financing in acquiring countries. These factors also relate
to other, commonly cited reasons why MNCs establish operations abroad, including those
discussed in several other papers of this volume, such as developing global supply chains
through vertically integrating M&As, expanding markets through horizontal M&As and
profit shifting for tax purposes.

                                               3
       Finally, I survey the evidence on post-acquisition outcomes. When a firm based in
one country buys a firm based in another, what happens to employment, investment,
production, and other measurable aspects of firm activity in the two locations? These
considerations are often politically-sensitive when firms acquire control of physical assets
located outside their own countries. It is not surprising that public sentiment can run high
when foreign firms gain corporate control of domestic assets.
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes M&As characteristics using
Bureau Van Dijk's Zephyr database. The advantage of this source over other aggregated
sources of FDI data is that the data give detailed transaction characteristics of individual
M&A transactions. I provide a series of stylized facts about the frequency, timing, and
composition of worldwide cross-border M&A trends over the last two decades. Section 3
examines the alternative motivations and explanations for these trends. Section 4 analyzes
post-acquisition outcomes for several real variables such as employment, investment, and
profitability. Section 5 outlines key policy issues that confront governments with respect to
cross-border M&A transactions. Section 6 concludes.


2.     Facts about Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions Around the World
The paper bases its overview of the structure and evolution of cross-border M&As on
Thomson's Bureau Van Dijk's Zephyr database, an extensive worldwide database of M&A
transactions. The database includes information on mergers and acquisitions, initial public
offerings, private equity, and venture capital deals and rumors. The data has global
coverage with European transactions from as early as 1997, North American transactions
from 2000, and other global regions from 2003 onwards. Zephyr aspires to be
comprehensive in that no minimum deal value is applied. As of October 2018, there was
information for more than 1.73 million deals, rumored, and actual transactions between
1/1/1997 and 12/31/2017.
       A typical M&A search query combines variables for geography, timing, deal type,
and deal value. This paper focuses on transactions that involve a cross-border target and are
completed--not rumored, pending, postponed, or simply announced. The focus is on
transactions with confirmation of completion and not assumed to be complete (assumed-
completed is a data category). From a master sample of 1.21 million announced and
completed deals, the cross-border sample consists of 223,405 completed acquisition

                                               4
transactions. Of these transactions, 195,741 transactions are mergers, acquisitions, and
minority stake investments. Excluded are IPOs, institutional buyouts, capital increases, joint
ventures, management buy-ins and buy-outs, demergers, and share buybacks. The final
sample consists of 166,311 transactions.
       The firms in the final sample are both public and private acquirors and targets. The
geographical setting included an extensive set of developed and emerging countries. An
important advantage of the data is good coverage of private firm acquisitions that are
generally not available in other cross-border M&A data sources. The sample includes
majority and minority acquisitions, and mergers as well as exits via private equity
transactions but excludes joint ventures, buyouts, privatizations, reverse mergers and
restructurings. One limitation of the Zephyr database is that coverage of deal values begins
in 2001, and it reports deal values for about 61% of the transactions. For approximately
45% of the sample, the data contain information about the mode of payment, such as cash,
equity, debt, and so on.
       Table 1 provides a broad overview of the data. The total value of deals in the sample
is $9.02 trillion, with a mean transaction value of $97.9 million. The value of the largest
deal is $195.6 billion which is the Vodafone AirTouch takeover of the German
telecommunications and engineering group Mannesmann AG based on a stock swap
between the two firms. About a third of the firms are publicly listed--29.3% of acquirors
and 26.3% of targets. Finally, there are 181 acquiror or source countries and 187 target or
destination countries in the sample.


Fact #1: Cross-border mergers and acquisitions comprise nearly 50% of FDI flows
following the Global Financial Crisis.

To highlight the importance of cross border mergers and acquisitions as a mode of entry
into foreign markets, Figure 1 provides a snapshot of the composition of foreign direct
investment into greenfield investments and M&A activity for 2017, the last year in our
sample. Data from the Financial Times FDI market reports database provides information
about the number and value of announced greenfield projects. Using individual transaction
information from the Zephyr database, we can calculate the number and aggregate cross
border M&A transactions.


                                              5
         In 2017, 54.4% of total FDI transactions were in the form of announced greenfield
investments that comprise 50.2% of the total value of worldwide FDI. In contrast, the
number of cross-border M&A transactions comprise 45.6% and 49.8% of the number and
value of aggregate FDI. The numbers imply that cross-border M&A activity accounts for
nearly half of all FDI transactions. Of the M&A transactions, the lion's share (99.9%) were
in the form of acquisitions while the relatively uncommon mergers comprise the
remainder.2 Further acquirors gain majority if not full control of their cross-border targets in
5.8% and 27.1% of the transactions, respectively. 67% of transactions in 2017 involve
acquisition stakes of 10%-49%, minority stakes classified as FDI, i.e., a 10% or greater
stake.
         Figures 2 and 3 plot the trends of announced greenfield projects and completed
M&A transactions in terms of both numbers and value between 2003-2017. The data
suggest that the value of announced greenfield projects peaked in 2007 and has not
recovered to its pre-crisis peak thereafter. Mergers and acquisitions, in contrast, have risen
steadily after the crisis, and the value of these transactions is roughly equal to those of
announced greenfield projects by the end of the data sample period.

Fact #2: The number of cross-border M&A transactions has tripled over the last two
decades.

Figure 2 shows that before the Global Financial Crisis (2000-2008), the total number of
cross-border M&A transactions increased from about 4,500 to 8,500 transactions
worldwide. M&A transactions fell by approximately 30 percent in 2009, mirroring the
collapse in global trade in the aftermath of the crisis. The pace of M&A activity recovered
and surpassed pre-crisis levels-in 2017; there were about 14,000 cross-border M&A
transactions--more than triple the number of transactions at the beginning of the sample.




2
  Zephyr's glossary defines merger as follows: "A true Merger is in reality actually quite rare and many
acquisitions are incorrectly described as "mergers" in the press. In a true Merger, there is a one-for-one share
swap for shares in the new company and the deal involves a `merging of equals.' If the swap is not on equal
terms, the deal would be coded as an Acquisition. However, in a true Merger, the original companies are
entered into the deal record as the Acquiror and the Target (in no particular order). In the case of a 3-way (or
more) merger, multiple companies can be entered in both Acquiror and Target fields. Where a Newco has
been used, the Newco is added as the Acquiror and the newly merged company as the Target. The newly
merged company name would be added to the comments. Mergers do often occur as `partnerships' and are
most typically carried out by organizations such as law firms and accountancy firms."

                                                        6
Fact #3: A rising share of transactions are by Asian and Latin American acquirors,
but the US and European companies still dominate the market for international
corporate control.

Figure 4.1 shows that in 2000, acquirors from Europe and the United States accounted for
91.2% (or 4,095 transactions) of all cross-border M&A activity. While there is a rising
importance of emerging Asian and Latin American acquirors, European and US
transactions continue to account for three-fifths (61%) of the transactions in 2017. This
trend holds even though the number of transactions by Asia and Latin American acquirors
increased eight-fold over the last two decades rising from 383 transactions in 2000 to 2,926
transactions in 2017.
       In 2000, Asian transactions accounted for about 6.7% of the total. This proportion
nearly quadrupled to 23% in 2017. Similarly, Latin American transactions rose from 1.97%
to 10.5% of total transactions between 2000-2017. In addition, 2.3% of the transactions
involved African countries in 2017. These numbers suggest that about 35%, of the M&A
transactions in 2017 involved a developing country target--a proportion that was less than
10% in 2000.
       The United States and Europe also account for a bulk of the target firms in cross-
border M&A transactions. Figure 4.2 shows that the United States, the United Kingdom,
and Germany comprise 28.5% of target firms in cross-border M&A transactions. Including
target firms from the Netherlands, France, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden, and Canada,
the fraction rises to an impressive 79.2% of total cross-border M&A targets. India, China,
and Russia account for 10.1% of target firms. Including targets from Hong Kong and
Australia, the share of target firms from these 15 nations alone account for nearly 90% of
all cross-border targets.
       North American and European acquirors and targets also dominate the regional
distribution of the total value of cross-border M&A activity. Figure 5.1 shows that North
American and European acquirors account for 71% of the overall value of cross-border
transactions. Acquiring firms from Asia and Latin America account for approximately a
quarter (26%) of the total cross-border transactions by value. Similarly, Figure 5.2 shows
that North American and European target firms are about 70% of total transactions by
value, while Asian and Latin American targets account for 24% of the total value of
transactions. The pattern of concentration in value is similar to that observed in the numbers


                                              7
of transactions. North America and Europe appear to be the most active regions in the
world through the lens of cross-border M&A activity.


Fact #4: Cross-Border M&A Activity is highly concentrated among a small set of
countries.

Fact #3 and Fact #4 collectively suggest that cross-border activity is highly concentrated
among a small set of countries. A predominantly large fraction of cross-border M&A
activity in terms of both acquirors and targets are located in North America (the United
States and Canada) and Europe, including the United Kingdom. The pattern in cross-border
FDI flows in the form of M&A activity appears to mirror patterns in international trade
between the two regions.
       Strikingly, fifteen acquiror countries together account for 71% of the total number
of cross-border transactions. Figure 6.1 shows that acquisitions from the United States and
the United Kingdom alone account for 36% of overall cross-border M&A activity. Along
with acquiring firms from Germany, France, the Netherlands, and Canada, these two
countries account for 52.6% of worldwide cross-border M&A transactions. About 11% of
the acquisitions originate from the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Switzerland,
Cyprus, Hong Kong, and Singapore--known for their tax haven status. Sweden, Japan, and
Australia also rank in the list of top 15 acquiror nations.
       Further, the top 15 nations comprise 73% and 70% of the total value of cross-border
deals as acquirors and targets, respectively (Figures 6.1 and 6.2). Of these, the US and UK
account for 32% and 26% of the total value as acquirors and targets, respectively. Other
countries in the top 15, by the total value of deals, are from Europe (Germany, France,
Spain, and the Netherlands), Asia (China, India, and Japan), tax haven countries
(Luxembourg, Switzerland, Hong Kong, Singapore and Bermuda), Canada and Australia
for acquirors.
       Ten of the same countries also feature on the 15 most popular destination countries
by value in terms of target location (Figure 6.2). The exceptions are Italy, India, Russia,
Brazil, and Sweden that are on the list of top destinations in place of Bermuda, Canada,
Japan, Hong Kong, and Singapore on the acquiror list. Once again, the concentration of
cross-border M&A activity by value comprises a relatively small set of countries, albeit


                                                8
most of the biggest economies in the world. What is worth noting is that there are over 180
acquiror and destination countries in the sample of transactions.
        Figure 7 plots the value of transactions by acquiring and target firms from different
countries. The picture shows a very high correlation between the total value of transactions
by each country as acquiror and target. For example, firms from the US and UK account for
a very high value of transactions as both acquirors and targets. In fact, for a sample of 179
countries, the correlation coefficient between the value transactions by acquiror and target
status for each country is 0.959. The finding is robust to sample sizes restricted to 100, 50,
or 40 countries-the correlation coefficient remains above 0.95. The figure suggests that
countries where firms engage in high levels of M&A activity as acquirors are also very
active destinations from where firms are acquired. Conversely, countries with lower levels
of activity as acquirors also tend to have lower values as targets. It is not all that surprising
that this pattern seems closely linked to country-GDP and consistent with the pattern of
concentration documented above.

Fact #5: The industrial composition of acquirors shows the rising global dominance of
the services sector.

        Figures 8 and 9 show the overall industrial composition of targets and acquirors in
cross-border M&A transactions. From the documentation in Zephyr, services include
"Finance, insurance, real estate, and non-financial services". Non-financial services include
Travel Accommodations (hotels), recreational and vacation camps, industrial launderers,
barber shops, tax preparatory services etc. In essence all industry SIC codes in the 6000-
7000 range are classified as services.
        Consolidated data from Figure 8 shows that the services sector accounts for 47% of
the overall target values, while manufacturing and agriculture account for 38% and 14%,
respectively. Similarly, Figure 9 shows that the share of total acquiror value from the
services sector accounts for a predominant share (65%) of the transaction values while the
manufacturing and agriculture account for 26% and 8% of acquiror value shares,
respectively.
        Over time, the data show a definite rise in the dominance of the services sector in
cross-border transactions. From the acquiror side, services accounted for 52% of the total
value at the beginning of the sample, rising to a massive 76% at the end of the sample in
2017. On average, the shares of acquirors from manufacturing and services are about 27%
                                                9
and 62% between 2000-2017--the remaining acquirors are from agriculture and
construction, utilities, and retail/wholesale trade. On the target side, the industrial
composition is more evenly split between manufacturing (38%) and services (46%), on
average, of total transaction values.
        For developed countries, while targets are from both manufacturing (40%) and
services (46%), acquirors are predominantly from services (63%) and about a third (27%)
for manufacturing. In developing and emerging countries, both targets and acquirors fall
into shares of 30%, 43% and 21% from manufacturing, services, and agriculture,
respectively.


Fact #6: A significant fraction of cross-border M&As involve industry diversification
integrating global value chains across borders.

Rationales for cross-border acquisitions rely on two main categories--horizontal M&A in
the acquiring firm's industry primarily for international market access and vertical M&A to
integrate global supply chains across borders. Determining whether a transaction is
horizontal or vertical depends on the extent to which acquisitions may or may not diversify
lines of business for the acquiring multinational. A challenge of such analysis is, however,
the crudeness of standard industry classifications. For example, for large firms that operate
in multiple lines of business, it is not clear how to classify a firm based on industry.
        To address this issue, Table 2 presents alternative measures of industrial
diversification based on 6-digit, 5-digit, 4-digit, 3-digit and 2-digit industry classification
(NAICS) of acquirors and targets, to get a more nuanced sense of the extent to which
acquisitions might diversify. The first column focuses on the non-financial sector, i.e.,
transactions where the acquiring firm is from a manufacturing or primary industry. It is
interesting to take note of the fact that as we move from finer to more aggregated degrees of
industry classification, the fraction of transactions classified as diversifying falls steadily.
At the 6-digit level of classification, nearly 50% of the transactions are outside the
acquiror's primary industry. This fraction falls to 17.8% when we consider a 2-digit
industry classification. The pattern is even more stark for the financial sector where over
60% of the cross-border M&A transactions constitute industry-diversification at the 6-digit
level, and the fraction is a mere 6.5% at the 2-digit level of classification.


                                                10
       SIC codes for classifying industries reveal a similar pattern--for a finer 4-digit
industry classification--65% of the transactions are outside the acquiror's primary industry
or diversifying transactions for the non-financial real sector. The fraction drops steadily
from 60% (3-digit), 46% (2-digit) to 32% (1-digit) measures of industry classification. In
the financial sector, the fraction ranges from 72% (4-digit) to 57% (2-digit) for diversifying
transactions.
       The pattern is consistent with the evidence in Alfaro and Charlton (2009), where
data from Dun & Bradstreet (D&B), also presents a more comprehensive and nuanced
picture of global multinational activity. The dataset included location, ownership, and
detailed sector-level information (at the four-digit level) for each of more than 650,000
multinational subsidiaries in 400 industries and 90 countries. Given that we do not observe
trade within multinational firms, the study uses a combination of four-digit sector-level
information and input-output tables to distinguish horizontal and vertical FDI.
       Similar to the evidence in Table 2, Alfaro and Charlton (2009) also find that at the
two-digit industry level, a considerably higher fraction of relationships are classified as
horizontal (subsidiaries in the same industry as their parents) rather than vertical
(subsidiaries that supply their parents with inputs) FDI. However, disaggregating to the
four-digit level reveals that many of the foreign subsidiaries in the same two-digit industry
as their parents are located in sectors that produce highly specialized inputs for their
parents' production.
       The Davies and Markusen paper in this volume classifies MNE organizational
structures according to whether the firm replicates significant amounts of activity across
different countries (horizontal FDI) or whether the production process is integrated in
stages across borders (vertical FDI). Alfaro and Charlton (2009) define vertical FDI as
establishments owned by a foreign parent that produce intermediate inputs to the parent's
production and export those inputs to the parent country whereas Alfaro et. al. (2018) use
input-output matrices to characterize the upstream or downstream relatedness of activities
within multinational firms. The M&A data in Zephyr also provide an unexplored avenue to
view the vertical, horizontal and diversifying motivations of firms to make acquisitions
across borders. Table 3 below shows a snapshot of the data to illustrate the different types
of transactions that take place.



                                              11
                   For example, Ruskii Alyumini Zao's acquisition of Glencore International AG
represents vertical integration where a Russian Alumina refining and primary aluminum
production firm purchased a Swiss metal ore mining firm. Mitsubishi's increasing interest
in Chilean Anglo-American Sur Sa is an acquisition of a mining company by a metals
wholesaler. On the other hand, in Deutsche Telekom AG's acquisition of UK's One-2-One
is a diversifying transaction where a wired telecommunication carrier purchases a stake in a
wireless telecommunications provider. The German Boehringer Ingelheim-French Merial
Sas transaction in the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector appears to be a horizontal
acquisition. Similarly, Walgreen's acquisition of Alliance Boots is also a horizontal
transaction in retail drug stores. In contrast, Roche's 100% acquisition of Bermuda
incorporated Corange Ltd., the parent company of Boehringer Mannheim and DePuy, was
designed to position Roche as a global leader in diagnostics and also strengthen its
pharmaceutical division, the foundation of Roche's operations. The transaction therefore
appears to have both horizontal and vertical features.
                   Detailed information on a transaction by transaction basis of the precise nature of
the acquisitions along with detailed input-output data would allow a more definitive
characterization of the vertical, horizontal and diversifying motivations for the cross-border
transactions. Simply viewing the transactions via the lens of NAICS codes suggests that
vertical transactions differ in their four-digit NAICS codes. Horizontal transactions tend to
differ in the fifth or sixth digit of their NAICS code. However, some of these horizontal
transactions are also diversifying transactions within narrow industry codes such as wireless
(NAICS code: 517312) and wired communications (NAICS code: 517311) or wineries
(NAICS code: 312130) and distilleries (NAICS code: 312140). Therefore, the data
highlight the fact that the distinguishing which transactions are strictly horizontal, i.e., to
geographical diversification across markets, may not be straightforward as many of these
transactions also comprise important industrial diversification features.
                   Table 3
Acquiror Company             Cntry Target Company                 Cntry Deal value (Bn USD) Target Code TARGET Industry                                Acq Code    ACQUIROR Industry
RUSSKII ALYUMINII ZAO        RU   GLENCORE INTERNATIONAL AG       CH                   30      212299 All Other Metal Ore Mining                           331313 Alumina Refining and Primary Aluminum Production
E.ON AG                      DE   ELECTRA DE VIESGO SA            ES                16.03      221111 Hydroelectric Power Generation                       221118 Other Electric Power Generation
DEUTSCHE TELEKOM AG          DE   ONE-2-ONE                       GB                14.07      517312 Wireless Telecommunications Carriers                 517311 Wired Telecommunications Carriers
BOEHRINGER INGELHEIM GMBH    DE   MERIAL SAS                      FR                   12      325411 Medicinal and Botanical Manufacturing                325412 Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing
ENEL ENERGY EUROPE SRL       ES   ENERSIS SA                      CL                10.44      221114 Solar Electric Power Generation                      221118 Other Electric Power Generatio
                                                                                                                                                                  Research and Development in the Physical,
ROCHE HOLDING AG             CH   CORANGE LTD                     BM                10.96      325412 Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing             541715 Engineering, and Life Sciences (except
                                                                                                                                                                  Nanotechnology and Biotechnology)
RWE AG                       DE   AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY INC.
                                                                US                     8.6     221310 Water Supply and Irrigation Systems                  221122 Electric Power Distribution
PERNOD RICARD SA             FR   SEAGRAM COMPANY LTD'S SPIRITS AND
                                                                  CAWINE DIVISION    8.15      312130 Wineries                                             312140 Distilleries
WALGREEN COMPANY             US   ALLIANCE BOOTS GMBH             CH                 6.67      446120 Cosmetics, Beauty Supplies, and Perfume Stores       446110 Pharmacies and Drug Stores
NESTLE SA                    CH   GERBER PRODUCTS COMPANY INC.    US                   5.5     311999 All Other Miscellaneous Food Manufacturing           311230 Breakfast Cereal Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                  Metal Service Centers and Other Metal Merchant
MITSUBISHI CORPORATION       JP   ANGLO AMERICAN SUR SA           CL                 5.39      212230 Copper, Nickel, Lead, and Zinc Mining                423510 Wholesalers




                                                                                                      12
       Returning to Table 2, for the non-financial real sector, 64.2% or in nearly two-thirds
of the transactions at the 4-digit NAICS level, acquiror and target firms share the same
industry code. However, dis-aggregating to the 5-digit level, this fraction drops down to
56.7% and further to 50.7% at the 6-digit level. The pattern suggests that 7.5% and 13.5%
of transactions that had the same industry-code at the 4-digit level have different industry
codes at the 5-digit and 6-digit levels, respectively. As illustrated above, these differences at
the 5- and 6-digit levels could correspond to diversifying acquisitions either across
industries or geographies.


Fact #7: Cross-border M&A transactions occur in waves.

Similar to domestic M&A activity, previous studies using more aggregated data suggest
that there were two waves of cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&A) in the 1980s
and 1990s. The first occurs between 1987-1990 and the second during the period of rapid
globalization between 1996-2000 (Evenett, 2004). Transaction-level data from the last two
decades confirm the wave nature of cross-border M&As. Figure 2 shows that cross-border
M&As declined between 2000-2002 following the second wave. The third wave begins in
2002 and peaks in 2008--cross-border M&As increased by 247% over this period but
collapse by 23% in 2009. The fourth wave takes place in the aftermath of the crisis, and the
number of cross-border M&As in 2017 had increased by 404% compared to 2009. It also
appears that successive waves of M&A have significantly higher numbers of transactions
consistent with the evolution of global economic integration.
       Evenett (2004) shows that the first wave of cross-border M&A, which took place
from 1987 to 1990, reached a peak of $135 billion in 1990--less than one-fourth the value
of the second wave. Figure 3 shows the third and fourth waves in the value of cross-border
M&A in parallel with the number of cross-border M&As (Fact #1). Globally, in nominal
terms the value of cross border M&A declined to $155 billion in 2003 from a peak value of
approximately $547 billion in 2000. As Figure 3 makes clear, the third wave peaked in
2007 at a pre-crisis value of $705 billion. In nominal terms, cross-border M&A fell by 55%
in 2009-similar to the collapse in global trade. The fourth wave occurs as cross-border
M&As gradually recovers in the aftermath of the crisis to a peak value of $935 billion in
2015. The value of cross-border M&A declined by approximately 30% in 2016 and 2017
coinciding with a period of uncertainty about global trade.
                                               13
        Theories that attempt to explain the wave phenomenon generally fall under the
category of firms in industries reacting to various shocks in their operating environments.
These shocks include deregulation; the emergence of new technologies, distribution
channels, or substitute products; or a sustained rise in commodity prices in response to
which firms within an industry acquire other firms (DePamphilis, 2009).3 For example,
Evenett (2004) suggests that the cross border mergers and acquisitions wave of the 1990s
was dominated by service sector transactions--in particular three sectors ( transportation
and communication; finance; and business services) accounted for about half of the value of
all M&A from 1997 to 2000. He suggests that we can attribute this cross-border mergers
and acquisitions wave to deregulation and technological advances in the
telecommunications and business services sectors. In banking, consolidation in the form of
strategic alliances took place in large numbers in the 1990s.
        Extrapolated to the cross-border context, alternative explanations suggest that
overvaluation (either price-to-earnings or market-to-book ratios) of firms in acquiror
countries compared to firms in target countries can drive M&As to cluster in waves.
Exchange rate appreciation in acquiror countries can also drive the attractiveness of asset
valuations in target countries. Alternatively, cross-border M&A waves that accompany
crises in emerging countries, such as in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis, can make
target country assets cheap for acquirors from countries not affected by the crisis.
Interestingly, the Asian financial crisis was followed by massive liberalizations in the
market for corporate control resulting in a wave of cross-border acquirors purchasing
targets in crisis-ridden countries.


Fact #8: Mega-deals in cross-border M&As are on the rise and also occur in waves.
Transactions whose value exceeded one billion U.S. dollars or mega-deals have increased
significantly over time. The number of mega-deals nearly doubled from 2000 to 2007,
reaching a pre-crisis peak of 123 deals. In the aftermath of the crisis, the number of such
deals recovers to an all-time high of 138 deals in 2015 (see Figure 10) and comes down in
2016 and 2017 consistent with the decline in overall cross-border M&A during these two



3
 https://understandingmanda.wordpress.com/article/why-merger-and-acquisition-waves-occur-
2y7l67l8la2ns-19/.

                                                14
years. In nominal value terms, mega-deals account for a striking 60% and 53.4% of total
cross-border M&A at their peak values in 2007 and 2015, respectively (see Figure 11). The
year 2000 is marked by the most significant cross-border M&A transaction to date--
Vodafone's acquisition of Mannesmann AG valued at $195 billion accounts for 35% of the
total value of cross-border M&A for the year and skewed the share of mega-deals to 72% of
the total.
        Table 4 lists the top-ten cross-border transactions completed over the sample period.
All ten transactions involve developed market acquirors, and eight out of ten targets are
also in developed markets. The exceptions are the Commonwealth Bank of Australia's
acquisition of Indonesia's Pt. Bank Arta Niaga Kencana valued at $50.7 billion and Hong
Kong's Citic Pacific's acquisition of Citic Ltd. in China valued at $38.1 billion. Target
industries predominantly comprise information technology, financial services, and
manufacturing, while acquiror industries also include transport and warehousing companies
consistent with the rise of integrated global supply chains. During the internet boom of the
late 1990s, Evenett (2004) found that the majority of mega-deals involved the service
sector, notably the financial and telecommunications industries. In contrast, the industry-
mix of acquirors and targets in mega-deals since 2000 includes firms from both services
and manufacturing.
        The average deal size in all cross-border transactions also more than doubled in
nominal dollars from $35.4 million in 2003 to a peak of nearly $80 million in 2007. In the
aftermath of the crisis, average transaction values ranged from $45 million to $61 million
during 2009-2017.
        Cross-border M&As have been used for corporate inversions for tax purposes
where following the M&A deal, the acquiring firm incorporates in the foreign country (i.e.,
inverts) so as to avoid paying corporate taxes in the home country and to access cash
accumulated abroad without paying repatriation taxes. For example, 40 percent of value of
M&A deals by US companies in 2015 for tax inversion deals. In some cases, the newly
acquired foreign subsidiary then acquires the original parent in the home country using its
tax-advantaged cash and is recorded as inward FDI.
        Note that the Medtronic transaction in the table represents a tax inversion to Ireland
based on acquiring Covidien plc for $42.9 billion in cash and stock. The tax inversion
allowed Medtronic to relocate its legal headquarters to Ireland, while maintaining its

                                              15
operational and executive headquarters in the U.S., thus allowing it to take advantage of the
low corporate tax regime in Ireland and avoiding taxes on profits exceeding $14 billion held
overseas.
          CITIC Limited is a conglomerate headquartered in Hong Kong whose shares trade
on the Main Board of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. It is majority-owned (58% of issued
shares) by the Chinese state-owned CITIC Group. It's main lines of business are in
financial services, resources and energy, manufacturing, engineering contracting, real estate
and other businesses. In 2014, CITIC Pacific bought most of the assets from the parent
company and issued new shares to the parent, making most of the assets of CITIC
Group publicly listed. According to its 2014 annual report, CITIC Limited is one of the
largest companies on the Hang Seng Index. "Formerly known as CITIC Pacific, our name
changed to CITIC Limited when we acquired the businesses of CITIC Group in August
2014."4 The deal therefore facilitated CITIC's listing in Hong Kong as part of the group's
long-term strategy to go public. A reason for choosing the Hong Kong Stock Exchange
(HKSE) is that the central government (the controlling shareholder) encourages state-
owned enterprises (SOEs) to list on overseas markets, especially the HKSE.

Fact #9: Cross-Border Acquirors Tend to be Large.

The median acquiror firm is five times larger than the median target firm. Median acquiror-
firm assets are $330 million while median-target firm assets are $58 million. The median
developed market acquiror has an asset size of $359 million, while the median developed-
market target asset size is $62 million. For emerging markets, the median acquiror and
target firm sizes are $196 million and $45 million, respectively.
          For target assets, we can also use information about acquired stakes with
transactions for whom we have deal values to compute, the target's enterprise value at the
time of the acquisition. The median target enterprise value for this sample is $50 million.
The median enterprise values for developed and emerging market targets are $ 60 million
and $ 33.33 million, respectively.




4
    https://www1.hkexnews.hk/listedco/listconews/sehk/2015/0417/ltn20150417394.pdf

                                                    16
Fact #10: For the most part, firms involved in cross-border M&A deals are privately-
held.

The vast majority of firms in cross-border transactions are private (Figure 12). Overall,
73.6% of the deals involve a private target, 69.9% involve a private acquiror, and 94.2%
have either a private acquiror or target. In developed markets, 71.4% of the deals involve a
private target, 70.0% involve a private acquiror, and 94.1% have either a private acquiror or
target. In emerging markets, 81.4% of the deals involve a private target, 73.1% involve a
private acquiror, and 97.5% have either a private acquiror or target.

Fact #11: Cash is king.

Cash is the predominant method of payment in cross-border M&A transactions (Figure 13).
94% of developed market acquirors and 95% of emerging market acquirors pay for target
firms with cash. A very small fraction of transactions involve payment in stock (5% for
developed and 3% for emerging markets) and, even fewer in debt instruments (1% for
advanced and 2% for emerging markets). In contrast, Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford
(2001) report that 70% of M&A transactions by US firms in the 1990s involve stock
financing, with 58% entirely stock financed. The proportion of all cash financed
transactions in the US was only 17% in 1999.
       However, more recent evidence shows that the number of merger and acquisition
(M&A) transactions paid for entirely in stock in the U.S. market declined sharply after 2001
(de Bodt, Cousin and Roll, 2017) following regulatory changes in FASB accounting rules
that abolished pooling and goodwill amortization. The authors show that in the past 25
years, U.S. merger and acquisition (M&A) transactions fully paid in stock have displayed a
striking pattern: about half of all transactions featured this payment approach during the
1990s, but in value-based percentages, fully stock-paid transactions fell to around 10% in
2014. According to Thomson Reuters, approximately 33 percent of all deals in the second
half of 2016 included some stock in the transaction.


Fact #12: Private equity transactions have increased over time.
       There can be strategic or financial motivations for undertaking cross-border M&A
transactions. Strategic motivations usually include market access across geographic regions,
synergies between target and acquiror firms that involve cost-cutting or revenue

                                             17
enhancement, vertical or horizontal integration of production processes, and so on.
Financial transactions, in contrast, include groups of investors such as private equity (PE)
firms. In contrast to strategic acquirors looking for organizational synergies to enhance
profitability via M&A activity, private equity led investors usually acquire stakes in pursuit
of a positive return on their investment and eventually looking to exit the investment at a
significant profit. Before exit, PE acquirors can help target firms realize operational
efficiencies and synergies as well as provide access to capital to help target firms grow.
       Private equity transactions have increased significantly in both numbers and value
in the cross-border market (Figure 14). The number of transactions doubled from
approximately 1000 transactions in 2001 to nearly 2000 transactions in 2007--a pre-GFC
peak in cross-border PE activity. The number increased in the aftermath of the GFC to over
3,300 transactions in 2015. With regard to value, the total value of PE transactions peaked
from $82 billion in 2000 to approximately $250 billion in 2007. The value plummeted to
$76 billion in 2009 before rising steadily to over $330 billion in 2015. Figure 15 presents
private equity transactions as a % of all transactions, to amplify their growing import.
Mirroring the patterns in overall cross-border M&A activity since 2016, both the numbers
and value of PE transactions have declined. The pattern of control acquisition suggests that
on average, PE investors, tend to acquire minority stakes. The primary method of payment
in a sample of 26,881 transactions with available data is cash in an overwhelming 98% of
the transactions.
       Also notice that Fact #10 says that firms in cross border M&A are largely privately
held, and Fact 12 says private equity transactions are increasing over time. To see whether
these two facts are related, Table 5 presents confusion matrices to examine whether deal
types and the public-private status of firms is systematically related. Panels A and B present
the proportions by the frequency and deal values based on the acquiror's public-private
status. Panel A shows that about 19% of the deals are private equity deals. Of these,
approximately 75% (14.4/19) involve a private acquiror. Panel B shows that by deal value,
nearly 40% of the deals are private-equity deals and 65% of them involve a private
acquiror.
       Panels C and D examine the same patterns based on the target's public-private
status. By the number of transactions, private equity deals are once again about 19% of the
transactions and by deal value nearly 35% of the deal value for the full sample. Panel C

                                              18
shows that 78% of these private equity deals (by frequency) involve a private target while
Panel D shows that approximately 68% of private-equity deals (by value) have a private
target. However, these patterns of public and private ownership status are very similar for
all other deals as well. Thus, there does not necessarily appear to be a strong relationship
between private-equity deal status and the public-private status of either acquirors or
targets. What remains striking is the proportion of private firms in the numbers of deals as
well as overall deal values (Table 5, Column 3).


Table 5: Confusion Matrices of Private Equity Deal and Public-Private Firm Status.
                            Panel A (Frequency of Transactions)
                               Private Equity Deal    All other deals       Total
        Public Acquiror        4.6%                   24.2%                 28.9%
        Private Acquiror       14.4%                  56.8%                 71.1%
        Total                  19.0%                  81.0%                 100.0%


                                      Panel B (Deal Value)
                               Private Equity Deal    All other deals       Total
        Public Acquiror        13.8%                  37.2%                 51.0%
        Private Acquiror       26.1%                  22.9%                 49.0%
        Total                  39.9%                  60.1%                 100.0%


                            Panel C (Frequency of Transactions)
                              Private Equity Deal     All other deals       Total
        Public target         4.1%                    20.7%                 24.8%
        Private target        14.8%                   60.4%                 75.2%
        Total                 18.9%                   81.1%                 100.0%


                                      Panel D (Deal Value)
                              Private Equity Deal     All other deals       Total
        Public target         10.9%                   22.4%                 33.3%
        Private target        23.4%                   43.3%                 66.7%
        Total                 34.3%                   65.7%                 100.0%
                                              19
       Overall, the median deal value in transactions that involve a private target is $6
million, $10 million in deals that involve a private acquiror, and $10 million in deals that
have either a private acquiror or target. In developed markets, the median value of deals
that involve a private target is $8 million, $13.5 million in involve a private acquiror, and
$12 million in deals that have either a private acquiror or target. In emerging markets, the
median deal value in transactions that involve a private target is much smaller at $1 million,
$3 million in deals that involve a private acquiror, and $1.5 million in deals that have either
a private acquiror or target.
       The question also arises whether the big deals involve publicly held companies and
the small ones privately held. The data suggest that there is no systematic relationship size
of the deal and public-private status of firm. The data show both big and small firms in both
big and small deals. Table 5, Panels A and B show the relationship between deal size and
the public-private status of acquirors. Panel A shows the proportions of deals above and
below median deal values and the public and private status of firms. For big deals (i.e., deal
value> the median deal value), there appears to be an even split between public and private
acquirors (Panel A, Column 1).
       In small deals, the deals are tilted towards private firms with a 60-40 split (Panel A,
Column 2). When big deals are classified as being in the third quartile (75th percentile and
above) the split between public and private acquirors is once again 50-50 (Panel B, Column
1). For deals in the first quartile (25th percentile and below), private deals account for 56%
of the number of small deals (Panel B, Column 2). Note that Zephyr records a large number
of transactions as 0 (i.e., at a threshold below $10 million), and these tiny deals get recorded
in the below median cell and the below 25th percentile.


       Table 6: Confusion Matrices of Deal Size and Public-Private Firm Status.
                                Panel A (Frequency of Transactions)
                            Big Deal > median        Small Deal <=        Total
                            deal value               median deal value
    Public                  19.90%                   23.40%               43.30%
    Private                 22.20%                   34.50%               56.70%
    Total                   42.10%                   57.90%               100.0%


                                Panel B (Frequency of Transactions)
                                                20
                          Big deal in 3rd           Small Deal in the      Total
                          quartile (75th            1st quartile (25th
                          percentile and above)     percentile and
                                                    below)
  Public                  9.80%                     34.40%                 44.20%
  Private                 11.10%                    44.70%                 55.80%
  Total                   20.90%                    79.10%                 100.0%



Fact #13: Tax haven countries play a significant role in cross-border M&A
transactions.

Evidence suggests that tax haven countries host a significant fraction of FDI. Multinational
firms use tax havens for tax planning purposes (Dharmapala, 2008)--and facilitate tax
avoidance by allowing firms to shift taxable income out of high-tax jurisdictions as well as
reducing the burden of foreign taxable income (Desai, Foley and Hines, 2006). Further, tax
havens tend to be countries with better corporate governance practices (Dharmapala and
Hines, 2009). Evidence also suggests that firms that use tax havens are the larger, more
international firms, and those with extensive intra-firm trade and high R&D intensities
(Desai, Foley and Hines 2006).
         Relatedly, Dharmapala (2018) points to a wide-body of evidence that suggests that
residence-based taxation of foreign income has significant effects on the ownership patterns
and value of cross-border M&A. For example, Huizinga and Voget (2009) show that the
prospect of international double taxation affects the parentsubsidiary structure of
multinational firms created by crossborder mergers and acquisitions. Further, countries
with a high international double taxation of foreignsource income attract a smaller
numbers of parent firms and reduce the likelihood of that the country is chosen as a
headquarter location following a crossborder M&A transaction. Moreover, higher
repatriation taxes significantly increase the propensity of multinational firms to relocate
their headquarters while evidence from a 2009 Japanese reform abolishing repatriation
taxes significantly increased transactions with a Japanese acquiror (Voget 2011, Feld et. al.,
2013).
         There is, however, relatively little information about the use of tax havens in cross-
border M&A transactions. The data in Figure 16 show that the role of tax havens rose
significantly between 2000-2017. At the beginning of the sample, in the year 2000,

                                               21
transactions that had either a target or an acquiror firms from tax haven countries accounted
for 7% and 6% of the total number and value of cross-border transactions, respectively. On
average, in the pre-GFC period, tax havens accounted for approximately 17% and 10% the
value and number of cross-border M&A transactions. The data suggest that these fractions
rose in the 2009-2017 post-GFC period--to 15% of the number of transactions and 30% of
the value of total cross-border M&A transactions.
       Figure 17 shows a bubble chart of the value of transactions that took place across
different tax haven countries--the bubble size represents the significance of cross-border
transactions based in tax havens appears to be increasing over time. The mean (median)
firm size in terms of available data for pre-deal total asset values for acquiror and target
firms in tax haven transactions is $11.29 billion ($330 million) and $4.19 billion ($195
million), respectively. This pattern is consistent with evidence that large firms tend to use
tax havens. The industry composition suggests that 75% of the acquirors based in tax
havens are from the financial sector, while 55% of targets domiciled in tax havens are from
the non-financial real sector.

Fact #14: The pattern of control acquisition in cross-border transactions varies across
developed and emerging market acquirors.

Similar to domestic M&A, when a firm makes an acquisition, it can take the form of a
minority stake, a majority stake or full takeover of the target firm (Figure 18). Cross-border
transactions by developed market acquirors involve acquisitions of minority stakes in
approximately 55% of transactions when the target is located in a developed market and
57% of transactions when the target is located in an emerging market. About 40% of
developed-developed market transactions involve the full purchase of the target while this
is the case for 26% of developed-acquiror-emerging-target transactions. In emerging
markets, developed market firms acquire majority control in 17% of transactions, while this
fraction is only 5% in developed market transactions. Thus, the data suggest that developed
market acquirors either acquire full control or minority stakes in developed-market targets
while it is approximately a 60-40 split between minority stakes and majority/full
acquisitions in emerging markets.
       In contrast, the pattern of control acquisition appears different when the acquiring
firm is from an emerging market. Emerging market acquirors tend to acquire minority
stakes in about 60% of the transactions when the target firm is also from an emerging
                                               22
market. A striking difference is that emerging market acquirors gain majority or full control
in 60% of the transactions when the target is located in a developed market. Emerging
market firms acquire full control of developed market acquirors in 49% of transactions.
       The data show that on average, foreign firms acquire a 9% initial minority stake in
target firms--the fraction ranges from 6% to 18.5% for developed and emerging market
targets, respectively. Conditional on acquiring an initial stake, approximately 40% of
transactions involve further acquisitions in the same target firm. There is a 60-40 mix in
transactions that lead to additional minority or majority stakes. In transactions involving
majority control, on average, 15% lead to additional stakes that fall shy of full control--
22% of the transactions result in a complete transfer of ownership to the foreign acquiror.
       Arguments for extending the boundaries of the firm across borders often rely on the
degree of investor protection provided by institutions of varying quality across the globe as
well as very different levels of capital market development. For example, Antras, Desai,
and Foley (2009) show that in settings where monitoring is non-verifiable, multinational
firms are more likely to establish their subsidiaries rather than license their proprietary
technologies through arms-length transactions to unrelated third-parties. These arms-length
transactions are more likely to occur in countries with stronger investor protections.
Further, multinational parents decrease their ownership stakes, financing, and scale of
operations in host economies with weaker institutional environments. The evidence from
cross-border M&A transactions corroborates some of these patterns. The latter part of the
paper explores the motivations for acquiring control in greater detail.




                                               23
                      BREXIT: Implications for European M&A

Given the looming disruptions from uncertainty about Britain exiting from the European
Union, it is worth examining European M&A Activity in a little more detail. Panels A and
B of Table 6 describe this activity in terms of both numbers and values of transactions. The
table considers the EU (without the United Kingdom) as one large country to explicitly
consider the importance of the UK in intra-European cross-border M&A activity.
       Panel A presents information about the frequency of transactions between 2000-
2017. The columns (targets) and rows (acquirors) classify countries/regions as the EU bloc
(ex UK), the UK, Non-EU European countries, and the rest of the world. The diagonal
elements of the table, therefore, represent domestic M&A activity for each of these
classifications. The top left quadrant represents M&A activity between and within the EU
and the UK. The patterns are striking. Intra-EU (domestic) M&A activity (~ 28,000
transactions), accounts for more than 60% of the approximately 44,000 total domestic and
cross-border M&A transactions, and in about 35% of the transactions, one-party is from the
EU and the other from the UK. When we focus on the 15,432 EU-UK cross-border
transactions, we see that nearly 70% of the acquirors are domiciled in the UK, while EU
acquirors account for 30% of the cross-border transactions with a target in the UK.
       Together the data show that while a disproportionate fraction of European M&A
activity is intra-European in nature, when we consider M&A flows between the EU and the
UK, a significantly higher proportion of the acquirors are based in the UK. The
overwhelming representation of the UK acquirors is also evident if we include Non-EU
European countries in the mix. In cross-border transactions across Europe, nearly 40% of
the acquirors and 15% of the targets are based in the UK. It is not clear how BREXIT will
impact the nature of cross-border M&A flows in Europe. Worth noting is the fact that the
UK acquirors account for 36% of the cross-border M&A flows from Europe to the rest of
the world. Of note is the fact that 8,511 transactions involve pairs of firms from the US and
the UK. There are 2,898 transactions between UK acquirers, and US targets-40% of
outbound M&A from the UK to the rest of the world and 5,613 transactions involve US
acquirers and UK targets--55% of inbound M&A into the UK from the rest of the world.
Britain's partnerships with countries outside the EU-bloc will no doubt remain of
significance.


                                             24
       Panel B shows the breakdown of M&A activity based on the value of the
transactions. A similar picture of UK dominance on the acquiror-side emerges. While intra-
EU M&A activity valued at $1.33 trillion accounts for 66% of the total value of
transactions, valued at $487 billion, UK-based acquirors account for 75% of cross-border
M&A activity between the UK and the EU-bloc. Including non-EU countries, UK acquirors
account for 40% of the total value of cross-border transactions within Europe and 10% of
the total value of cross-border transactions globally.
       It is clear the UK has been an active destination for inbound M&A flows from
around the world and also an important player on the acquiror side in cross-border M&As.
What is less clear is what sorts of policies could come into play regarding the foreign direct
investment flows in a post-Brexit world. In the EU, there is uncertainty about what type of
regulatory equivalence will operate for the UK acquirors and targets and how free trade
agreements will morph between the EU and UK. From a legal standpoint, takeover
legislation, intellectual property rights protections, and employment and tax laws could all
be affected by Brexit.
       Foreign firms that used the UK as a gateway to access European markets may have
to rethink their cross-border M&A strategies. Acquiring operations in an EU country may
help international firms retain European market access but divert activity away from the
UK. Conversely, the rapid depreciation of the British pound and post-referendum share
prices may present opportunistic buying opportunities in the UK.
       Ultimately, the nature of cross-border M&A activity involving the UK and the EU
will depend on the exact form Brexit takes and the precise nature of the UK's arrangements
with the EU. For example, if the UK follows the `Norwegian model,' i.e., leaves the EU but
joins the EEA and EFTA and allows for the free movement of capital, labor, and trade, it
will retain access to the single market. This model also means that the EU Takeover
Directive and EU Merger Regulations will continue to apply to UK-based firms.
       Conversely, the "Swiss Model" that would require the UK to negotiate bilateral
agreements with EU countries individually would afford the UK greater flexibility to
change its laws but also impose a burden of changing the regulatory framework governing
M&A activity on firms considering the UK as an FDI/ M&A investment destination.
Complete exit from the EU and the single market would leave the UK relying on WTO
rules to engage with the EU or negotiate an entirely new free trade agreement and imposes

                                              25
the most significant uncertainty regarding the regulatory framework governing M&A
activity involving the UK.5


3.      Determinants of Cross-Border M&A
When looking at the organization of firms across borders, a natural first-order question that
arises is why MNEs exist at all or why firms choose to become MNEs. In theory, in a world
of complete contracting, firms globalizing their operations could outsource production at
various stages of the value chain to third-parties via arms-length contracts. Outsourcing is
evident across numerous industries where segments of the production process are
fragmented across suppliers and countries. Therefore, the rationale for keeping stages of
production within the boundaries of the firm across borders must depend on what drives
firms to maintain control over their international operations. Fact #14 suggests that the
pattern of control acquisition in cross-border transactions varies across developed and
emerging market acquirors.
        Theories of firm organization often put forward contracting frictions as a primary
rationale for extending firm boundaries. In the context of multinational firms, these
contracting frictions can span vastly different institutional settings around the world--with
varying investor and legal protections that lie at the heart of enforcing property rights
agreements. These institutional differences can apply with particular force in industries
which are R&D intensive or specialize in intangible asset production where the protection
of intellectual property is of paramount importance. Multinational parents may, therefore,
be more likely to share proprietary technologies and intangible assets when they acquire
majority control of the target, especially in settings with non-verifiable monitoring and
weak investor protection.
        Similar to domestic M&A, in theory, the potential for synergies or the creation of
surplus-value is an important rationale for firms acquiring targets across borders. If foreign
owners are more efficient at running the domestic firms, the transfer of ownership from
domestic to foreign hands can lead to efficiency gains and be welfare-improving (Krugman
1998). Therefore, the question arises of whether the transfer of ownership from domestic to



5
 For an excellent summary of legal issues, see "What could Brexit mean for M&A?"
https://www.pillsburylaw.com/images/content/1/0/v2/104451/AcquisitionsDaily-Pearse-July152016.pdf

                                                  26
foreign hands through cross-border mergers and acquisitions generates surplus value.
Alternatively, how profitable are these transactions? Several studies examine this question.
       Borrowing from a vast literature on mergers and acquisitions in corporate finance,
Chari (2007) turns to the stock market for an answer to this question. Since stock prices
represent the present discounted value of expected future cash flows, changes in stock
prices provide estimates of surplus-value creation at the time of foreign acquisition
announcements. In particular, on the date of a foreign M&A transaction announcement,
changes in acquiror- and target-firm stock prices reveal information about the potential
wealth creation from the transaction. Changes in market-weighted joint returns for
acquirors and targets can, therefore, serve as summary statistics for value creation through
M&A activity (Andrade, Mitchell and Stafford, 2001)--in other words, help assess the
profitability of M&As.
       The advantage of using announcement returns lies in the fact that the effects on
productivity or other measures of economic output may occur over many years. The stock
market, in contrast, seeks to assess the discounted value of future cash flows and provides
an immediate indicator of whether these investments are expected to generate value for the
firm's shareholders.
       Buiter (2006) argues that FDI flows are extraordinarily productive and profitable
because these investments come bundled with unique technical and managerial skills and
knowledge. Therefore, the cumulated historical value of these cross-border M&A flows is
likely but a small fraction of the fair value or fundamental value today of the equity claims
on the assets abroad. Surplus value creation (or profitability) through the transfer of control
is likely to be high if the investing country is very different from the recipient country, for
example, flows from developed markets to risky emerging markets. However, putting a
firm figure on the value of these flows is a daunting challenge (Buiter, 2006). Using
abnormal announcement returns associated with M&A transactions, we can estimate the
market-capitalized returns generated by developed-market cross-border M&A flows to
emerging markets.
       In Chari (2007), I focus on developed to emerging market cross-border M&A flows
and use a transaction level dataset (the Securities Data Corporation (SDC) Thompson's
International Mergers and Acquisitions database) to identify the M&A transactions over the
period 1988-2003. Similar to the Zephyr database, the SDC data provide information about

                                               27
the transacting parties, the dates the acquisitions were announced and completed, the stakes
sought by the acquiring firms, and a variety of other transaction characteristics such as deal
size and method of payment. The stock price information comes from Datastream,
Bloomberg, and national stock exchanges.
       The data confirm the view that foreign acquisitions in emerging markets create
surplus value. On average, following a foreign acquisition announcement, market-
capitalization-weighted joint returns for targets and acquirors show a statistically significant
increase of 5.8% when majority control is acquired. The joint-return increases are robust to
the inclusion of controls for country, time, industrial diversification, method of payment
effects, as well as acquiror- and target-firm characteristics such as size and liquidity. The
findings are consistent with studies that conclude that FDI results in improvements in
productivity (Aitkin and Harrison, 1999) and that the concentration of productivity gains
resulting from FDI is in plants where multinational firms acquire majority or full ownership
(Perez-Gonzalez, 2004).
       The findings also suggest that acquiring majority control may be a necessary pre-
requisite to undertaking productivity improvements, especially in settings where it is
difficult to write or enforce complete contracts. Since problems of ineffective monitoring
and incomplete contracting are especially relevant in the context of emerging markets, by
acquiring majority control, developed-market acquirors in effect extend the boundaries of
the firm across borders to encompass the emerging-market targets.
       Similarly, in Chari, Ouimet, and Tesar (2010), we examine shareholder value gains
from cross-border mergers and acquisitions (CBMAs) involving developed country
acquirors and emerging market targets. For a sample of 390 transactions, we find that
market-adjusted returns amount to a total of USD 111.5 billion for acquiring firm
shareholders. On average, acquirors realize a positive return of 4.43 percent when they
announce the acquisition of control of a public target from an emerging market. The median
net return (acquiror's dollar value gain/transaction value) is 1.37 when control of an
emerging market target transfers to a developed market acquiror. The study finds that
improved governance (via control rights) and the transfer of intangibles such as R&D or
brand value from acquirors to targets explain the revaluation in acquiror stock prices and
the resulting dollar value gains in emerging market transactions.



                                              28
        Another set of explanations for cross-border M&As focus on imperfect capital
market integration across countries where multinational firms with deep pockets can make
purchases around the world, especially when foreign assets are available cheaply. These
explanations rely on financial frictions in international capital markets as determinants of
cross-border M&A. For example, Erel, Liao, and Weisbach (2015) examine differences in
valuations between acquiror and target firms, which can vary substantially over time or any
pair of countries via fluctuations in exchange rates and stock market movements. The
authors find that countries with appreciated currencies are more likely to have acquiring
firms while countries whose firms in countries where currencies have depreciated are more
likely to be targets. Valuation differences may also explain the wave nature of M&A
activity (Fact # 7).
        Baker, Wurgler, and Foley (2009) suggest a role for cross-border arbitrage by
multinational firms. The study finds that FDI flows increase sharply with source-country
stock market valuations and suggest a "cheap financial capital" channel in which FDI flows
in part reflect the use of relatively low-cost capital available to overvalued parents in their
own countries. Similarly, Erel et al. (2015) find that firms in countries with high-
performing stock markets are more likely to be buyers while those in countries with
relatively poor-performing stock market tend to be targets.
        Blonigen, Fontagne, Sly, and Toubal (2012) also find a valuation effect that drives
cross-border M&A such that productivity losses among target firms provide an opportunity
for multinational acquirors to obtain desired assets relatively cheaply. Finally, Erel et al.
(2014) provide evidence that both foreign and domestic acquisitions ease financial frictions
in target firms in a large sample of European acquisitions. They find that the investment
levels of the target firms increase significantly following an acquisition.
        Studies of cross-border M&As that examine financial frictions also focus on a
"cheap assets" channel. Labeled "fire-sale FDI," countries with financial crises provide
ample opportunity to purchase liquidity-constrained and otherwise stressed assets at bargain
prices. To explain the surge in foreign acquisitions of Asian firms during the 1997­98
financial crisis at a time when portfolio investors were fleeing from Asia, Krugman (1998)
first put forward the idea of fire-sale foreign direct investment. Krugman provides
anecdotal evidence from the financial press that sharp nominal exchange rates depreciations
combined with a rapid deterioration in domestic macroeconomic conditions led to severe

                                               29
liquidity constraints for domestic firms. As a result, distressed domestic firms were
purchased by foreign investors at discounted prices or fire-sale prices. Motivated by this
idea, Aguiar and Gopinath (2005) find evidence of fire-sale FDI in East Asia during the
Asian Financial crisis. Specifically, countries that experience dramatic reversals in portfolio
equity and debt flows simultaneously experience an increase in foreign acquisitions, in
particular of liquidity-constrained firms.
       Acharya and Shin (2009) develop a theoretical model that explains an inflow of FDI
and outflow of foreign portfolio investment during financial crises. They show that the
transfer of control in the form of direct ownership of failed firms' assets can circumvent
agency problems, but during crises, efficient owners (e.g., other domestic firms) also face
financing constraints. The result is a transfer of ownership to foreign firms at fire-sale
prices. Their model predicts that such fire-sale FDI is associated with flipping acquired
firms back to domestic owners once the crisis abates.
       However, the evidence regarding fire-sale FDI is mixed. In Chari (2007), I use stock
returns to address the question of whether foreign acquirors took advantage of cash-
strapped targets during crisis periods. By exploiting the cross-time variation in acquiring
firm returns, I investigate whether the gains to acquiring firms increase significantly during
crisis periods in comparison to periods of relative calm. The results show that crisis periods
do not coincide with a period of substantially higher acquiror returns suggesting that it is
not clear that the developed-market acquisitions represent fire-sales by firms in emerging
markets. Note that the crisis periods (especially in Asia) coincide with the deregulation of
the market for corporate control--several countries liberalized their M&A laws making it
easier for foreign companies to acquire domestic firms under the policy direction of the
IMF. Therefore, it is important to recognize that crisis period returns also reflect the
liberalization measures implemented during this time.
       Similarly, Alquist, Mukherjee, and Tesar (2016) develop a model of cross-border
mergers and acquisitions to compare acquisitions undertaken during financial crises with
acquisitions made during non-crisis periods. The study provides two motivations for foreign
acquisitions. First, a liquidity motive where foreign firm acquisitions relax the target credit
constraints. Second, a synergistic motive where acquisitions exploit operational synergies
between the target and the acquiror. The authors suggest that during crises, credit
conditions tighten in the target economy and the liquidity motive dominates. Their model

                                               30
predicts that during crisis relative to non-crisis periods, (1) foreign acquisitions are more
likely; (2) proportions of foreign acquisitions that involve industry diversification are
higher; (3) average ownership stakes are lower; and (4) acquisition duration is lower (i.e.,
acquisition stakes are more likely to be flipped). Their empirical analysis finds support for
the first prediction but not for the remaining three. These results therefore suggest that
foreign acquisitions in emerging markets do not differ in these important ways between
crisis and normal periods.6
         A final set of explanations about the determinants of cross-border M&A activity
focuses explicitly on institutions and corporate governance concerns. As suggested earlier
in this section, legal and institutional features can have a significant impact on the property
rights setting and the incomplete contracting problem. In Chari et al. (2009) we examine
whether the ability of developed-market acquirors to bring better institutional practices to
emerging-market targets may drive up expected future cash flows if the target is acquired
and becomes bonded to better institutions (Coffee 1999). We use the legal and institutional
measures as proposed by La Porta et al. (1998) for the countries in our sample as proxies
for institutional differences between countries.
         The study finds that acquirors from countries with better investor protection
experience significant gains when majority control of a target located in a country with
weak investor protection is announced. However, these gains only occur when the acquiror
attains control of the target. The results are consistent with our hypothesis that, with
control, acquirors can bond target firms to the institutions in their home countries, leading
to the creation of shareholder value.
         Other international M&A studies focus on the gains to target firms when they are
acquired by firms operating in an environment with better investor protection. For example,
Rossi and Volpin (2004) show that firms in countries with inadequate investor protection
are more likely to be targets in cross-border acquisitions. Bris and Cabolis (2008) find that
target abnormal returns increase with better shareholder protection and accounting
standards in the acquiror's country of origin for wholly-acquired targets using a sample of
developed- and emerging-market transactions.

6
  Using data on M&A transactions from 27 EU countries from 1999 to 2012, Wietzel, Kling, and Gerritson
(2014) find little evidence for 'fire-sale FDI' suggesting an integrated European market without significant
financial frictions. Similarly, Stoddard and Noy (2015) find that financial crises have a significant adverse
impact on FDI flows and M&A activity. They also do not find empirical evidence of fire-sale FDI.

                                                      31
         While there are numerous reasons for firms to make cross-border acquisitions, a few
major themes broadly summarize the nature of these transactions. First, factors that drive
control acquisition referred to in Fact #14 in a cross-border context are key and fall under
the rationales of protecting intellectual property or improving corporate governance
structures especially in countries with weak institutions. Second, valuation differences
between acquiror and target firm countries referred to in Fact #7 either due to stock market
valuations or exchange rates in source countries (booms or appreciations) or destination
countries (most frequently crises and depreciations). Finally, the rules of the game
(deregulation or protectionism) or changes in regulatory frameworks lead to significant
changes in the ownership patterns of firms across borders and the organization of global
supply chains.


4. Post-Acquisition Outcomes
In the context of foreign acquisition of domestic targets, it is important to examine whether
foreign ownership leads to improvements in firm-profitability or plant-productivity.7
Studies about the effects of FDI focus on plant-level productivity measures, such as total
factor productivity (TFP) or labor productivity (output per worker). Antras, Desai, and
Foley (2009) document the productivity-improving role of US multinational firms.
         Fukao et al. (2006) show that Japanese target firms that were foreign investment
recipients experienced rapid improvements in productivity and profitability compared to
those acquired by domestic firms. Akben-Selçuk (2008) finds the same using data on
Turkish firms. Doms and Jensen (1998) also find that foreign-owned companies in their
sample are more productive than domestic-owned ones. Studies of industrial country firm
acquisitions of developing country targets indicate that both parties experience valuation
improvements following the transactions (Chari, Ouimet, and Tesar, 2009). In the
developed-market context, Girma and co-authors in a series of papers concentrating on


7
  See, for example, Caves, 1996; Aitken and Harrison, 1999; Perez-Gonzales, 2004; Arnold and Javorcik,
2005; and Petkova, 2008. Aitken and Harrison (1999) conclude from a sample of Venezuelan firms that
foreign ownership is correlated with productivity improvements. Arnold and Javorcik (2005) use Indonesian
plant-level data and find that foreign ownership leads to significant improvements in productivity in the year
of acquisition as well as in subsequent years. Petkova (2008) conducts a study using Indian plant-level data
and concludes that foreign-owned plants experience improvements in productivity three years following
foreign investment. In the literature concerned with spillovers from FDI, Aitken, and Harrison (1999) find
adverse effects on domestic firm productivity from FDI, Javorcik (2004) identifies positive FDI spillovers
effects on domestic firms through backward linkages.
                                                      32
acquisition targets in the United Kingdom document improvements in growth rates of firm
performance following foreign acquisitions.
         The most direct test of the post-acquisition performance of developed-market
acquisitions is to examine the return on assets (ROA) of targets following the acquisition.
In Chari et al. (2009) we investigate a change in ROA in the second year following cross-
border acquisition for a sample of developed and emerging market targets and find that
there is a correlation between the transfer of majority control of emerging market targets
and higher post-acquisition ROA.8 We also find that (i) stock-financed acquisitions are
associated with lower accounting returns; (ii) transactions where the acquiror comes from
an industry with high patent-intensity correlate with higher accounting returns; (iii)
compared to developed-market targets, the acquisition of control of emerging-market
targets is associated with higher accounting returns.
         Following heightened interest in a spate of emerging market acquisitions of US
firms, in Chari, Chen, and Dominguez (2012) we analyze the performance of firms that are
acquired by firms located in emerging markets. We examine stock market, accounting
measures, and employment outcomes. In the study, abnormal announcement returns
provide a forward-looking estimate of expected shareholder value creation. We also
examine changes in other aspects of target-firm operations, such as property, plant and
equipment, employment, and sales following the acquisition. Post-acquisition, we evaluate
changes in accounting measures of performance such as profitability, investment, and sales
as well as employment outcomes in US targets that are the subject of emerging market
acquisitions.
         Our results suggest that emerging-market firms tend to acquire public targets with
relatively high levels of sales, employment, and total assets. We also find that the stock
price response of target firms is positive and significant around the time of the acquisition
announcement. On average, target stock price returns on a cumulated basis over a three-day
window around the acquisition announcement date increase by 8 percent. This abnormal
return remains significant and positive for extended windows of 10 and 21 business days.
Consistent with the positive announcement returns, we find that after the acquisition the


8
 Standard accounting rules stipulate that firms must include the profits or losses of any majority-owned
subsidiaries in their consolidated accounting statements. Thus, in cases of control acquisition, the acquiror's
accounting performance includes the target's performance.

                                                       33
profitability of acquired targets improves. The target firm's ROA increases by 7 percent in
the five years following the acquisition.
        We also find strong evidence that the acquiring firms undertake significant
restructuring of the target firms. Measures of employment, sales, and plant, property, and
equipment (PP&E) in the target firms all decline in the post-acquisition years. This pattern
of increasing profits (income/assets) but declining sales are consistent with post-acquisition
firm-efficiency improvements. For instance, if acquiring firms shut down or get rid of
unprofitable divisions, declining target sales will be accompanied by rising profits. The
decline in employment and net PP&E we observe, also suggest downsizing to improve
overall profitability as a percent of assets.
        The downsizing of employment is consistent with a comparative input cost
hypothesis given that emerging-market acquirors may take advantage of the low wages in
their home countries by cutting labor-intensive activities in the United States following an
acquisition. Whereas industrial country acquirors often seek out emerging markets for their
lower labor costs, we find that emerging market acquirors can relocate (or in-source)
manufacturing activity while keeping existing distribution networks in the host country of
the acquired business.
        Chen (2011) explores whether the acquiror-country of origin of the acquiror matters
for post-acquisition target performance. Compared with domestic acquisitions, Chen finds
that target firms acquired by foreign firms experience higher returns on assets. However,
the channels of performance improvement vary across foreign acquiror types. Emerging
market acquisitions lead to reductions in sales and employment, whereas acquisitions by
industrial country firms increase sales and employment in targets. The results of this study
show that targets experience similar patterns in performance improvements and
restructuring processes after being acquired by emerging market firms as the Chari et al.
(2012) study.
        There is a wide body of literature that documents the economy-wide effects of FDI
and economic growth (See Alfaro and Johnson, 2012 for a nice survey). The evidence
suggests that FDI can affect target sectors vis competition, technology diffusion, etc. and
the beneficial effects generally depend on the strength of local institutions. It is possible
that cross-border M&A activity also generates these types of positive externalities.



                                                34
           In general, a wide body of evidence suggests that in the international context,
mergers and acquisitions are key drivers of productivity improvements in target firms with
spillovers to other firms in the destination countries. This evidence is generally consistent
with the broader evidence related to the productivity enhancing role of foreign direct
investment or the "good cholesterol" in international capital flows. The patterns regarding
productivity improvement also stand in contrast to purely domestic M&A activity where the
evidence about value creation is more mixed. What is consistent across cross-border and
domestic M&A with respect to post-acquisition outcomes is the reorganizations that follow
in terms of employment and capital investment fundamentally changing the structure of the
merged firms and the industries to which they belong.


5.     Policy Considerations
       A rapid increase in foreign acquisitions often engenders a heated debate in host
countries. Popular sentiment is of the view that foreign investments through acquisitions
merely involve a transfer of existing assets from domestic to foreign hands and are of little
value to the host nation.9 For instance, in the aftermath of the East Asian crisis, following a
spate of foreign acquisitions, Prime Minister Mahathir of Malaysia famously proclaimed,
"If we are not careful, we will be re-colonized."10 Furthermore, if foreign acquisitions
coincide with crisis periods in the host nations, these transactions have had the added
controversy of domestic firms being forced to liquidate assets at fire-sale prices (Krugman
1998).
       In the United States, a spate of acquisitions by foreign firms also leads to consternation
in policy circles. For example, the proposed acquisition of commercial operations at six
U.S. ports by Dubai Ports World in 2006, and the 2005 acquisition bid by CNOOC, the
Chinese state-owned oil company, to take over Unocal met with considerable resistance in
Washington and were ultimately thwarted, in Unocal's case in favor of Chevron's lower
offer of US$17.4 billion. Another example of a high-profile emerging market acquisition
was the Indian Tata Motors 2008 purchase of Ford's Jaguar and Land Rover divisions.

9
  "When Japanese-owned Bridgestone takes control over the U.S. firm Firestone.....in such an acquisition
there is no investment expenditure; merely an international transfer in the title of corporate assets." See K. A.
Froot, "Japanese Foreign Direct Investment," NBER Working Paper No. 3737, June 1991, and in U.S.-Japan
Economic Forum, Vol. 1, M. Feldstein and Y. Kosai, eds., National Bureau of Economic Research and Japan
Center for Economic Research, 1991.
10
     Televised speech, Oct 1998.
                                                       35
More recently, in 2013, China's biggest pork producer, Shuanghui International acquired
Smithfield Foods, the nearly 100-year old Virginia-based meat giant, for $4.7 billion in
cash.
        Policy implications stemming from cross-border M&A activity therefore arise from
two separate concerns. When foreign firms try and acquire domestic natural resources or
critical technology, it is legitimate to ask whether national security may be compromised by
a transfer of domestic assets to foreign control. On the other hand, if national security is
not at risk, nationalist sentiments such as those expressed by Prime Minister Mahathir often
play a role in whether cross-border acquisitions are successfully completed or derailed.
        An interesting study by Dinc and Erel (2013) examines the impact of economic
nationalism on cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Using data from the European Union
for over ten years, the study documents government reactions to significant corporate M&A
attempts. The paper presents compelling evidence for widespread economic nationalism in
where governments prefer that firms remain domestically-owned rather than be acquired by
foreigners. Moreover, these preferences are stronger in countries with active farright
parties and weak governments. The study shows that nationalist government reactions not
only affect the outcome of targeted M&A transactions but also deter future foreign
investment in these countries.
        The United States remains the largest recipient of FDI flows in the world. It is also
the largest source country in terms of direct investment abroad. In 2017, the total stock of
FDI in the United States was $4.03 trillion and U.S. direct investment abroad was $6.01
trillion (BEA). Historically, the U.S. has therefore taken an "open and rules-based"
approach to foreign investment flows and more or less allowed the market to determine the
extent and nature of these flows. However, increasingly foreign acquisitions considered
threats to either national security about critical technologies or natural resources are under
review by the committee on foreign investment in the United States (CFIUS).
        Considering economic threats under the umbrella of national security has also
increased in importance. Congressional scrutiny of the review process at CFIUS has
increased with the emergence of state-owned enterprises as acquirors where foreign
governments have "substantial interests" as well as attempted foreign acquisitions of
sensitive and critical technologies. These transactions are subject to CFIUS review to
determine whether a transaction threatens to impair the national security, or the foreign

                                              36
entity is controlled by a foreign government such that it represents a strategic geopolitical
calculus rather than purely commercial interest, or it would result in control of any "critical
infrastructure that could impair the national security."11 CFIUS regulations apply directly
to cross-border M&A. Between 2008-2015, CFIUS received 925 notices from foreign
investors of plans to acquire, take over, or merge with a U.S. firm.
        In 2018, the CFIUS statute was amended through the Foreign Investment Risk
Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) and expanded the scope of "covered" transactions
subject to CFIUS review to include, for example, the foreign purchases of distressed assets
or bankrupt firms to acquire critical technologies. It is worth noting that to date, spanning
three administrations, only six foreign M&A transactions were blocked by presidential
action based on CFIUS recommendations--five of the six involved Chinese acquirors.
        Fundamental policy issues therefore arise in the context of how to weigh the
benefits of foreign investment in the domestic economy with national security interests.
Evidence suggests that foreign investment can create jobs, spur local investment, and
contribute to tax revenues which matters at the state, local, and federal levels. Strategically,
the question also arises of how the United States, the biggest beneficiary of inward foreign
direct investment, can protect its national security interests while promoting a liberalized
international economic order that facilitates US investment abroad and encourages the free
movement of capital across other countries' borders.
        At the same time, how should policymakers determine whether foreign investment
in an industry (critical or not) is too high or too concentrated? Do these concerns outweigh
the functioning of a free and efficient market for international corporate control? Another
challenge is about how national security should be defined in a rapidly evolving global
economic and technological landscape. These are some of the open policy questions that
will directly impact the nature of cross-border M&A, for which easy answers will be hard
to come by, and in all likelihood continue to be handled on a case by case basis rather than
by policy decree.
        While CFIUS scrutiny has gained importance in the United States, European Union
(EU) antitrust issues have also heated up. Planned mergers and acquisitions of firms that do
significant business in the EU must be notified to the European Commission if the

11
   Pg. 22. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS)
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RL33388.pdf.

                                                   37
combined businesses exceed certain revenue thresholds.12 If the EC concludes that a merger
would distort competition, it may block it unless the companies propose remedies. More
than 7,500 cases have been referred to the Commission since 1990 and 30 cases blocked on
anti-competitive grounds.
        In 2019, for example, the proposed merger between rail manufacturers Reuters
Siemens and Alstom was derailed after EU regulators blocked the deal, leading to calls
from Germany and France for an overhaul of EU competition policy to better meet global
challenges such as competition from China. Other examples include the prohibition of a
joint venture between Tata Steel and ThyssenKrupp and rejecting a bid by the German
copper company Wieland-Werke AG to buy a business unit from Aurubis, Europe's biggest
copper smelter as anti-competitive and that would lead to increased prices for different
types of steel and copper, respectively.
        The EU's merger review process has been the subject of controversy given instances
of mergers that were approved by other regulatory authorities (such as USDOJ in the case
of the $42 billion acquisition of Honeywell by General Electric in 2001) but blocked by the
Commission. Critics argue that the merger policy is used for advancing protectionist
industrial policy rather than competition (Bradford et. al., 2018).13 US officials have leveled
charges that the Commission deviates from the norm that "the antitrust laws protect
competition, not competitors" and accuse the Commission of "using its merger-review
process as a tool to protect and promote European industry at the expense of U.S.
competitors." US tech giants such as Apple, Google, Facebook, chipmaker Broadcomm and
Amazon have faced high-profile investigations and/or subject to hefty fines by the
Commission for anti-trust violations. Looking ahead, antitrust considerations no doubt loom
large in the context of cross-border M&A in the European Union.
        More generally, a broad range of public policy issues surrounding cross-border
M&A arise as governments weigh the balance of the potential benefits of M&A activity
(e.g., increased productivity growth, inward flows of capital financing, technological
diffusion) against the potential costs (loss of markets to foreign firms, a loss of corporate


12
   The EC enforces merger control in the EU, on the basis of the Merger Regulation.
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/legislation/regulations.html#merger_reg
13
   https://promarket.org/european-union-use-antitrust-power-protectionism/


                                                    38
control, national security concerns, and greater market concentration). Here, as we see in
many an instance, some countries welcome greenfield investment, but not foreign firms
taking over their domestic companies.


6. Concluding Remarks
This paper documents a series of facts about recent trends in cross-border M&A activity
around the world. The facts depict several salient features about the international market for
corporate control. Transactions-level data show that over the last two decades, cross-border
mergers and acquisitions comprise nearly 50% of FDI flows following the Global Financial
Crisis. The number of cross-border M&A transactions has tripled over the last two decades.
Interestingly, cross-border M&A activity is highly concentrated among a small set of
countries. In particular, both in numbers and value of transactions, the United States and
Europe dominate the market for international corporate control.
       The industrial composition of acquirors shows the rising global dominance of the
services sector. Further, a significant fraction of cross-border M&As involve industry
diversification integrating global value chains across borders. Similar to domestic M&As,
cross-border M&A transactions occur in waves--over the last two decades, there were two
waves, one that peaked in 2007 before the global financial crisis and a second that peaked
in 2015. Successive waves are bigger in terms of the numbers of transactions, and the value
of transactions increases dramatically. The last decade also saw the rise of mega-deals or,
deals greater than $10 billion, in cross-border M&As.
       Acquirers in cross-border M&As tend to be large, relative to target firms. The
median acquiror firm is five times larger than the median target firm. For the most part,
firms involved in cross-border M&A deals are privately-held and cash is the predominant
form of payment in these transactions. The importance of private equity transactions in
cross-border M&A has increased over time and around the globe. Further, a group of tax
haven countries play a significant role in cross-border M&A transactions.
       The data show that the pattern of control acquisition in cross-border transactions
varies across developed and emerging market acquirors. Alternative motivations and
incentives for acquiring control across borders range from extending the boundaries of the
firm to encompass foreign targets in settings of unverifiable and costly monitoring, to
providing liquidity to financially constrained firms. The evidence on post-acquisition

                                             39
outcomes suggests that by and large target profitability improves following acquisitions and
the acquisitions seem to create significant surplus value. However, it is also the case that if
foreign acquirors undertake significant restructuring of target firms, there can be an impact
one employment and investment. The paper concludes with a discussion of policy
implications as policy makers weigh national security concerns with a desire to increase
foreign investment in their economies.

References
V.V. Acharya, H. Shin, and T. Yorulmazer. Fire-sale FDI. Korean Economic Review,
      27(2):163­202, 2011b.

Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath. 2005. Firesale FDI: and Liquidity Crises. Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 87(3):439­52.

Aitken, Brian J., and Ann E. Harrison, 1999, "Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct
       Foreign Investment? Evidence from Venezuela," American Economic Review, Vol.
       89, pp. 605­18.

Alfaro, Laura & Andrew Charlton. (2009). Intra-industry Foreign Direct Investment.
        American Economic Review, 99(5), 2096-2119.

Alfaro, Laura, and Matthew Johnson. "Foreign Direct Investment and Growth" Chap. 20
        in The Evidence and Impact of Financial Globalization, edited by Gerard Caprio,
        299­307. Elsevier, 2012.

Ron Alquist, Rahul Mukherjee, and Linda Tesar. Fire Sale FDI or Business as Usual?
      Journal of International Economics, 98:93­113, 2016.

Akben-Selcuk, Elif, 2008, "The Impact of Cross-Border M&A Target Company
      Performance: Evidence from Turkey," Economics Bulletin, Vol. 13, No. 5, pp. 1­9.

Andrade, G., M. Mitchell, and E. Stafford, 2001, "New Evidence and Perspectives on
      Mergers," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 103­20.

Antras, Pol, Mihir Desai, and Fritz Foley, 2009, "Multinational Firms, FDI Flows
       and Imperfect Capital Markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, No. 3,
       pp. 1171­219.

Arnold, J.M., and B.S. Javorcik, 2005, "Gifted Kids or Pushy Parents? Foreign
       Acquisitions and Plant Performance in Indonesia," Development Studies Working
       Paper No. 197. Centro Studi Luca D'Agliano, March.

Malcolm Baker, C. Fritz Foley, Jeffrey Wurgler, Multinationals as Arbitrageurs: The Effect
      of Stock Market Valuations on Foreign Direct Investment, The Review of Financial
      Studies, Volume 22, Issue 1, January 2009, Pages 337- 369.
                                           40
Blonigen, Fontagne, & Nicholas Sly, F. T. (2014). Cherries for sale: Incidence and Timing
       of Cross-border M&A. Journal of International Economics, 94, 341-357.

Bris, A., and C. Cabolis. 2008. The Value of Investor Protection: Evidence from Cross-
       Border Mergers. Review of Financial Studies 21(2):605­48.

Buiter, W. 2006. Dark Matter or Cold Fusion? Goldman Sachs Global Economics Paper
        No. 136, 16 January. http://www.nber.org/wbuiter/dark.pdf.

Caves, R., 1996, Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis (Cambridge, England:
       Cambridge University Press).

Chari, Anusha, 2007. The Net Present Value of Foreign Direct Investment. Mimeo.

Chari, A., P. Ouimet, and L. Tesar, 2010, "The Value of Control in Emerging Markets,"
       Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 1741­70.

Chari, Anusha, Wenjie Chen and Kathryn M. E. Dominguez. "Foreign Ownership and Firm
       Performance: Emerging Market Acquisitions in the United States." IMF Economic
       Review 60 (2012): 1-42.

Chen, 2011, "Does the Country of Origin of the Acquiring Firm Impact Performance?"
       Journal of International Economics, Vol. 83, No. 2, pp. 219­28.

Eric de Bodt, Jean-Gabriel Cousin, and Richard Roll, 2018. Full-Stock-Payment
        Marginalization in Merger and Acquisition Transactions, Management Science,
        64:2, 760-783

Desai, Mihir A., Foley, C. Fritz and Hines, James, (2006), The demand for tax haven
       operations, Journal of Public Economics, 90, issue 3, p. 513-531.

Dharmapala, Dhammika, 2008. What problems and opportunities are created by tax
      havens?, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Volume 24, Issue 4, winter 2008,
      Pages 661­679.

Dharmapala, Dhammika, 2018. "The Consequences of the Tax Cut and Jobs Act's
      International Provisions: Lessons from Existing Research," National Tax Journal,
      71(4), pages 707-728.

Doms, M.E., and J.B. Jensen, 1998, "Comparing wages, skills, and productivity between
      domestically and foreign-owned manufacturing establishments in the United
      States," in Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, ed by
      Baldwin, R.E. Lipsey and J.D. Richardson Chicago. University of Chicago Press. p.
      235­258. NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth. Vol. 59.

Dinc, Serdar I. and Erel, I. (2013), Economic Nationalism in Mergers and Acquisitions. The
       Journal of Finance, 68: 2471-2514.

                                            41
I. Erel, R. C. Liao, and M. S.Weisbach. Determinants of Cross-Border Mergers and
         Acquisitions. Journal of Finance, 67(3), 1045-1083,2012.

Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S Weisbach. Do Acquisitions Relieve Target Firms
        Financial Constraints? The Journal of Finance, 2014

Evenett, S. (2004). The Cross-Border mergers and Acquisitions Wave of the late 1990s. In
       R. Baldwin, & A. Winters, Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics.
       Boston: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Feld, Lars P., Martin Ruf, Uwe Scheuering, Ulrich Schreiber, and Johannes Voget, 2013.
       "Effects of Territorial and Worldwide Corporation Tax Systems on Outbound
       M&As." ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper 13-088.
       ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research, Mannheim, Germany.

Fukao, Kyoji, Ito Keiko, Ug Kwon Hyeog, and Takizawa Miho, 2006, "Cross-Border
       Acquisitions and Target Firms' Performance: Evidence From Japanese Firm-Level
       Data," NBER Working Papers, No. 12422.

Huizinga, Harry P., and Johannes Voget, 2009. "International Taxation and the Direction
       and Volume of Cross-Border M&As." Journal of Finance 64 (3), 1217­1249.

Girma, S., 2005, "Technology Transfer from Acquisition FDI and the Absortive
       Capacity of Domestic Firms: An Empirical Investigation," Open Economics Review,
       Vol. 16, pp. 175­87.

Girma, S., and H. Gorg, 2007, "Evaluating foreign ownership wage premium using a
       difference-in-differences Matching Approach," Journal of International Economics,
       Vol. 72, No. 1, pp. 97­112.

Girma, S., R. Kneller, and M. Oisu, 2007, "Do Exporters Have Anything to Learn from
       Foreign Multinationals?" European Economics Review, Vol. 51, pp. 981­98.

Javorcik, B.S., 2004, "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of
       Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages," American
       Economic Review, Vol. 94, pp. 605­27.

P. Krugman. Fire-Sale FDI. University of Chicago Press, 2000.

La Porta, R., F. L´opez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1998. Law and Finance.
       Journal of Political Economy 106(6):1113­55.

Perez-Gonzales, Francisco, 2004, "The Impact of Acquiring Control on Productivity:
       Evidence from Mexican Manufacturing Plants," mimeo.

Petkova, N., 2008, "Does Foreign Ownership Lead to Higher Firm Productivity?" mimeo.


                                            42
Rossi, S., and P. Volpin. 2004. Cross Country Determinants of Cross-Border Mergers and
       Acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics 74:277­304.

Stoddard, Olga and Noy, Ilan, (2015), Fire-sale FDI? The Impact of Financial Crises on
       Foreign Direct Investment, Review of Development Economics, 19, issue 2, p. 387-
       399.

Voget, Johannes. 2011. "Relocation of Headquarters and International Taxation." Journal
       of Public Economics, 95 (9), 1067­1081.

Weitzel, Utz, Kling, Gerhard and Gerritsen, Dirk, (2014), Testing the fire-sale FDI
       hypothesis for the European financial crisis, Journal of International Money and
       Finance, 49, issue PB, p. 211-234.




                                            43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
                             Figure 15. Value of Cross-Border Private Equity Transactions
                                                (Share of Total CBMA)

70.0%


60.0%


50.0%


40.0%


30.0%


20.0%


10.0%


 0.0%
        2000

               2001

                      2002

                             2003

                                    2004

                                           2005

                                                  2006

                                                         2007

                                                                2008

                                                                       2009

                                                                              2010

                                                                                     2011

                                                                                            2012

                                                                                                   2013

                                                                                                          2014

                                                                                                                 2015

                                                                                                                        2016

                                                                                                                               2017




                                                                53
                     Figure 16: Role of Tax havens in Cross-border Merger and Acquisitions
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
      2000

              2001

                       2002

                              2003

                                     2004

                                            2005

                                                   2006

                                                          2007

                                                                  2008

                                                                         2009

                                                                                2010

                                                                                       2011

                                                                                              2012

                                                                                                     2013

                                                                                                            2014

                                                                                                                   2015

                                                                                                                          2016

                                                                                                                                 2017
             Value of Transactions involving Tax havens (% of total value of all Cross-Border Transactions)

             Number of Transactions involving Tax havens (% of total number of all Cross-Border
             Transactions)




                                                                 54
Figure 18: The Pattern of Control Acquisition in Emerging & Developed Economies




                                     55
            Table 1: Overview of Cross-Border Merger and Acquisitions (CMBA)
No. of completed cross-border transactions (1997-2018)                                        166,312
Total Value of Deals (USD Billions)                                                            9,016
Mean of Total value of deals (USD Millions)                                                       98
Value of Largest Deal (USD Billions)                                                             196
Share of publicly-listed acquirors                                                             29.3%
Share of publicly-listed targets                                                               26.3%
No. of Acquiror Countries                                                                         181
No. of Target Countries*                                                                          187


*Excludes island states with total deal value of less than USD 1 billion




                     Table 2: Alternative measures of Industrial Diversification
                                                                 Non-Financial Real
                                                                      Sector          Financial Sector
2   digit                                                              17.8%               6.5%
3   digit                                                              26.2%               55.4%
4   digit                                                              35.8%               52.2%
5   digit                                                              43.3%               39.8%
6   digit                                                              49.3%               62.9%




                                                    56
Table 4


          57
                                           Panel A: Number of M&A Transactions
                                                  Target Region
Acquiror Region          European Union (Ex UK)             United Kingdom            Non-EU   Rest of the World    Total
European Union (Ex UK)           27,658                          4,662                 5,892         13,121        51,333
United Kingdom                   10,770                          1,130                  889          7,410         20,199
Non-EU                           4,883                            785                  1,460         2,451          9,579
Rest of the World                20,602                          10,188                3,457         69,219        103,466
Total                            63,913                          15,386                9,424         77,589        166,312
                                     Panel B: Total Value of M&A Transactions ($ Billion)
                                                    Target Region
Acquiror Region          European Union (Ex UK)            United Kingdom           Non-EU     Rest of the World    Total
European Union (Ex UK)           1,337                           164                 329              930           2,760
United Kingdom                    487                             34                  49              405            976
Non-EU                            162                             34                  92              219            507
Rest of the World                1,069                           510                 270             3,165          5,014
Total                            3,055                           742                 540             4,679          9,016


                                                  BREXIT Table




                                                        58
