                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE ENVIRONMENTAL BIAS OF TRADE POLICY

                                       Joseph S. Shapiro

                                      Working Paper 26845
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26845


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2020, Revised November 2020




I thank Costas Arkolakis, Tim Armstrong, Kyle Bagwell, Brian Copeland, Arnaud Costinot,
Thibault Fally, Penny Goldberg, Larry Goulder, Edgar Hertwich, Sam Kortum, Arik Levinson,
Giovanni Maggi, Guillermo Noguera, Bill Nordhaus, Michael Peters, Steve Puller, Andrés
Rodríguez-Clare, Katheryn Russ, Nick Ryan, Bob Staiger, Reed Walker, Marty
Weitzman, and seminar participants at AEA, AERE, Columbia, Dartmouth, the
Environmental Defense Fund, Georgetown, Harvard/MIT, Harvard Kennedy School, IDB,
the Kiel Institute, NBER EEE, NBER ITI, NTA, Princeton, San Francisco Fed, Stanford,
Sweden's Ministry for Foreign Affairs, UBC, UC Berkeley, U Hawaii, UC Santa Barbara, UC
San Diego, U Mass Amherst, Vanderbilt, the World Bank, and Yale for useful discussions, Matt
Fiedler and Ralph Ossa for sharing code, Elyse Adamic, Kenneth Lai, Eva Lyubich, Daisy Chen
Sun, and Katherine Wagner for excellent research assistance, and the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, NSF SES-1850790, and USDA NIFA #1021396 for generous support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph S. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Environmental Bias of Trade Policy
Joseph S. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 26845
May 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. F13,F18,F6,H23,Q50,Q56

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper describes a new fact, then analyzes its causes and consequences: in most countries,
import tariffs and non-tariff barriers are substantially lower on dirty than on clean industries,
where an industry's "dirtiness" is defined as its carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions per dollar of
output. This difference in trade policy creates a global implicit subsidy to CO2 emissions in
internationally traded goods and so contributes to climate change. This global implicit subsidy to
CO2 emissions totals several hundred billion dollars annually. The greater protection of
downstream industries, which are relatively clean, substantially accounts for this pattern. The
downstream pattern can be explained by theories where industries lobby for low tariffs on their
inputs but final consumers are poorly organized. A quantitative general equilibrium model
suggests that if countries applied similar trade policies to clean and dirty goods, global CO2
emissions would decrease and global real income would change little.


Joseph S. Shapiro
University of California at Berkeley
714 University Hall #3310
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
joseph.shapiro@berkeley.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26845
       I     Introduction
       This paper describes a new fact, then analyzes its causes and consequences: in most countries, import
       tariffs and non-tariff barriers (NTBs) are lower on dirty than on clean industries, where an industry's
       "dirtiness" is measured by its carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions per dollar of output. This difference
       between dirty and clean industries creates an implicit subsidy to CO2 emissions in internationally traded
       goods and so contributes to climate change. I describe this pattern as trade policy's environmental bias.
           This bias is widespread. I find it in most countries, in tariffs and NTBs, and in cooperative and
       non-cooperative tariffs. U.S. tariff data over the past 30 years suggest this bias has slowly diminished
       over time, though remains large. U.S. tariffs imposed in the 2018 trade war slightly attenuated but did
       not eliminate this bias. The global implicit subsidy in trade policy that I estimate, of $85 to $120 per
       ton of CO2 , is interesting because the global social cost of CO2 emissions (and hence the optimal tax on
       CO2 emissions) is usually estimated as around $40 per ton of CO2 (IWG 2016). The magnitude of the
       environmental bias of trade policy is therefore larger than what research suggests is an optimal tax on
       CO2 emissions, and the sign is opposite--trade policy is imposing lower tax rates on dirtier goods, while
       an optimal carbon policy would impose higher tax rates on dirtier goods.
           One way to interpret this fact is in terms of climate change policy. Optimal climate change policy
       would impose a uniform Pigouvian tax (or equivalent quantity mechanism like a cap-and-trade market) in
       all countries and industries, since CO2 creates the same climate change externality regardless of where it is
       emitted. Researchers and policymakers often claim that imposing climate change policy in some countries
       but not others could harm domestic energy-intensive industries and lead to relocation or "leakage" of
       emissions, more than an absolute decrease in emissions. Climate change regulation is far from global and
       covers about 20 percent of global CO2 emissions, including in the EU, California, and elsewhere (World
       Bank 2018). Carbon prices in these policies differ substantially across regulations and are generally below
       $10/ton. Some countries have considered pairing such sub-global policy with an import tariff or border
       adjustment that is proportional to the CO2 emitted from producing and transporting goods.1
           Of course, most countries already impose tariffs and NTBs on traded goods. This paper asks whether
       dirty industries already face higher tariffs and NTBs, which would mean that countries already implicitly
       have carbon tariffs in their existing trade policies. Given media emphasis on dirty industries' political
       lobbying, one might expect dirtier industries to receive relatively greater trade protection. I show that
       this prediction is incorrect, and that dirtier industries face relatively low tariffs and NTBs.
           I obtain these findings from regressions of tariff (or ad valorem NTB) rates on CO2 intensity. I
   1
    Some versions of this proposal would include rebates for exports. Several proposed U.S. climate change regulations would
implement carbon tariffs, including the Waxman-Markey Bill (the American Clean Energy and Security Act), which passed
the House but not the Senate in 2009; the American Opportunity Carbon Fee Act of 2014; and a current "carbon dividends"
proposal by the U.S. Climate Leadership Council led by James Baker, Martin Feldstein, Greg Mankiw, and publicly endorsed
by 27 economics Nobel laureates and 3500 economists. One common perception is that a carbon tariff is politically necessary
(though so far not politically sufficient) to ensure support for any U.S. climate change regulation. Legal analyses suggest that
regulations of the World Trade Organization (WTO) could allow such carbon tariffs, though disagree on exactly which type of
carbon tariff WTO rules would allow (Hillman 2013; Pauwelyn 2013; Cosbey et al. 2017).




                                                               1
      measure CO2 intensity by inverting a global multi-region input-output table, which accounts for emissions
      embodied in intermediate goods. For example, the CO2 emissions rate for U.S. kitchenware accounts for
      the Australian coal used to produce the Chinese steel used to produce a U.S. frying pan, and the bunker
      and diesel fuels used to transport each. The global input-output data this paper uses, from Exiobase,
      describe 48 countries and 163 industries, and so generate measures of CO2 intensity for each international
      and intra-national trade flow in the global economy. The tariff data are even more detailed, with 200
      million tariff measures that uniquely describe each origin×destination×industry. I obtain qualitatively
      similar results from several other datasets and sensitivity analyses.
          Why have countries imposed more protection on clean than dirty industries? Theory and evidence
      suggest that countries do not explicitly consider CO2 or intend to subsidize it in choosing trade policy;
      indeed, I believe that countries are not even aware of the implicit subsidy in trade policy this paper
      highlights, since previous literature has not tested for or identified it. Instead, this paper proposes that
      some forces which determine trade policy are correlated with CO2 intensity.
          To determine which forces account for the association between trade policy and CO2 intensity, the
      analysis considers explanations based on 20 variables suggested by theoretical and empirical research.
      These explanations include optimal tariffs (inverse export supply elasticities), lobbying expenditures,
      unionization, labor and capital shares, declining or "sunset" industries, worker wages and education, firm
      size, industry concentration rates, intra-industry trade, levels and trend in trade exposure, dispersion
      in firm sizes and in firm locations, shipping costs, unemployment, "local" pollutants like sulfur dioxide,
      production efficiency, and an industry's upstream location. These variables are available for the U.S.; a
      subset is available for all countries. To address potential endogeneity, some specifications instrument a
      particular political economy explanation (e.g., mean wages in a specific industry) with its value from the
      ten other smallest countries in the data. I focus on the ten smallest other countries since they are more
      likely to take conditions in the rest of the world as given.
          Among these potential explanations, linear regressions and a machine learning algorithm highlight
      an industry's location or "upstreamness" in global value chains as accounting for a large share of the
      association between CO2 intensity and trade policy. The analysis measures upstreamness as the economic
      distance of each industry from final consumers (Antr`
                                                          as et al. 2012). More upstream industries have both
      lower protection and greater emissions.
          I investigate one political economy explanation for the covariance of upstreamness and trade policy
      involving lobbying competition. Firms may lobby for high tariffs and NTBs on their own outputs, but also
      lobby for low tariffs on the goods they use directly and indirectly as inputs, so as to decrease production
      costs.2 Because final consumers are poorly organized (Olson 1965), politicians give the least protection to
   2
     Firms publicly emphasize this rationale. When President Trump initially proposed tariffs on steel, the American Automotive
Policy Council announced, "The auto industry and the U.S. workers that the industry employs would be adversely affected
and that [sic ] this unintended negative impact would exceed the benefit provided to the steel industry" (Gibson 2017). The
Consuming Industries Trade Action Coalition (CITAC), a twenty-year old U.S. lobby group focused on decreasing tariffs on
upstream industries, experienced a doubling of membership during a "Stand up to Steel" campaign, and supported a bill in
the U.S. House of Representatives (HR 2770) to give steel consumers greater standing in trade cases. When President Obama
imposed tariffs on Chinese tires, CITAC responded, "[W]e believe that this case will undermine the jobs of many more US



                                                              2
      the upstream industries (which are also the dirtiest) and the greatest protection to the most downstream
      industries (which are also the cleanest).
          Figure I shows nonparametric local linear regressions that illustrate several key ideas in the paper.
      Each graph in this figure shows two lines. The downward-sloping dashed blue line shows a nonparametric
      regression of total CO2 intensity on upstreamness. This line shows that the most upstream industries
      are dirtier. The upward-sloping solid red line shows a local linear regression of tariffs plus NTBs on
      upstreamness, which shows that the most upstream industries have the least protection. The patterns
      are similar for global and U.S. data. Previous research has not documented this systematic nonparametric
      relationship between trade policy and upstreamness, or between pollution and upstreamness. In these
      graphs, the relationships between each of these outcomes (CO2 intensity, trade policy) and upstreamness
      are somewhat linear.
          Appendix Figure I finds similar patterns in essentially each of the roughly 50 countries with data.
      This figure plots nonparametric relationships between CO2 intensity and upstreamness, and between
      trade policy (tariffs+NTBs) and upstreamness, separately for each country in Exiobase. While this
      figure provides almost 50 separate small graphs, casual inspection shows the "X"-shaped pattern that in
      most countries, CO2 intensity increases somewhat steadily with upstreamness, while tariffs and NTBs
      decrease.
          A partial equilibrium back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that this global implicit subsidy in
      trade policy to CO2 emissions totals $550 to $800 billion dollars per year. This can be interpreted as
      revenue that a carbon tariff would collect if it had the same pattern as trade policy's environmental bias
      (i.e., -$85/ton to -$120/ton).
          I then use a quantitative general equilibrium model to assess how counterfactual trade policies would
      affect CO2 emissions and social welfare. This analysis uses strong assumptions that provide an imperfect
      approximation to reality.
          The model incorporates several common features--input-output links, trade imbalances, CO2 emis-
      sions from fossil fuel, tariffs that are lump-sum rebated, and NTBs (Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare 2014;
      Caliendo and Parro 2015; Eaton et al. 2016; Shapiro 2016). I study six sets of counterfactual policies. In
      the first, each country sets a single tariff per trading partner which applies to all industries, and which
      equals the country's mean baseline bilateral tariff. Each country implements a similar reform for NTBs.
      This counterfactual decreases global CO2 emissions while leaving global real income unchanged or slightly
      increased. It has similar magnitude effects on CO2 as two of the world's largest actual or proposed climate
      change policies, the EU Emissions Trading System and the U.S. Waxman-Markey Bill. In the second
      counterfactual, only the EU adopts this policy. One could think of this as a way for the EU to address
      leakage from its CO2 cap-and-trade market, the EU Emissions Trading System. This decreases global
      CO2 emissions by half the amount of the global policy, and again leaves global real income unchanged or
      slightly higher.
          The third and fourth counterfactuals find that changing tariffs and NTBs to equal either the base-
workers in downstream industries..." (Business Wire 2009).




                                                             3
       line level of the cleanest third or dirtiest third of industries decreases global CO2 emissions by several
       percentage points. Fifth, I consider a counterfactual in which every country adds a tariff proportional to
       goods' CO2 intensity, i.e., a carbon tariff. This has modest environmental benefits. Finally, if countries
       completely eliminated tariffs and NTBs, both global CO2 emissions and real income would rise. Although
       turning off trade policy by definition eliminates trade policy's environmental bias, the resulting increase
       in income dwarfs this environmental effect.
          This paper has potentially important policy implications. In a first-best setting where every country
       implemented uniform carbon prices on all CO2 emissions, trade policy would have no role in efficient
       climate policy. In a second-best setting where political economy constraints make optimal climate change
       policy infeasible, considering environmental concerns in designing trade policy could potentially increase
       welfare. But in either setting, a trade policy which subsidizes CO2 may be inefficient, and hence limiting
       the greater protection of clean relative to dirty goods could increase welfare. I believe that a reform
       which considers the CO2 intensity of an industry in negotiating bilateral or multilateral trade policy
       across industries but without a formal carbon tariff has not been discussed in government or academia.3
       Such reforms may appeal to groups that typically disagree ­ dirty industries and environmentalists ­
       because they can maintain protection of dirty domestic industries (at least relative to clean industries)
       while decreasing global CO2 emissions. More broadly, the World Trade Organization (WTO) has sought
       to decrease protection of downstream relative to upstream industries, since such trade policy reforms
       would let developing countries sell more advanced technologies to industrialized countries. This paper
       suggests that such WTO goals may also help address climate change.
          Several caveats are worth noting. This paper refers to the higher tariff and NTB rates on clean relative
       to dirty goods as an implicit "subsidy" in trade policy to CO2 emissions. This "subsidy" refers to a lower
       tax rate in a setting where most goods face positive taxes (tariffs and NTBs). This difference in trade
       policy may encourage countries to purchase more clean goods domestically and dirty goods from abroad;
       internationally traded goods within an industry are more CO2 -intensive both because they require long-
       distance transportation and because they tend to be outsourced to countries like China and India that
       rely heavily on coal for production and so are CO2 -intensive (Shapiro 2016). The difference in trade
       policy also encourages firms and final consumers to substitute from consuming cleaner to dirtier goods
       (e.g., substituting from aluminum to steel). For these reasons and since the quantitative analysis finds
       that the difference in trade policy between clean and dirty industries increases global CO2 emissions, I
       refer to this difference in trade policy as an implicit "subsidy." This is a global subsidy--for example, if
       France imposes low import tariffs on dirty goods, this may increase CO2 emissions from French trading
       partners and from the globe overall, though could decrease these emissions from within France.4
   3
     Such reforms are likely feasible within WTO regulations. The WTO does not primarily regulate NTBs, so most changes
in NTBs are permissible. WTO members negotiate maximum ("binding") tariffs on trading partners. The binding tariffs do
constrain the maximum possible level, but WTO members have flexibility in choosing tariffs below those levels through bilateral
or multilateral agreements.
   4
     A carbon subsidy through trade policy can also produce a range of behavioral responses, not all modeled here. For example,
increasing the price of energy-intensive goods might lead consumers to use existing goods for longer, which could make the
net effect on carbon emissions ambiguous. An analogous pattern in vehicle fuel economy standards is sometimes called the




                                                              4
         It is also worth discussing the implications of using a second-best tool like trade policy as an alternative
      or complement to traditional environmental taxes on production or consumption. Important debates have
      considered the merits of taxing pollution through trade policy (e.g., Kortum and Weisbach 2016). One
      point of this paper is that current trade policy is subsidizing pollution for political economy (not efficiency)
      reasons, which no theoretical or empirical arguments claim is efficient.
         This paper builds on several literatures. I believe this paper is the first to report the association
      of tariffs or NTBs with the pollution emitted to produce different goods, and the first to quantify the
      environmental consequences of harmonizing trade policy between clean and dirty goods. Research on
      trade and the environment asks how hypothetical changes in aggregate trade flows affect pollution, studies
      hypothetical carbon tariffs, or investigates how environmental policies and attributes of industries affect
      trade flows though not trade policies (Antweiler 1996; Copeland and Taylor 2003; Frankel and Rose 2005;
      Fowlie et al. 2016; Shapiro and Walker 2018). A large literature studies the consequences of hypothetical
      carbon border tax adjustments, relying primarily on computable general equilibrium (CGE) models and
      largely or completely abstracting from existing patterns of tariffs or NTBs. An entire field of academia,
      industrial ecology, quantifies the pollution required to produce internationally traded goods. Research
      in industrial ecology and economics measures pollution embodied in traded goods (e.g., Antweiler 1996;
      Davis and Caldeira 2010; Aichele and Felbermayr 2012). None of this work compares its measures of
      pollution embodied in traded goods against actual current levels of tariffs or NTBs.
         This paper also introduces tariffs and NTBs as a new setting to study political economy and the
      environment. Research on the political economy of environmental policy is limited. Some work does use
      Grossman and Helpman (1994)'s "Protection for Sale" model to study domestic environmental policy
      (Fredriksson 1997; Schleich and Orden 2000). Trade policy provides an appealing setting to study po-
      litical economy and the environment because it governs the more than 20 percent of CO2 that crosses
      international borders embodied in traded goods, substantially affects pollution, creates easily-observed
      tax rates that vary across industries and countries, and depends on political economy forces like lobbying.
         This paper also builds on an older trade policy literature by providing the first nonparametric evidence
      of "tariff escalation" ­ the phenomenon that more processed goods face higher tariffs ­ using continuous
      measures of upstreamness; the first evidence of NTB escalation, which is important since NTBs create
      a larger trade barrier than tariffs in industrialized countries; and the first empirical link between tariff
      escalation and the environment. Corden (1966, p. 228) in the Journal of Political Economy described
      tariff escalation as "so well known that detailed substantiation is hardly needed." Research on tariff
      escalation has since become uncommon, despite renewed interest in global value chains. While the
      existing literature generally identifies tariff escalation by reporting three mean tariff rates, for "primary,"
      "intermediate," and "consumer goods" (Balassa 1965; Golub and Finger 1979; Marvel and Ray 1983),
      I propose that upstreamness provides a natural and continuous measure to use for studying escalation.
      Upstreamness is also related to the explanation for tariff escalation that downstream industries may lobby
      for low tariffs on their intermediate inputs (Cadot et al. 2004; Gawande et al. 2012). I am not aware

"Gruenspecht effect" (Jacobsen and van Benthem 2015).




                                                             5
       of prior work interpreting tariff escalation through the full measure of upstreamness, though Gawande
       et al. (2012) relate it to the simpler measure of the share of an industry's output sold as intermediates. I
       show that upstreamness is more strongly associated with tariffs or NTBs than are many other standard
       explanations for trade policy. The most relevant recent other parts of the trade policy literature link
       trade policy to global value chains (Antr`
                                                as and Staiger 2012; Blanchard et al. 2016) and link trade policy
       to other domains like the environment (Copeland 2000; Maggi 2016).
            The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and Section 3 the econometrics. Section
       4 discusses the relationship between pollution intensity and trade policy. Section 5 evaluates political
       economy explanations. Section 6 evaluates consequences of counterfactual reforms. Section 7 concludes.



       II       Data
       I combine data on three types of variables: trade policy, pollution emissions, and political economy. Unless
       otherwise noted, all data represent a cross-section for the year 2007 (which is the year Exiobase covers) or
       the closest available year. I show some estimates with multiple years of U.S. data. Appendix A provides
       additional detail on each set of files, including concordances that link different industry classifications,
       and Appendix A.6 compares the use of industry classifications versus input-output tables for measuring
       tariffs on intermediate versus final goods.


       II.A       Trade Policy
       Tariffs are the most easily-quantified trade policy instrument, but NTBs are increasing in importance.
       I obtain data on tariff rates from the Market Access Map (Macmap) database. A 2-digit Harmonized
       System (HS) code version of these data is freely available online. I purchased the 6-digit HS code version
       from the French Centre d'Etudes Prospectives et d'Informations (CEPII) (Guimbard et al. 2012). The
       data provide the most comprehensive tariff records available. The data distinguish 5,000 different goods
       (6-digit Harmonized System codes) for 190 countries and account for most-favored nation tariffs, regional
       trade agreements, free trade agreements, customs unions, and tariff-rate quotas. The data cover all
       bilateral trading partners.
            For tariffs on U.S. imports, I use records from the Census Bureau's Imports of Merchandise files.
       While Macmap lists statutory tariff rates (i.e., official policy), Census records list tariff duties actually
       paid, so permit calculation of effective tariff rates.
            Non-tariff barriers (NTBs) include policy barriers to trade that are not tariffs, such as price regulations,
       product standards, quantity restrictions like quotas, or others.5 I use data from Kee et al. (2009) on the
   5
    A global social planner might set tariff rates to zero, since tariffs largely exist for political economy or terms-of-trade reasons.
A global planner might set some NTBs to non-zero rates, since some NTBs could address market failures in health, safety, or
the environment. I abstract from efficiency rationales for NTBs in part since I am not aware of data distinguishing the extent to
which each country and industry's NTBs are efficient versus reflect rent-seeking and protectionism. It is generally believed that
NTB rates have risen in recent decades partly in response to decreased tariff rates, which would suggest that NTBs primarily
represent protection rather than correction of market failures.



                                                                   6
       dollar (i.e., ad valorem) equivalent of NTBs; they describe how they calculate these values from raw data
       in the World Bank's World Integrated Trade Solutions (WITS) system. These NTB values are calculated
       for each 6-digit HS code, for a year around 2000-2003 (the exact year varies across countries), and for
       about 100 countries.


       II.B      CO2 Emissions
       I first explain my approach to measuring CO2 emissions informally for one closed economy, then explain
       it formally, then discuss multiple open countries, and finally describe data sources.
          Consider two types of CO2 emissions. First, an industry burns fossil fuels to produce output. Second,
       an industry purchases intermediate goods as inputs that themselves require CO2 emissions to produce. I
       describe the first channel as "direct" CO2 emissions and the second as "indirect." An input-output table
       for one country contains one row per industry and one column per industry. Each value in the table
       represents the dollars of output from an industry in a row required to produce a dollar of output of the
       industry indicated in a column. This permits calculation of direct CO2 emissions, since it shows how
       many dollars of coal, oil, and natural gas are required to produce a dollar of output in each other industry.
       To calculate direct CO2 emissions, I consider the rows for the coal extraction, oil extraction, and natural
       gas extraction industries. The analysis uses independent data on the national price per physical unit of
       each fossil fuel and on the physical emissions rate (i.e., the tons of CO2 emitted per ton of coal, barrel
       of oil, or cubic foot of natural gas burned). Multiplying these coal, oil, and gas input expenditures by
       the tons of CO2 emitted per dollar of fossil fuel burned gives the direct emissions rate. This approach
       to using an input-output matrix to account for pollution is standard (Miller and Blair 2009, p. 447)
       and resembles what the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change calls the "Tier 1" or "default"
       method of calculating CO2 emissions. It is designed to measure emissions from producing goods, which is
       appropriate for an analysis of tariffs on internationally traded goods.6 It obtains industry-level measures
       of CO2 -intensity, though abstracts from intra-industry heterogeneity (Lyubich et al. 2018).
          This approach can calculate direct but not indirect emissions. For example, the emissions rate for
       cookware in this approach reflects fossil fuels burned to shape steel into a pan (which are listed in the
       cookware industry column) but not fossil fuels used to make the steel in the first place (which are listed
       in the steel industry column or its input industries like electricity). As shown formally below, inverting
       the input-output matrix permits calculation of total emissions, which equal the sum of direct and indirect
       emissions. This inverse indicates the dollars of coal, oil, and natural gas required to produce a dollar of
       output in each industry, including the coal, oil, and natural gas embodied in intermediate goods, and
       inputs to intermediates, and inputs to these inputs, etc. Environmental researchers call this a "life cycle"
       or "footprint" measure of emissions; international economists call it a "value chain" measure.
   6
    One could also wonder how domestic or "behind-the-border" policies affect the choice among energy-consuming durable
goods like cars or air conditioners. While Section IV.B discusses sensitivity analyses designed to account for energy used in
consuming these goods, a detailed analysis of energy consumption for these goods and associated policies is the topic of an active
body of research that uses models specialized to these sectors (e.g., Bento et al. 2009; Jacobsen et al. 2019).




                                                                7
   Continuing this explanation for a single closed economy, let S denote the number of industries in the
economy and let A be an S × S input-output table where each row lists the industry supplying inputs and
each column lists the industry demanding outputs. Each entry in the matrix A describes the dollars of
input from the industry in a given row required to produce a dollar of output for the industry in a given
column. Let x be an S × 1 column vector describing each industry's gross output and let d be an S × 1
vector of final demand, including exports. An accounting identity states that each industry's gross output
equals the value of its output used for intermediate goods in all industries plus the value of its output
used for final demand: x = Ax + d. Simple algebra then reveals the total amount of intermediate inputs
(including both direct and indirect inputs) required to produce a dollar of final demand: x = (I - A)-1 d.
The matrix (I - A)-1 is called the Leontief inverse or the matrix of total requirements. It describes the
dollars of each input, including those required to produce intermediate inputs, and inputs to inputs, etc.
required to produce an additional dollar of final demand. This approach does not account for changes
in CO2 emissions from goods that are complementary with or substitutes for the good of interest, which
may be most relevant for energy-consuming durable goods like vehicles or housing.
   Extending this approach to multiple open countries and industries is straightforward. Let N denote
the number of countries. In a multi-region input-output table, A is an N S × N S matrix, where each row
is a specific country×industry and each column is a specific country×industry. For example, one table
entry might show the dollars of Chinese steel (one row) required to produce a dollar of U.S. cookware
(one column). Then x and d are N S × 1 column vectors describing gross output and final demand,
respectively. Using a multi-region input-output table, the rest of the analysis proceeds as above.
   Several data sources help measure CO2 emissions. The main dataset is Exiobase, which combines
trade data, input-output tables, and national accounts to construct a global multi-region input-output
table. Exiobase reports the direct CO2 emissions per million Euros of output for every country×industry.
To construct data on CO2 emissions per country×industry, Exiobase primarily uses emissions data from
the International Energy Agency (IEA 2007a,b,c). I use Exiobase's calculated CO2 emissions from fossil
fuel combustion for each country×industry. Appendix A.2 provides additional details on Exiobase.
   I then calculate total (direct+indirect) emissions rates from Exiobase as follows. Let Lijst denote
an entry of the Leontief inverse L = (I - A)-1 , i.e., the dollars of output from industry s in country i
required to produce one dollar of output from industry t in country j , including the entire global value
                                             direct be the direct emissions from producing a dollar of output
chain (inputs, inputs to inputs, etc.). Let Eis
from country i in industry s, i.e., the CO2 emitted from the coal, oil, and natural gas used directly in
                                         direct . Then the total emissions rate is E =
this country×industry. Exiobase reports Eis                                                              direct .
                                                                                    jt        i,s Lijst Eis



II.C     Political Economy Explanations
Why do different industries face different trade policies? One explanation involves optimal tariffs and
the terms of trade--a large country can privately benefit by imposing small import tariffs on its trading
partners. In this classic explanation, a country's privately optimal tariff equals the inverse of the foreign
export supply elasticity it faces (Bickerdike 1907). Optimal tariffs could correlate with CO2 intensity,



                                                     8
       since optimal tariffs are higher on more differentiated industries, and clean industries may be more
       differentiated. The second set of theories involves political economy. The more influential of these
       theories focus on organized interest groups (Olson 1965; Grossman and Helpman 1994, 1995; Maggi and
       Rodr´
           iguez-Clare 1998, 2007). Organized industries can provide campaign contributions and use other
       means to obtain trade protection. Politicians may find it privately optimal to distort trade policy in
       response to this lobbying, but in most settings a social planner would not.
          Some political economy variables are available separately for each country×industry in Exiobase; I
       extract these variables and use them for the global analysis. A larger set of political economy variables
       are available for each industry in U.S. data; I use these data to analyze the U.S. only. The introduction
       lists each variable; Appendix A.3 describes measurement of each variable and their data sources. I choose
       variables to include following existing empirical trade policy research (Pincus 1975; Caves 1976; Anderson
       1980; Ray 1981; Marvel and Ray 1987; Trefler 1993; Freund and C              ¨
                                                                            ¸ aglar Ozden 2008), especially Rodrik
       (1995).
          I add a measure of "local" air pollution emissions and damages not discussed in the trade literature.
       Firms' emissions of air pollutants, in addition to emissions of pollution through water and land, create
       local external costs. These externalities could lead to policies like low tariffs and NTBs on dirty industries
       which seek to relocate polluting activity to other countries.7
          I discuss the one variable here which turns out to be the most important. I measure each industry's
       "upstreamness" as the average economic distance of an industry from final use. One can also interpret
       upstreamness as the mean position of an industry's output in a vertical production chain (Antr`
                                                                                                     as and
       Chor 2013) or as the share of an industry's output sold to relatively upstream industries (Fally 2012).
       If industry i is measured to be more upstream than industry j , this does not imply that industry i
       actually supplies industry j . Rather, this simply implies that industry i on average is further in economic
       distance from final consumers than industry j is. Appendix A.3 presents the equation used to measure
       upstreamness and discusses its measurement. Upstreamness is measured for each industry in the U.S.
       data and each country×industry in the Exiobase global data.



       III       Econometrics
       III.A       Trade Policy and CO2 Intensity
       To measure differences in trade policy between clean and dirty industries, I estimate the following:a

                                                      tjs = Ejs + µj +     js                                            (1)
   7
    Another interpretation is that many regions impose domestic local zoning restrictions that relocate dirty production from
richer to poorer areas. Similarly, imposing low tariffs and NTBs on dirty goods could reflect wealthy countries' efforts to relocate
dirty production to poor countries.




                                                                 9
       The dependent variable t is the mean import tariff rate or ad valorem NTBs that destination country
       j imposes on goods in industry s. In the global data, s represents the foreign industry which produced
       the good, not the domestic industry which consumed it. For example, the emissions rate E for Mexican
       imports of steel reflects the mean emissions from steel production in all countries from which Mexico
       imports, while the tariffs t reflects Mexico's import tariffs on steel. Equation (1) has a j rather than
       both i and j subscript because the analyses averages across origin countries (weighted by the value of
       each trade flow) for three reasons: this enhances comparability between tariffs and NTBs, since the latter
       are defined only by destination country and industry; this helps address the presence of zero trade flows
       between some origin×destination×industry tuples; and this increases comparability of these regressions
       with political economy variables, which are observed at the country×industry level. I show some results
       with separate observations for each exporter×importer×industry (i × j × s) tuple. Appendix B provides
       some additional details on equation (1).
          The main explanatory variable, E , represents the tons of CO2 emitted per dollar of imported good.
       As discussed earlier, E is calculated from inverting an input-output table, so includes both direct CO2
       emissions, which are those emitted from industry s, and indirect emissions, which are those emitted from
       industries used as inputs to industry s, and inputs to inputs, etc.8
          Equation (1) allows a useful interpretation: the parameter  represents the carbon tariff implicit in
       existing trade policy. The regression has this interpretation because t is measured in dollars of tariff
       duties (or NTB equivalent) per dollar of imports and E is measured in tons of CO2 per dollar of imports.
       Therefore  represents duties collected per ton of CO2 emitted.9 For example,  = 40 would imply that
       an additional $40 of import duties (or NTB ad valorem equivalent) is collected for each additional ton
       of CO2 embodied in a good. My finding of   -85 to -120 implies that current trade policy embodies
       a carbon subsidy in trade policy of 85 to 120 dollars per ton of CO2 . As mentioned in the introduction,
       I refer to this as a "subsidy" in part because it represents a lower tax rate for traded dirty goods, even
       though it occurs in a setting where most traded goods face positive taxes.
          Standard errors in most regressions are clustered by industry. I also report some results with standard
       errors clustered by importer. As discussed in Appendix B, the main estimates in the paper, including
       those of equation (1), include only observations for manufacturing.
   8
     Formally, Ejs = ( i=j,t Eijst Xijst )/ i=j,t Xijst , where Eijst is the emissions rate from inverting the global input-output
table, and Xijst is the value of the trade flow from origin country i and origin industry s to destination country j and destination
industry t. The summation excludes i = j because the emissions rate relevant for carbon tariffs and international trade applies
only to international imports, not to intra-national trade. The emissions rate Eijst differs by importer×exporter×industry. For
example, the emissions rate for U.S. steel imports from China differs from the emissions rate for U.S. steel imports from Canada.
These emissions rates differ because China and Canada use different fossil fuel inputs, both directly and indirectly.
   9
     Imports appear to be in the denominator of both the left- and right- hand sides of equation (1), which could produce spurious
correlation. In practice in the global data, as Section II.A explains, t is measured as statutory tariffs (or NTB equivalents).
Hence, t reflects published regulations about which tariff rate applies to different types of products, and t is not measured through
dividing data on duties collected by data on imports. In the U.S. data, t equals duties collected divided by imports. But as
Section II.B explains, in the U.S. data, E equals emissions from a U.S. industry's production of CO2 (including life cycle CO2 )
divided by the industry's gross output. Additionally, the U.S. value of E from the input-output table is instrumented with its
value from the direct survey MECS. Hence, the measurement of these variables in data limits the scope for bias from spurious
correlation.



                                                                 10
   Measuring CO2 intensity from an input-output table may involve two types of measurement error.
The first is potentially relevant to all analysis with input-output tables--the input-output table itself
has errors-in-variables. Constructing an input-output table requires judgments of analysts from national
statistical agencies and adjustment through linear programming (Horowitz and Planting 2006). Second,
prices paid for each fossil fuel vary by industry, and input-output tables lack data on such industry-specific
input prices. Both types of measurement error could attenuate OLS estimates of .
   To address potential measurement error in measures of CO2 intensity, I use direct emissions as an
instrumental variable for total emissions. The first-stage regression is

                                                direct
                                         Ejs = Ejs     + µj + js                                          (2)

The second stage is equation (1). Here Ejs measures total (direct+indirect) emissions from the input-
                  direct measures direct emissions. Direct emissions reflect fossil fuels used in industry s
output table and Ejs
but not fossil fuels embodied in intermediate goods used in industry s. For example, the direct emissions
for producing a car include the natural gas used to heat and weld the car parts together at the car factory
but not the coal used to produce steel that is then shipped to the car factory.
   For the U.S. data, the instrument is the direct emission rate, measured from the Manufacturing Energy
Consumption Survey and the Census of Manufactures. For the global data, the instrument is the direct
emissions rate in the 10 smallest other countries. The validity of such leave-out instruments can be less
clear than the validity of some other types of instruments, in part due to concerns about the reflection
problem (Manski 1993). Due to the possibility that measurement error persists in the global estimates,
the true global subsidy in trade policy may be larger in absolute value than what I estimate.


III.B      Political Economy Explanations
I then test the hypothesis that the association between trade policy and CO2 intensity reflects variables
that are omitted from equation (1) but that both determine trade policy and correlate with CO2 intensity.
I estimate linear regressions including potential variables Fjs that are believed to explain trade policy,
along with CO2 intensity:
                                        tjs = Ejs + Fjs + µj +      js                                    (3)

I estimate a separate regression for each political economy variable Fjs then assess which of these political
economy variables most attenuates the estimated covariance  between trade policy and carbon intensity.
   In separate estimates, I control for all potential political economy explanations at once. I implement
this regression using both linear regression and using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator
(Lasso), which is a common machine learning algorithm for automatic model selection (Tibshirani 1996).
Identifying which variables Lasso includes in a model can be informative though also sensitive to spec-
ification (Mullainathan and Speiss 2017). These regressions test whether each variable, including CO2
intensity, has additional explanatory power for trade policy beyond these other variables.




                                                     11
       IV        Results: Trade Policy and CO2 Intensity
       IV.A        Summary Statistics
       Table I describes the cleanest and dirtiest industries in the global data, ranked by total (direct+indirect)
       CO2 emissions. Panel A shows the cleanest five industries while Panel B shows the dirtiest. Column (1)
       shows mean CO2 rates across all countries, column (2) shows mean tariffs, and column (3) shows NTBs.
           The cleanest five manufacturing industries primarily produce food products and have a mean global
       emissions rate of 0.37 tons CO2 per thousand dollars of output. The dirtiest five manufacturing industries
       mostly produce heavy goods like bricks or steel and have a mean global emissions rate of 1.88 tons CO2 per
       thousand dollars of output. Motor vehicles appear relatively clean in these data (also in U.S. input-output
       tables) because, as discussed earlier, most of the emissions due to vehicles come from a separate good that
       is complementary, refined petroleum, and later I explore estimates accounting for this complementarity.10
           It may be informative to calculate the CO2 externality these numbers imply. If each ton of CO2
       emitted creates a social cost of carbon of $40 (IWG 2016), this comparison involves multiplying by
       40/1000. This calculation implies that globally, pork products create a social cost from CO2 emissions of
       about 1.5 percent of product value (=0.34*40/1000). Producing iron and steel creates a CO2 externality
       equal to 7 percent of its product value (=1.74*40/1000).
           In the ten industries of Table I, column (2) shows that the cleanest industries face over four times
       the mean tariff of the dirtiest industries, at 9 versus 2 percent. Column (3) shows a similar difference
       between the cleanest and dirtiest industries for NTBs (25 versus 5 percent). I now turn to regressions
       analyzing all industries.


       IV.B        Implicit Carbon Tariffs
       Tariffs
       Figure II, Panels A and B, plots hypothetical $40/ton carbon tariffs. Each point in these graphs is a
       separate country×industry (Panel A, all countries) or industry (Panel B, U.S. only). The tariff rate is a
       constant multiple of the emissions rate, which makes both graphs linear. In this hypothetical policy, the
       mean carbon tariff for all countries in Panel B is three percent, which is slightly over half of current global
       mean tariff rates. The mean U.S. carbon tariff is about four percent, which is larger than prevailing mean
       U.S. tariffs (Table II).
           Figure II, Panels C and D, shows actual tariff data. In these graphs, the pattern across industries is
       the opposite of hypothetical carbon tariffs. The hypothetical carbon tariffs in Panels A and B impose
  10
     Some developing countries directly subsidize the consumption of raw fossil fuels; trade policy also to some extent reflects
these patterns. For global trade in fossil fuel industries (coal, crude oil, natural gas, and refined petroleum), average global tariffs
are 1.7 percent and NTBs are 3.6 percent; for all other industries, these averages are 3.9 percent and 9.6 percent, respectively.
In developing countries, mean tariff and NTB rates for fossil fuels are 5.8 percent and 6.7 percent, and for all other industries
they are 7.5 percent and 9.0 percent. These values are weighted and include all industries (not only manufacturing).




                                                                  12
higher tariffs on dirtier industries (positively sloped line), but actual tariffs in Panels C and D impose
lower tariffs on dirtier industries (negatively sloped line).
   Table II reports regressions corresponding to these graphs. Panels A and B show estimates for
the world and U.S., respectively. Odd-numbered columns are unweighted; even-numbered columns are
weighted by the value of the trade flow. For the U.S., weighting provides an efficient response to het-
eroskedasticity, since U.S. effective tariff rates equal total duties divided by total trade value. Columns
(1) and (2) show a first-stage regression of total CO2 intensity on direct CO2 intensity, corresponding
to equation (2). Columns (3) and (4) show reduced-form regressions of tariffs on direct CO2 intensity.
Column (5) and (6) show OLS regressions of tariffs on total CO2 intensity. Columns (7) and (8) report
instrumental variables regressions of tariffs on total CO2 intensity, instrumented by direct CO2 intensity.
   In Table II, Panel A, the negative signs in columns (3) through (8) imply that global tariffs have a
subsidy in trade policy to CO2 emissions, not a tax. Columns (7) and (8) show that the mean subsidy to
CO2 emissions in global tariffs is $11 per ton of CO2 weighted, or $32/ton unweighted. The first-stage
F-statistics show that most of the instruments are strong, though the unweighted U.S. estimates have
marginally weak instruments (F-statistic of 9.8, versus a standard cutoff of 10), and hence are possibly
biased towards OLS. The instrumental variables estimates are modestly larger than the corresponding
OLS estimates, which is consistent with attenuation bias in OLS due to measurement error, though their
qualitative results are similar.
   Figure III shows the estimated association between CO2 intensity and tariffs for the U.S., separately
for each year of available data 1989-2017. The red circle shows the point estimate for each year and the
vertical bar shows the 95 percent confidence interval. This graph shows statistically significant negative
associations between U.S. tariffs and CO2 intensity in every year. The estimated U.S. subsidy in trade
policy was $13/ton in 1989, then decreased gradually to $6/ton around 1998, and remained near that
value through 2017. One potential explanation is that the secular decline in mean tariffs overall decreased
the difference between tariffs on clean and dirty goods.


Non-Tariff Barriers
Figure II, Panels E and F, plots NTBs against CO2 emission rates. These graphs have similar structure
to the tariff graphs. They show that dirtier industries face lower NTBs in both the global and U.S. data.
Some of the cleanest industries have NTB ad valorem equivalent values close to 100 percent, while many
of the dirtiest industries face little or no NTB protection.
   Table III reports regressions corresponding to these graphs. The table structure is similar to the tariff
regressions in Table II. Again the numbers in columns (3) through (8) are all negative, showing a carbon
subsidy in trade policy rather than carbon tax. Columns (7) and (8) show that the implicit subsidy
to CO2 in global NTBs is $76 in the unweighted regressions or $90 in the weighted regressions. The
instrumental variables estimates in columns (7) and (8) show a large subsidy to CO2 emissions implicit
in U.S. NTBs, of about $37 to $48/ton. Summing up subsidies in tariffs from Tables II and NTBs from
Table III, columns (7) and (8), gives the global subsidy that I emphasize of about $85 (weighted) to $120



                                                      13
       (unweighted).
          These implicit subsidies appear in both tariffs and NTBs but have larger magnitude in absolute value
       in NTBs, perhaps in part since NTB mean values are greater. The mean U.S. ad valorem equivalent of
       NTBs is 8 to 11 percent, which is over four times the mean tariff rate (Tables II and III). This supports
       the common claim that U.S. NTBs are more restrictive than U.S. tariffs. Globally, NTBs create a larger
       barrier to trade than tariffs do, at 9 to 13 percent (NTBs) versus 3 to 5 percent (tariffs).


       Implicit Subsidies in Trade Policy, by Country
       To investigate how these patterns vary by country, I sum together tariffs and the ad valorem equivalent
       of NTBs as a more complete measure of protection. I then estimate equation (1) separately for each
       country (hence, these regressions exclude country fixed effects).
          Figure IV plots the result. Each point in this graph describes an estimate of the implicit carbon
       subsidy in trade policy for one country. Each point represents the subsidy to global emissions implicit
       in the trade policy of one country. The point for each country is estimated separately.11 Points on the
       graph are ordered by the estimated implicit subsidy, with names shown for several countries of interest.
          Almost every country in Figure IV has a negative value, implying that most countries have a carbon
       subsidy rather than a carbon tariff implicit in trade policy. European countries like France, Germany,
       Norway, and the UK have among the largest such subsidies in trade policy, with subsidy values exceeding
       $175/ton. Russia, India, and China have smaller subsidies in trade policy. The y-axis of Figure IV shows
       each country's implicit subsidy. A country like China which has high emissions due to its reliance on coal
       can still nonetheless have a small value in Figure IV since its trade policies are not strongly correlated
       with industries' CO2 emissions. The two regions with positive values in Figure IV are Romania and the
       Rest of the Middle East. Figure V plots these data in a global map which classifies countries by their
       subsidies implicit in trade policy.
          The cross-country comparisons in Figures III and IV do not follow predictable patterns. Large subsi-
       dies in trade policy appear in both rich regions like the EU and poor regions like Africa; small subsidies
       also appear in both rich countries like Canada and poorer countries like Vietnam. Oil-intensive countries
       like Saudi Arabia and Iran have small subsidies in trade policy, while countries with strict environmental
       policies like Norway have large subsidies. This lack of patterns is consistent with the interpretation of
       Section 5 that these subsidies in trade policy are due to political economy forces which are correlated
       with CO2 intensity.12
  11
      Stacking the regression to account for the covariance structure across countries might increase efficiency in these estimates.
Most of the estimates are significantly different from zero, though not significantly different from each other. I view the most
striking feature of Figure IV as the fact that even with completely separate regressions for each country, most of the country-
specific subsidies in trade policy are negative and large in absolute value; stacking the regression makes the estimates no longer
independent across countries.
   12
      In unreported results, I took the estimated country-level subsidy to CO2 in trade policy plotted in Figures III and IV, and
regressed it on several country characteristics. This regression finds that a country's GDP per capita, its mean tariff rate, and
its quality of environmental management are all significantly associated with larger subsidies in trade policy (more negative
regression coefficients). The regression also controlled for mean NTB rates, mean CO2 emissions rates, an index of perceived




                                                                14
      Sensitivity Analyses and Extensions
      Appendix C discusses numerous alternative estimates of these implicit carbon tariffs that are shown in
      Appendix Table I, including from a tobit, alternative approaches to inference, nonlinear specifications of
      CO2 intensity, winsorizing the data, including non-manufactured goods, including intra-national trade,
      separating direct and indirect emissions, including all greenhouse gases, separately accounting for CO2
      emissions from consumption and not merely production (e.g., the gasoline used to power a vehicle), the
      reverse regression, using the World Input-Output Database (WIOD), excluding manufactured agricultural
      and food products, and specifically analyzing the recent trade war by focusing on recent changes in U.S.
      import tariffs. Most of these results are qualitatively similar to the main estimates, though some vary in
      their magnitudes.
          One interesting pattern in Appendix Table I, rows 26-28, is that the implicit subsidy persisted in U.S.
      tariff data through the year 2017. Tariffs imposed in the 2018 trade war (Fajgelbaum et al. 2020) slightly
      attenuated but did not eliminate this implicit subsidy. Even in these more recent U.S. data, controlling
      for upstreamness eliminates the estimated association between trade policy and CO2 intensity.
          Appendix C describes an additional analysis which suggests these implicit subsidies appear in both
      cooperative tariffs, such as those negotiated through the WTO, and non-cooperative tariffs, such as those
      the U.S. lists for trade with North Korea.



      V       Explanations for the Relationship Between Trade Pol-
      icy and Pollution
      Why do countries impose higher tariffs and NTBs on clean than on dirty goods? The existence of these
      subsidies in trade policy is surprising, so the question of why they exist is interesting. Additionally,
      because no prior research has tested for or demonstrated the existence of these subsidies in trade policy,
      explaining why they exist enhances their plausibility. Finally, understanding why these patterns of trade
      policy occur may provide insight into the political feasibility of changing them.


      V.A        Explanations: Omitted Variables
      Which are the most important omitted variables in regressions of trade policy on CO2 intensity? Appendix
      Table III shows that an industry's upstream location is likely to play an important role. The table shows
      the difference in each political economy variable between "dirty" and "clean" industries (i.e., those above
      and below the median CO2 intensity), separately for global and U.S. data. All political economy variables
      are expressed in z-scores (i.e., I subtract the mean and divide by the standard deviation). Relative to

country corruption, and the country's mean upstreamness; these other variables had marginally significant (upstreamness) or
no (other controls) association with the level of a country's implicit subsidy in trade policy. I do not show this cross-country,
cross-sectional regression, which has 7 explanatory variables and less than 50 observations, since it may be hard to interpret
economically; I mention it because it provides another way to summarize the data in Figures IV and V.




                                                               15
clean industries, dirty industries are significantly more upstream, have a lower labor share, lower wages,
higher unionization rates, higher shipping costs, and higher local pollution emissions; the global data
give conflicting patterns for intra-industry trade and the import penetration ratio. While dirty industries
anecdotally have outsize political influence, dirty industries make marginally lower PAC contributions,
though PAC contributions are believed to be a very imperfect measure of lobbying influence.
   Appendix Table III shows that the association between emissions and upstreamness is stronger than
the association between emissions and other political economy variables in U.S. and global data. All
variables are in z-scores so have the same units. In the global data, some of the other variables are
correlated with dirtiness, but the correlations are weaker than for upstreamness. The association between
emissions and upstreamness in the global data is over four times stronger than the association between
emissions and other political economy variables. Additionally, the regressions below imply that these
other variables have less strong direct relationships to trade policy than upstreamness.
   Table IV asks which political economy explanation is the most important omitted variable in re-
gressions of trade policy on CO2 intensity. It shows regressions of trade protection (tariffs+NTBs) on
total CO2 intensity while controlling for one political economy variable at a time, with specification cor-
responding to equation (3). Total CO2 intensity is instrumented with direct CO2 intensity. Panels A
and B show estimates for all global trade; Panel C shows U.S. estimates. Column (1) includes no con-
trols. Columns (2) through (6) each control for one political economy variable, observed at the level of
a country×industry. Column (2) controls for upstreamness, column (3) for intra-industry trade, column
(4) for the import penetration ratio, column (5) for the labor share, and column (6) for the mean wage.
   Table IV, Panel B, uses data from the ten smallest other countries to construct instrumental variables
for the focal country×industry. The regressions in Panel B have two instruments (direct CO2 and political
economy variables, both averaged across the ten smallest other countries) and two endogenous variables
(CO2 and a political economy variable, both for the focal country). These help address the possibility
that some political economy explanations are endogenous. One example would be if trade policy affects
wages in a given industry and country but not in the same industry in other countries. Analyses of
agglomeration and import competition similarly use somewhat similar instruments (Ellison et al. 2010;
Autor et al. 2013; Antr`
                       as et al. 2017).
   Table IV, Panel A, column (1) restates the earlier result that the total subsidy to global CO2 emissions
implicit in global trade policy is around $120/ton. Column (2) shows that controlling for upstreamness
attenuates this estimate to $33/ton. Columns (3) through (6) show that controlling for other political
economy variables one at a time only slightly changes the estimated implicit subsidy in trade policy.
   Table IV, Panel B, obtains similar estimates from instrumenting each political economy variable with
its mean in the ten smallest other countries. In column (2), controlling for upstreamness eliminates the
estimated implicit subsidy--the estimated association between CO2 emissions and trade policy is -$120
(34) with no political economy controls, but $34 (39) when controlling for upstreamness. Columns (3)
through (6) show that instrumenting does not substantially change the other estimates. These estimates
have strong instruments.




                                                    16
          Panel C finds similar patterns using U.S. data. The estimated U.S. subsidy from tariffs and NTBs
       is $50 (10) per ton. Controlling for upstreamness attenuates this estimate, to $3 (10) per ton. Other
       political economy controls do not substantially change the estimated subsidy in trade policy.
          Figure VI graphs the U.S. estimates from Table IV, along with estimates controlling for other political
       economy variables that are available for the U.S. but not all countries. Each blue circle in these graphs
       is the coefficient from a regression of tariffs+NTBs on total CO2 intensity (instrumented by direct CO2
       intensity), controlling for one political economy variable, and corresponding to equation (3). Each red
       horizontal line shows a 95% confidence interval. The "Main Estimates" restates results from Table IV,
       Panel C, column (1). Each of the other numbers controls for one additional variable. The "Firm size:
       mean" entry, for example, comes from a regression that controls for the mean firm size in each industry.
          Figure VI shows that controlling for most political economy variables one-by-one produces little change
       in the association of trade policy with CO2 intensity. Only one variable, upstreamness, eliminates the
       estimated implicit subsidy in trade policy, and renders it statistically indistinguishable from zero.13
          Appendix C.1 discusses a wide range of sensitivity analyses, which collectively suggest that upstream-
       ness accounts for an important share of the association between CO2 intensity and trade policy.
          Figure VI and Appendix Table V suggest that local pollution does not statistically account for the
       association between CO2 emissions and trade policy, since controlling for local pollution emissions or
       damages does not substantially change the coefficient on CO2 intensity, though does decrease its preci-
       sion. A few additional reasons suggest why concern for local pollution emissions is unlikely to be the
       primary explanation for why dirty industries face lower tariffs and NTBs. First, many policymakers
       seek to maintain dirty industries' domestic production and directly regulate local pollution emissions by
       requiring installation of scrubbers or other technology that abates local air pollution (though not CO2 ).
       Many environmental policies contain explicit provisions to prevent relocation of dirty production. Hence,
       relocating dirty industries abroad may not be a primary policy goal. Additionally, I am not aware of
       evidence that concern for local pollution emissions has led dirty industries to have lower tariffs or NTBs.
       Many trade agreements like NAFTA and TPP have side agreements dealing with the environment, but
       these agreements typically describe domestic environmental regulations or monitoring investments, not
       patterns of tariffs and NTBs. Many actually seek to prevent the relocation of dirty industries, by barring
       the use of weak domestic environmental policies to lure dirty production across borders. Moreover, this
       implicit subsidy in trade policy appears in most countries. Efforts to outsource local pollution would thus
       to some extent neutralize each other.
  13
    This section's comparison of the carbon content of goods against their upstreamness and trade policy has similarities to
Blanchard et al. (2016)'s value-added content logic that a country may choose trade policy for a good to reflect the domestic
content which is embodied in the value chain for that good. One important difference is that each country may have preference
over policy for its own domestic content embodied in traded goods. For CO2 externalities, however, it does not matter whether
the CO2 embodied in a good was originally emitted from domestic or foreign fossil fuels, since CO2 has the same effect on global
climate regardless of the location of its emission.




                                                              17
       V.B      Explanations: Empirical Reasons why Upstreamness Substan-
       tially Accounts for Subsidies in Trade Policy
       Why is an industry's upstreamness strongly correlated with its CO2 intensity? Using U.S. data from the
       Bureau of Economic Analysis, Appendix Figure III graphs the share of each industry's revenue accounted
       for on the production side by intermediate goods, labor expenditures, profits and taxes, and fossil fuels.
       Appendix Figure III shows that upstream industries use a larger share of fossil fuels than downstream
       industries do. For the upstream industries, nearly five percent of production costs are devoted to fossil
       fuels; for the most downstream industries, less than one percent of costs are. Relative to upstream
       industries, downstream industries spend relatively more on labor and intermediate goods. Previous
       research has not shown these patterns but they make intuitive sense--upstream industries are taking raw
       materials extracted from the ground and transforming them, while downstream industries depend more
       on labor and other inputs.
          Appendix Figure III also helps answer an important question. If downstream goods are just combina-
       tions of upstream goods, why would different import tariff rates on upstream versus downstream goods
       affect CO2 emissions? Imagine an economy in which upstream goods were made exclusively from coal
       and downstream goods were made from upstream goods. In this hypothetical economy, upstream and
       downstream goods would have the same CO2 intensity, and tariff escalation could not affect global CO2
       emissions. Appendix Figure III shows that this hypothetical economy is misleading because downstream
       industries use as inputs both upstream goods and relatively clean factors like labor. Hence, imposing high
       tariffs on downstream but not upstream goods can encourage consumers to substitute from demanding
       relatively clean factors like labor to demanding relatively dirty factors like energy.
          Buyers can respond to changes in trade policy in many ways, including substituting between goods,
       changing total demand for an industry's products, and changing trading partners. To what extent can
       firms and consumers substitute between industries with different levels of upstreamness? Certainly in
       examples, goods that are substitutes have different levels of upstreamness and CO2 intensity. For example,
       steel and aluminum are likely substitutes, and in the U.S. data which have greater industry detail, steel
       is both more upstream and more CO2 intensive than aluminum.14
          Appendix D informally discusses how theories of trade policy might rationalize these findings, and
       describes a few reasons why the Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) production efficiency theorem does not
       well account for these patterns of trade policy.
  14
   The example compares iron and steel mills (NAICS industry 331111) against aluminum sheet, plate, and foil manufacturing
(NAICS industry 331315).




                                                            18
       VI        Consequences of Implicit CO2 Subsidies in Trade Pol-
       icy
       VI.A        Partial Equilibrium Approximation
       I use a few approaches to investigate the aggregate consequences of these patterns of trade policy. The
       first is a partial equilibrium calculation:

                                                         ^         Ejs         Xijs                                         (4)
                                                             j,s         i=j


       where     i=j   Xijs represents the value of international imports by country j in sector s. This represents the
       revenue that a carbon tariff would collect if it had the same pattern as trade policy's environmental bias
       (i.e., -$85 to -$120/ton). The parameter ^ is the implicit carbon subsidy in trade policy from equation
       (1).
           My primary estimate of Equation (4) uses regression results from Tables II and III, columns (7) and
       (8). This implies that global trade policy provided an implicit subsidy of $550 to $800 billion in the year
       2007 (measured in 2016 dollars). This can be calculated simply: 6.5 billion tons of CO2 are embodied in
       international trade (including in intermediate goods), times $85 to $120 in subsidy per ton of CO2 traded,
       gives $550  6.5 × 85 or $800  6.5 × 125.15 Appendix Table I provides other estimates of the implicit
       subsidy . These other regression estimates in turn lead to other estimates of the total global subsidy
       in trade policy. While the exact subsidy can vary with the regression specification, these magnitudes
       suggest this subsidy may have quantitatively important effects on trade and CO2 emissions.
           To put these estimates in perspective, global direct subsidies to fossil fuels were about $530 billion
       in 2007 (IMF 2013). These direct subsidies are a focus of political debate. The CO2 subsidies in trade
       policy, which have not been previously highlighted, have a similar magnitude. Of course, a direct subsidy
       to fossil fuel could have larger effects on CO2 than an indirect subsidy through trade policy.


       VI.B        Analytical Model
       The calculation of the previous subsection is simple but has limitations. I now turn to a model including
       several potentially important features--pollution can directly affect utility; pollution creates transbound-
       ary damages; countries may have pre-existing and sub-optimal trade policy on any goods; tariffs generate
       revenue which is lump-sum redistributed; and industries are connected through input-output links, so
       dirty industries can be upstream. This subsection describes a setting with two symmetric countries and
       two industries (one clean, one dirty). The next subsection describes a fuller quantitative model that
  15
     In many regression settings, difference-in-difference analyses cannot measure the total effect of a policy, since such regressions
are normalized against a comparison group and have fixed effects that remove any economy-wide effects. My summary calculations
reflect a descriptive regression that is not differences-in-differences--the regression has no comparison group, and is not estimating
a causal effect. Hence, this partial equilibrium calculation assumes that goods with zero tariff have zero subsidy.




                                                                    19
impose fewer restrictive assumptions, but which thereby obtains numerical but not analytical results.
These models make strong assumptions that are not literal descriptions of reality, like constant elasticity
of substitution utility, but the benefit of these stylized descriptions is that they permit analysis of how
specific counterfactual trade policy reforms affect CO2 emissions and social welfare.
   Preferences. The representative agent in country j maximizes national utility Uj .

                                                            js 
                                            Uj =          Qjs  f (Z )                                                    (5)
                                                      s

                                                                         ( -1)/ /( -1)
Here Qjs is a consumption aggregate given by Qjs  (                   i qijs   )       .   The elasticity of substitution
is  > 1, which for simplicity here does not vary by sector. Utility depends on international trade (qijs ,
i = j ) and intra-national trade (qjjs ) in each sector s  (1, 2). Global pollution emissions Z =                    j   Zj
create multiplicative damages f (Z ). The representative agent treats emissions as a pure externality, so
ignores them in choosing expenditure. This analytical model does not need to specify the functional form
of f (Z ), as I discuss below. Sector 1 represents dirty goods that emit pollution; sector 2 represents clean
goods that do not. Preferences are Cobb-Douglas across sectors, with expenditure shares js . I describe
an Armington model, in which countries have a taste for variety, and each country produces one variety
per sector. Standard versions of Ricardian models with richer microfoundations, like Eaton and Kortum
(2002) or Dornbusch et al. (1977), would produce the same aggregate equilibrium equations describing
production, consumption, and trade (Arkolakis et al. 2012), and thus the same conclusions for emissions
and social welfare.
   The associated price index is
                                                                          -1/
                                                                      -
                                        Pjs =         (cis ijs )                                                         (6)
                                                  i

Equivalently, one can write the trade elasticity > 0 as =  - 1, where  is the elasticity of substitution
between goods from each country. The variable         can be interpreted as the elasticity of trade flows with
respect to trade costs. Goods face multiplicative trade costs ijs  1. Trade costs may include a general
iceberg friction, tariffs, and non-tariff barriers: ijs = ijs (1 + tijs )(1 + nijs ). Here ijs  1 are iceberg
trade costs, so  goods must be shipped for one to arrive. Buyers pay bilateral import tariffs tijs  0.
Tariff revenues are lump-sum rebated to domestic consumers. I treat NTBs nijs  0 as comparable to
an iceberg trade cost. Intra-national trade costs equal one: jjs = 1.
   Technology. The unit cost of producing goods is Cobb-Douglas in labor, which is sold at price wi ,
and in intermediate goods from other sectors:

                                                  1-is                  iks
                                           cis = wi                   Pik                                                (7)
                                                                  k

Here is is the labor share and iks is the cost share of industry k to produce output in country i and
industry s.




                                                          20
               Pollution. The pollution emitted to sell goods to a particular destination j is:16

                                                                                Xij 1
                                                                 Zij 1 =                                                              (8)
                                                                           ci1 (1 + tij,1 )

       One could think of cis as the factory-gate price. One country's pollution emissions are Zi =                        j   Zij 1 , and
       global pollution emissions are Z = Z1 + Z2 . Here Xijs is total expenditure on goods produced in origin
       country i, shipped to destination country j , in sector s.17 Sales are deflated by the unit production cost
       cis .
               Trade flows. Consumer utility maximization implies the following international trade flows:
                                                                                     -
                                                                           cis ijs
                                                               Xijs =                     Xjs
                                                                             Pjs
                                                                    = ijs Xjs                                                         (9)

       where ijs  Xijs /Xjs = (cis ijs /Pjs )- denotes the share of country j s expenditure on sector s varieties
       which is sourced from country i , and Xjs =                      i Xijs   is total expenditure on sector s goods in country j .
               Equilibrium. In baseline data and counterfactuals, consumers maximize utility, firms maximize
       profits, and markets clear. Trade is balanced, so each country's revenues equal its expenditures. Global
       GDP is the numeraire, so                  i Yi   = 1, where Yi is a country's factor payments. Market clearing for labor
       is Li =        s Lis ,   where Lis is labor supply, which I assume is inelastic. Total expenditure on goods in a
       country×sector equals the sum of expenditure on final and intermediate goods:

                                                          Xjs = js (Yj + Tj ) +           jsk Rjk                                    (10)
                                                                                      k

       Here Xj = Yj + Tj is total expenditure, which comes from factor payments and from tariff revenues
       Tj =        i,s Xijs tijs /(1 + tijs ).   Tariff revenues are lump-sum redistributed to the representative agent. The
       term Ris represents country×sector revenues, given by Ris =                              j   Xijs /(1 + tijs ).
               Counterfactual Methodology To study counterfactuals, I express each variable in changes from
       baseline levels, sometimes called "exact hat algebra" (Dekle et al. 2008; Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare
       2014). Let a denote a variable from the model in the baseline data and a the value in a counterfactual.
       Define the proportional change in this variable due to counterfactual policy as

                                                                                 a
                                                                           ^
                                                                           a                                                         (11)
                                                                                 a

               Counterfactual Results and Interpretation: Pollution. Equation (9) implies that the change
  16
     Pollution here is isomorphic to the consumption of fossil fuels. While analyzing air and water pollution is more complex
and involves a range of abatement technologies firms can install, because end-of-pipe abatement technologies like carbon control
and sequestration for fossil fuels are not economically viable, knowing the fossil fuels consumed is sufficient to measure the CO2
emitted (Shapiro and Walker 2020).
  17
     The right-hand side of equation (8) has 1 rather than s subscripts because only dirty goods (sector 1) emit pollution.




                                                                            21
in expenditure shares due to a counterfactual trade policy is
                                                                   -
                                                        c
                                                        ^is ^ijs
                                            ^ ijs =
                                                                                                         (12)
                                                          P^js

Similarly, equation (6) implies that the change in country×sector price index is

                                                                          -1/
                                      ^js =
                                      P             ijs (^
                                                         cis ^ijs )-                                     (13)
                                                i

                                                             ^ = Z /Z , then substitute in the definitions
   To derive the change in pollution emissions, I start from Z
of pollution, trade flows, and counterfactual changes, from equations (8), (9), and (11):

                                     ^      ^ ii1 Zii1 + (1 + tij 1 )-1 
                                                                        ^ ij 1 Zij 1
                                ^i = Xi1
                                Z                                                                        (14)
                                     c
                                     ^i1                    Zi

To obtain another useful version of this result, I substitute in the equations for the changes in expenditure
shares and the price index from equations (12) and (13):
                                                                       
                                                  ^ij 1 )-    ij 1
                                   ^       ii1 + (
                              ^i = Xi1 
                              Z
                                                                 1
                                                             1+tij 1
                                                                                                         (15)
                                   c
                                   ^i1
                                               ^     -
                                        ii1 + (ij 1 ) ij 1
                                                                    1
                                                            ii1 + 1+ij
                                                                     tij 1


    The change in emissions due to a counterfactual policy equals the product of two terms: the change
                                    ^ i,1 /c
in real expenditure on dirty goods (X      ^i,1 ) and change in the pollution intensity of expenditure.
   This interpretation is analogous to decomposing pollution into composition and technique effects.
Scale is often part of such decompositions, but here is fixed by choice of the numeraire, at least in terms
of nominal GDP. Equation (8) shows that pollution intensity in revenue terms is normalized to one, so
that one dollar of dirty goods revenues always produces one unit of pollution. Because tariffs create a
wedge between expenditures and revenues, pollution intensity in expenditure terms is less than one.
   In equations (14) and (15), one can separate the change in pollution intensity into two channels that
represent domestic and foreign spending. In equation (14), both appear in the numerator of the term in
brackets--the first term reflects the counterfactual emissions from domestic sales and the second term
reflects the counterfactual emissions from exports. In equation (15), the denominator of the term in
parentheses equals the inverse of the change in the domestic expenditure share for dirty goods (^ -1 ).
                                                                                                         111
This denominator is less than one, so represents a channel by which a counterfactual policy increases
emissions intensity. This reflects the idea that increasing tariffs on dirty goods increases pollution emitted
to produce dirty goods sold domestically, which tends to increase the emissions intensity of expenditure.
The magnitude of this effect grows as the trade elasticity ( ) increases, because this elasticity reflects how
trade flows respond to trade costs, including tariffs.
   In the numerator of the term in parentheses equation (15), the second term reflects emissions for



                                                       22
exports. This term shows that increasing tariffs on dirty goods discourages trade in dirty goods. This
result is intuitive and tends to decrease the emissions intensity of expenditure. This channel also becomes
more important as the trade elasticity becomes larger.
   The change in real spending on dirty goods appears in the first ratio of equations (14) and (15). In
that ratio, the change in expenditure follows directly from the country×sector expenditure equation (10):

                                                  js (Yj + Tj ) +     k   jsk Rjk
                                         ^ js =
                                         X                                                                              (16)
                                                  js (Yj + Tj ) +     k   jsk Rjk

The change in unit costs follows from substituting the price index into the unit cost equations in changes
for each industry, then solving this system of equations:

                                 1     121 112 +(1-122 )111                              1     121 122 +(1-122 )121
  c
  ^11 = [111 + 211 (^211 )- ]-       (1-111 )(1-122 )-112 121   [112 + 212 (^212 )- ]-       (1-111 )(1-122 )-112 121   (17)

The exponents reflect the interdependence of the unit cost and price index in (6) and (7) due to input-
output links.
   Equations (16) and (17) show that the change in real expenditure on dirty goods reflects changes
in spending on dirty final goods, dirty intermediate goods, and the production cost. The first term in
the numerator and denominator of equation (16), js (Yj + Tj ), represents expenditure on dirty final
goods. The change in this expenditure occurs only due to changing tariff revenues. The assumption that
expenditure on final goods is Cobb-Douglas implies that expenditure shares for final goods are fixed. Tariff
revenues are typically a small percent of national income, so quantitatively, this channel may have small
effects on emissions relative to the other channels. The second term in the numerator and denominator
of equation (16),    k   jsk Rjk , represents expenditure on dirty intermediate goods. Input-output links
drive this channel. If all goods are final, this term equals zero.
   Equation (17) represents the change in unit costs. If all goods are final in this model with symmetric
countries, unit costs do not change (^
                                     c11 = 1). The first bracketed term represents the effects of changing
trade policy for dirty goods, and the second bracketed term represents the effects of changing trade policy
for clean goods. If trade policy for clean goods does not change, the second bracketed term in equation
(17) equals one.
   This model allows for pre-existing tariffs and for changes in tariffs on clean and dirty goods. Neither
baseline nor counterfactual tariffs on clean goods change the pollution intensity of expenditure, because
clean good tariffs (t212 ) do not appear directly in equation (15). Baseline and counterfactual tariffs on
clean goods do affect real expenditure on dirty goods by changing tariff revenues and intermediate good
flows in equation (16), and also through changing the prices of clean goods and thus the second bracketed
term in equation (17).
   This model assumes both sectors are traded. Adding a third, non-tradable sector provides similar
results. If the non-traded sector is clean, the main change is in the cost of production (17), which then
accounts for the contribution of non-traded prices to the production cost of dirty goods. If the non-
traded sector is also dirty, then expression for emissions include an extra term reflecting emissions from



                                                           23
       non-tradables.
          Counterfactual Results and Interpretation: Social Welfare. The change in social welfare
                                                                                                      ^j =
       due to a counterfactual equals the product of the change in real income and pollution damages: W
        ^ j /P
       (X    ^j )f (Z ). Substituting in the definition of expenditure and the price index from (13) gives

                                            Yj + Tj                                      js
                                     ^j =
                                     W                      [            cos 
                                                                    ojs (^   ^ojs )- ]        f (Z )            (18)
                                            Yj + Tj     s       o


       If all goods are final, given symmetry and choice of the numeraire, this simplifies to18

                                         Yj + Tj                                          js
                                  ^j =
                                  W                         11s + 21s (^21s )-      s     s       f (Z )        (19)
                                         Yj + Tj    s

       Equations (18) and (19) show that the change in welfare equals the product of three terms. The first
       ratio represents the increase in nominal expenditure, which comes from tariff revenues (Tj ). The second
       term represents the (inverse of the) price index. Increasing tariffs on dirty goods increases the price
       index, decreases this term, and therefore decreases real income, though decreasing tariffs on clean goods
       increases real income.
          The third term represents the change in pollution damages, which can be written independently of the
       functional form of the damages f (·). Knowing the change in global emissions and the functional form of
       pollution damages would be sufficient to calculate the change in pollution damages. One general finding
       is that the magnitude of the damages from climate change tends to be much smaller than the change in
       real income (Shapiro 2016). Hence, for calculating social welfare changes, the first two channels (nominal
       income and the price index) may matter more than the change in emissions.
          I consider counterfactual policies which increase protection for dirty goods but decrease protection for
       clean goods. How do these counterfactuals affect social welfare? Equations (18) and (19) show that the
       sign of how these policy changes affect social welfare is theoretically ambiguous. Even if they decrease
       CO2 emissions, they involve both increases and decreases in protection, so the net effect of these changes
       on the price index and on tariff revenues depends on specific parameters and data.


       VI.C       Quantitative Model
       I now turn to quantify effects of these counterfactuals in a richer model. The quantitative model is
       stylized but incorporates some additional features--many asymmetric countries; many industries; input-
       output links; trade imbalances; multiple dirty (fossil fuel) industries; distinctions between iceberg trade
       costs, non-tariff barriers, and tariffs; and others. Because the model resembles the"structural gravity"
       literature in trade (Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare 2014) and the simpler model of the previous subsection,
  18
    The price index term in brackets from this equation can be rewritten in terms of the change in the share of a country's
expenditure purchased from domestic producers (Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare 2014). I show the formulation in equation (18)
since it is more similar to versions of the price index from the rest of this paper and allows simple interpretation.




                                                                    24
       I describe the model's formal assumptions and counterfactual methodology in Appendix E.19
           I apply the model using data from Exiobase. For computation, I aggregate the data to 10 regions
       and 21 industries, shown in Appendix Tables VI and VII. I assume intra-regional tariffs are zero. Three
       regions comprise the EU: Western, Southern, and Northern Europe.
           I use sector-specific trade elasticities from aggregating studies that estimate these parameters: Caliendo
       and Parro (2015), Shapiro (2016), Bagwell et al. (2018), and Giri et al. (2018). Within a study, I aggre-
       gate multiple estimates for a sector using inverse variance weighting, which minimizes variance (Hartung
       et al. 2008).20 I calibrate the damages from CO2 emissions so that a one-ton increase in CO2 emissions
       decreases global welfare by $40, which corresponds with prevailing estimates of the social costs of CO2
       emissions in 2007 (IWG 2016).


       Choice of Counterfactuals
       I use this model to analyze several counterfactual policies. The main counterfactual changes each country's
       bilateral import tariffs to the country's weighted mean baseline bilateral tariff, and similarly for NTBs,
       with weights equal to baseline trade: tijs = [             s tijs Xijs /(1   + tijs )]/[   s Xijs /(1   + tijs )] i = j . Here tijs
       denotes the baseline tariff rate on goods from origin country i to destination country j and sector s, Xijs
       denotes the tariff-inclusive baseline value of bilateral trade, and tijs denotes the counterfactual tariff.
       The counterfactual makes a similar change for NTBs. Policies resembling this counterfactual could result
       from WTO multilateral negotiations focused on eliminating tariff escalation or from environmentalists
       lobbying for tariff harmonization between clean and dirty industries. In regions like the EU which already
       have a climate change policy, politicians could argue that this kind of reform decreases leakage. Such
       policies might even attract support from dirty industries.
           Appendix E.4 describes several other counterfactuals, including one where only the EU imposes this
       policy change, where protection changes to the level of clean goods, where protection changes to the level
       of dirty goods, where I add a carbon tariff, and where I turn off all trade policy.
           One important question is what channels account for any change in CO2 emissions. I follow the
  19
    One choice not standard in the "structural gravity" literature is the functional form of pollution damages. This does not
matter in the analytical model, as discussed above, but does matter for exact numbers in the quantitative model. I specify
pollution damages as multiplicative with utility from consuming goods:
                                                                        s
                                                                        s -1 js
                                                                 s -1
                                                                                                   -1
                                         Uj =             qijs   s                [1 +  (Z - Z0 )]
                                                s     i

Here Z are global CO2 emissions, Z0 is a reference or baseline level of emissions, and  is a damage parameter chosen so a
one-ton increase in emissions from baseline levels creates a global social welfare cost equal to the social cost of carbon, or $40.
The other terms here are more standard: Uj is the utility of the representative agent in country j , s indexes sectors, qijs is the
quantity of goods produced in country i and consumed in country j from sector s, s is the elasticity of substitution, and js
are Cobb-Douglas expenditure shares. I choose this functional form since it makes it so that a one-ton increase in emissions
decreases global social welfare by $40, which is a central estimate from the climate change literature.
  20
     I take the median estimate across studies since confidence intervals for Giri et al. (2018) are small enough relative to the other
papers that inverse variance weighting across studies implicitly puts disproportionately high weight on that study. Bartelme
et al. (2018) take the median estimates across these studies to estimate trade elasticities.



                                                                        25
environmental economics literature in decomposing the change in CO2 emissions due to a counterfactual
into three terms: the change in real output ("scale"), the change in the share of global output from
each industry ("composition"), and the emissions intensity of each industry ("technique") (Grossman
and Krueger 1993; Copeland and Taylor 2003; Levinson 2009; Shapiro and Walker 2018). Appendix E.3
describes this methodology.
   It is not straightforward to assess the extent to which certain endogenous changes in the model, such
as reallocation of production and transportation, account for the full effect of any counterfactual. I can,
however, provide indirect evidence on the importance of transportation. Most energy used in transporta-
tion comes from petroleum, and most petroleum is used for transportation. Coal is disproportionately
used for the heaviest industries, like electricity generation, cement manufacturing, and steel blast fur-
naces, while natural gas is used for other purposes. Hence, examining the change in emissions from each
fossil fuel provides some insight as to the importance of these channels.


Counterfactuals: Results for Main Counterfactual
Table V, Panel A, analyzes the first counterfactual, in which each country sets the same tariffs and NTBs
on clean and dirty industries. Column (1) shows the percentage change in global CO2 emissions. Column
(2) shows the percentage change in global real income, defined as the weighted sum of country-specific
changes in real income, where the weights are each country's baseline real income. Column (3) shows
the change in CO2 intensity, which equals the change in CO2 minus the change in real income (equal to
column (1) minus column (2)). Column (4) shows the change in social welfare due to climate damages.
Column (5) shows the change in social welfare due to both the gains from trade and climate damages.
Differences in trade elasticities and values mean these counterfactuals can change trade's volume and
benefits even if they don't change mean tariffs or NTBs.
   I find that this counterfactual of harmonizing trade policy between clean and dirty industries would
decrease global CO2 emissions by about 3.6 percentage points but increase global real income by 0.7
percentage points (Table V, row 1). This counterfactual decreases CO2 intensity by 4.2 percentage
points.
   Table V shows that the increase in social welfare due to the decreased CO2 emissions is much smaller
than the increase in social welfare due to the increased real income. The social welfare impact of changing
CO2 emissions in a counterfactual here scales roughly proportionally with the assumed social cost of CO2 .
While I have assumed a social cost of $40 per ton, in line with central values from the prevailing literature,
some studies provide estimates have ranged up to $100 per ton or greater (e.g., from an expert elicitation
in Pindyck (2019), or from Stern (2006)). In general, the gains from trade are orders of magnitude
larger than trade's climate change externality, whether the damages per ton are $40 or $100 (Shapiro
2016). In part, this finding may reflect the fact that prevailing estimates of climate damages assume
a quadratic damage function that is parameterized from the historical experience of modest changes in
climate, and may poorly reflect the costs of large future climate change. A large potential cost is the
uncertain possibility that the climate could increase by more than 5 or even more than 10 degrees Celsius,



                                                     26
which could create catastrophic damages not well measured in prevailing estimates (Weitzman 2009). In
part for these reasons, I emphasize the physical decrease in CO2 emissions more than the monetization
of that decrease, though I show both.
   Table V, Panel B, separates these changes by region, though interpreting it requires care. Because
CO2 mixes uniformly in the atmosphere, climate damages are the same regardless of where CO2 emissions
originate. Additionally, this regional allocation identifies where fossil fuels are extracted. Low protection
on dirty industries in baseline data, as the EU has (Figure V), accelerates fossil fuel production and
consumption in other regions like China and India but decreases it in the EU. Thus, changing prevailing
patterns of trade policy tends to increase emissions in Europe and decrease them elsewhere. The largest
driver of the differences in results across regions in Table V Panel B is the rate of baseline protection on
dirty goods, shown in Figure V.
   Accordingly, the regional allocation in Table V, Panel B, shows that this counterfactual causes the
largest increases in emissions from Europe. The counterfactual causes the largest decreases in emissions
from the Americas and Rest of the World. This counterfactual modestly increases real income in all
regions; that is not predetermined but is driven by differences in trade elasticities and flows across
regions. Some of the region-specific change are large, though within the range of historical experience.
   Panel C separates these effects into scale, composition, and technique, using the methodology de-
scribed in Appendix E.3. The scale effect shows that this counterfactual increases real output by 0.8
percentage points. The composition effect shows that this counterfactual reallocates production across
industries to decrease emissions by about 1.3 percentage points. The technique effect shows that even
holding composition and scale fixed, the (weighted) mean industry carbon intensity falls by about 2.5
percentage points.
   Panel D reports the change by fossil fuel, which helps interpret the composition effect (since only fossil
fuel directly emits CO2 in this analysis). Coal production, which is primarily used for heavy industry,
slightly increases. Oil and gas production each decrease by slightly more. A majority (though not all)
of oil is used for transportation; this suggests that an important channel here for decreasing emissions is
that dirtier goods are produced domestically and require less shipping. The decrease in gas suggests that
decreased production of goods that rely heavily on gas is another important channel.
   The introduction highlighted that using trade policy for environmental goals can produce a range
of responses through changing sourcing countries, transportation, and input choices. This quantitative
analysis suggests that each of these changes accounts for some of the results in this model. Panel B of
Table V shows that this policy increases fossil fuel production from regions that are currently encouraging
trade in dirty goods but decreases it in other regions; Panel D shows that this policy decreases in emissions
from oil (one proxy for the change in emissions from transportation), which accounts for about half the
policy's environmental benefits; and the policy reallocates expenditure across sectors (the composition
effect), which also accounts for an important share of the decrease in emissions.
   One way to benchmark these numbers is to compare against other climate change policies. The
Waxman-Markey bill, which passed the House but not the Senate in 2009, would have created a U.S. cap-




                                                     27
       and-trade market for CO2 . The European Union Emissions Trading System (ETS), a large cap-and-trade
       market for CO2 , is the world's largest climate change policy (excluding China's incipient cap-and-trade
       market). These policies decrease global CO2 emissions by 2.6 percent and 1.1 percent, respectively.21
       By comparison, I calculate that this trade policy counterfactual would decrease global greenhouse gas
       emissions by 3.6 percent, which is moderately more than the ETS. These calculations do compare a global
       trade policy reform against actual unilateral climate change policies, though most climate change policy
       to date has involved individual countries.


       Counterfactuals: Decomposition
       This subsection distinguishes several components of how changing trade policy affects emissions, and
       thereby seeks to provide some insight on why the model generates these results.
          Appendix E.2 describes a decomposition of a counterfactual's effects on emissions through several
       channels--changes in the price of fossil fuels, changes in spending on domestic versus foreign fossil fuels,
       expenditure on fossil fuels as final versus intermediate goods, and other channels. Appendix Figure IV
       shows this decomposition visually, Appendix E.2 shows it mathematically, and Appendix Table IX shows
       it numerically.
          Here I summarize the general patterns. The main counterfactual requires each country to impose the
       same trade policies on different goods, and thus it turns off differences in trade policy between clean and
       dirty goods. While this policy increases relative rates of protection for all energy-intensive goods, it also
       directly decreases international trade in fossil fuels. Domestic supply of fossil fuels does increase, but the
       domestic supply is not enough to offset the decrease in imported fuels.
          As to more detailed channels, increasing protection for energy-intensive goods increases the price of
       fossil fuels, in part because fossil fuel extraction itself uses other energy-intensive goods as an input,
       and the price of other energy-intensive goods rises as well. In addition, this counterfactual policy leads
       to decreases in the share of fossil fuels purchased from international sources. While it also increases
       the share purchased from domestic sources, the value of the fall in international purchasing exceeds the
       value of the rise in domestic production.22 International trade is a small share of natural gas and coal,
       though is more common for oil. This counterfactual also tends to decrease spending on fossil fuels as an
       intermediate good, as it decreases demand for fossil fuels from other energy-intensive goods sectors. The
       change in spending on fossil fuels as a final good has mixed patterns--tariff revenue and factor incomes
  21
     The Waxman-Markey bill would have decreased U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by 17 percent in the year 2020 relative to
2005 levels. The U.S. accounted for 15 percent of global CO2 emissions in 2005. Although the Waxman-Markey bill did not pass,
U.S. emissions were similar in 2014 as in 2005 (Climate Watch 2019). Assuming the Waxman-Markey bill would have decreased
U.S. emissions by 17 percent, it would have decreased global emissions by 2.6 percent (=0.15*0.16). In 2005, the EU emitted
11 percent of global CO2 -equivalent (Climate Watch 2019). Some research estimates that the EU ETS decreased EU emissions
relative to a counterfactual by about 10 percent (Dechezlepretre et al. 2018), which implies that the EU ETS decreased global
emissions by about 1.1 percent.
  22
     The main interesting exception discussed in Appendix E.2 is that India had exorbitant import tariffs on coal in the year
2007 (50 percent), and so this counterfactual actually decreases those tariffs and thus increases trade in coal, and emissions from
coal trade.




                                                                28
both increase total spending (and thus spending on fossil fuels as a final good) in some cases but decrease
it in others, and the net effect is small.
   It may be useful to highlight similarities and differences between the full quantitative model, illustrated
through this decomposition, and the analytical model of Section VI.B. Both models allow a natural
separation of the change in emissions into a change in real expenditure on dirty goods, and a change in
the pollution intensity of that expenditure. In both models, emissions reflect a tradeoff between emissions
for domestic production and exports, where the trade elasticity magnifies that tradeoff. In addition, in
both models, changes in tariff revenues drive changes in nominal expenditure on dirty goods, while input-
output links play an important role in changing the price of dirty goods. One important difference is
that even though the analytical model has input-output links, because it has only two sectors, one clean
and one dirty, there is no distinction between energy-intensive goods like steel which are not fossil fuels
versus relatively cleaner industries like food manufacturing; that distinction is more relevant in the full
quantitative model. In addition, assumptions like symmetry and having two countries allow the analytical
model to provide simpler and more intuitive equations for changes in pollution and other terms; the key
ideas of those equations are still present in the fuller model, but is less direct.
   Appendix E.4 discusses sensitivity analyses, which are shown in Appendix Table VIII, and give qual-
itatively similar results. Appendix E.4 and Appendix Table VIII also show results for the other counter-
factuals, which are generally in line with the results of the main counterfactual.
   The counterfactuals analyzed in the main text and Appendix suggest a few broader conclusions. Trade
policy reforms can have quantitatively meaningful effects on CO2 emissions; it is valuable to assess both
the environmental and traditional costs and benefits of such trade policies; and policymakers concerned
about the environment should consider decreasing protection on clean industries, not merely increasing
protection on dirty industries.



VII        Conclusions
This paper asks a simple but new question: how and why do tariffs and non-tariff barriers (NTBs) differ
between clean and dirty industries? I define an industry's "dirtiness" by the total CO2 emitted to produce
a dollar of output. I find a simple answer: tariff and NTB rates are substantially higher on clean than
on dirty goods. This relationship appears in most countries, in cooperative and non-cooperative trade
policy, and in many years and ways of analyzing the data.
   At a broad level, this paper suggests that trade policy can have important impacts on environmental
outcomes. The implicit subsidy to CO2 in trade policy this paper analyzes, which has not been previously
identified, totals $550 to $800 billion per year. For comparison, all direct global subsidies to fossil fuel
consumption, which are a major focus of political debates involving the U.S., EU, World Bank, and IMF,
together total about $530 billion per year. General equilibrium model-based analyses require strong
assumptions but suggest that if countries imposed similar tariffs and NTBs on clean and dirty industries,
global CO2 emissions would fall, while global real income would largely not change or slightly increase.




                                                      29
The resulting change in global CO2 emissions has similar magnitude to the estimated effects of some of
the world's largest actual or proposed climate change policies.
   I find that trade policy has this subsidy because political economy variables that determine trade
policy are correlated with CO2 emissions. The data show an important role for an industry's upstream
location--the extent to which it sells to other firms versus final consumers. I describe theory and evidence
consistent with the idea that firms lobby for high protection on their own outputs but low protection
on their intermediate inputs. Because industries can be well organized but final consumers generally are
not, countries end up with greater protection on downstream (and clean) goods, and less protection on
upstream (and dirty) goods.
   These conclusions are relevant to policy. Climate change is a classic externality that would be ad-
dressed efficiently with a Pigouvian tax on CO2 emissions. Today, however, a fifth of global output faces
carbon prices, and existing carbon prices are heterogeneous and below typical estimates of the social cost
of carbon emissions. Countries that do implement carbon prices face concerns that they will decrease
the competitiveness of domestic energy-intensive industries and cause "leakage" of dirty production from
regulated to unregulated regions. A common proposal to address these concerns is a tariff that is pro-
portional to the carbon embodied in imported goods, usually called a carbon tariff or carbon border
adjustment. I show that countries are imposing greater protection on clean than on dirty goods, so in-
stead of internationally adopting a carbon tariff, most countries have implicitly created a carbon subsidy
in trade policy. Using trade policy negotiations to decrease this environmental bias of trade policy could
help address climate change. This proposal is particularly relevant in regions like the EU which already
have a domestic carbon price, but which currently have trade policies that may be encouraging leakage
of dirty production to other regions rather than preventing it.
   What is the political feasibility of harmonizing tariffs and NTBs between clean and dirty industries?
The exact reform, of course, influences its political feasibility. For example, if one region implemented
this reform and other regions did not respond with similar reforms, this could increase domestic emissions
of "local" pollutants like particulate matter, even while decreasing global CO2 emissions. Additionally,
increasing tariffs and NTBs on upstream goods could disadvantage developing countries, which may
have a comparative advantage in producing upstream goods, though environmental interest groups and
dirty industries might support such reforms. Because dirty industries are disproportionately upstream,
downstream industries lobbying for low tariffs on their inputs might oppose such reforms. Lobbying from
energy-intensive industries is usually a problem for climate change policy, but for these reforms would
actually increase their feasibility. More generally, climate change and the environment have never been
part of the argument against tariff escalation, and are rarely part of the debate in choosing relative levels
of tariffs and NTBs across industries. This paper suggests that making the environment part of these
policy conversations could produce important benefits.
   University of California, Berkeley, and National Bureau of Economic Research




                                                     30
References
Aichele, R. and G. Felbermayr (2012). Kyoto and the carbon footprint of nations. Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management 63(3), 336­354.

Anderson, K. (1980). The political market for government assistance to australian manufacturing indus-
  tries. Economic Record 56(153), 132­44.

Antr`
    as, P. and D. Chor (2013). Organizing the global value chain. Econometrica , 2127­2204.

Antr`
    as, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012). Measuring the upstreamness of production and
  trade flows. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102(3), 412­416.

Antr`as, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017). The margins of global sourcing: Theory and evidence
  from u.s. firms. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2514­64.

Antr`
    as, P. and R. W. Staiger (2012). Offshoring and the role of trade agreements. American Economic
  Review 102 (7), 3140­3183.

Antweiler, W. (1996). The pollution terms of trade. Economic Systems Research 8 (4), 361­366.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012). New trade models, same old gains? American
  Economic Review 102(1), 94­130.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013). The china syndrome: Local labor market effects of
  import competition in the united states. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121­68.

Bagwell, K., R. W. Staiger, and A. Yurukoglu (2018). Quantitative analysis of multi-party tariff negoti-
  ations.

Balassa, B. (1965). Tariff protection in industrial countries: An evaluation. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 73 (6), 573­594.

Bartelme, D., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2018). Economies of scale and
  industrial policy: A view from trade.

Bento, A. M., L. H. Goulder, M. R. Jacobsen, and R. H. von Haefen (2009). Didistribution and efficiency
  impacts of iincrease us gasoline taxes. American Economic Review 99(3), 667­699.

Bickerdike, C. F. (1907). Review of a. c. pigou's protective and preferential import duties. Economic
  Journal 17, 98­108.

Blanchard, E. J., C. P. Bown, and R. C. Johnson (2016). Global value chains and trade policy. NBER
  Working Paper 21883.

Business Wire (2009). Citac: Obama administration tariffs on chinese tires will hurt u.s. automakers and
  other downstream industries.

Cadot, O., J. de Melo, and M. Olarreaga (2004). Lobbying, counterlobbying, and the structure of tariff
  protection in poor and rich countries. World Bank Economic Review .

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of nafta. Review of Economic
  Studies 82, 1­44.



                                                   31
Caves, R. E. (1976). Economic models of political choice: Canada's tariff structure. Canadian Journal
  of Economics 9 (2), 278­300.

Climate Watch (2019). Historical ghg emissions.

Copeland, B. R. (2000). Trade and environment: policy linkages. Environment and Development Eco-
  nomics 5, 405­432.

Copeland, B. R. and M. S. Taylor (2003). Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence. Princeton
  University Press.

Corden, W. M. (1966). The structure of a tariff system and the effective protective rate. Journal of
  Political Economy 74(3), 221­237.

Cosbey, A., S. Droege, C. Fischer, and C. Munnings (2017). Developing guidance for implementing border
  carbon adjustments: Lessons, cautions, and research needs from the literature. Mimeo, RFF.

Costinot, A. and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2014). Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, Chapter Trade
  Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization, pp. 197­262. North-Holland.

Davis, S. J. and K. Caldeira (2010). Consumption-based accounting of co2 emissions. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences 207(12), 5687­5692.

Dechezlepretre, A., D. Nachtigall, and F. Venmans (2018). The joint impact of the european union
  emissions trading system on carbon emissions and economic performance.

Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2008). Global rebalancing with gravity: Measuring the burden of
  adjustment. IMF Staff Papers 55(3), 511­539.

Diamond, P. A. and J. A. Mirrlees (1971). Optimal taxation and public production i: Production
  efficiency. American Economic Review 61(1), 8­27.

Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. Samuelson (1977). Comparative advantage, trade, and payments in a
  ricardian model with a continuum of goods. American Economic Review 67 (5), 823­839.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica 70(5), 1741­1779.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, B. Neiman, and J. Romalis (2016). Trade and the global recession. American
  Economic Review 106 (11), 3401­38.

Ellison, G., E. L. Glaeser, and W. R. Kerr (2010). What causes industry agglomeration? evidence from
  coagglomeration patterns. American Economic Review 100, 1195­1213.

Fajgelbaum, P., P. Goldberg, P. Kennedy, and A. Khandelwal (2020). The return to protectionism.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Fally, T. (2012). Production staging: Measurement and facts. Mimeo, UC Berkeley.

Fowlie, M., M. Reguant, and S. P. Ryan (2016). Market-based emissions regulation and industry dynamics.
  Journal of Political Economy 124(1), 249­302.

Frankel, J. A. and A. K. Rose (2005). Is trade good or bad for the environment? sorting out the causality.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 87(1), 85­91.



                                                   32
Fredriksson, P. G. (1997). The political economy of pollution taxes in a small open economy. Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management 33, 44­58.

Freund, C. and C       ¨
               ¸ aglar Ozden (2008). Trade policy and loss aversion. American Economic Review 98(4),
  1675­1691.

Gawande, K., P. Krishna, and M. Olarreaga (2012). Lobbying competition over trade policy. International
  Economic Review 53(1), 115­132.

Gibson, G. (2017). Behind the scenes, companies fight trump on u.s. steel tariffs.

Giri, R., K.-M. Yi, and H. Yilmazkuday (2018). Gains from trade: Does sectoral heterogeneity matter?

Golub, S. S. and J. M. Finger (1979). The processing of primary commodities: Effects of developed-
  country tariff escalation and developing-country export taxes. Journal of Political Economy 87 (3),
  559­577.

Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1995). Trade wars and trade talks. Journal of Political Economy 103(4),
  675­708.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1994). Protection for sale. American Economic Review 84 (4),
  833­850.

Grossman, G. M. and A. B. Krueger (1993). The Mexico-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, Chapter Environ-
  mental Impacts of a North American Free Trade Agreement. M.I.T. Press.

Guimbard, H., S. Jean, M. Mimouni, and X. Pichot (2012). Macmap-hs6 2007, an exhaustive and
  consistent measure of applied protection in 2007. International Economics 2(130), 99­121.

Hartung, J., G. Knapp, and B. K. Sinha (2008). Statistical Meta-Analysis With Applications. Wiley.

Hillman, J. (2013). Changing climate for carbon taxes: Who's afraid of the wto? Technical report, Ger-
  man Marshall Fund. http://www.gmfus.org/publications/changing-climate-carbon-taxes-whos-afraid-
  wto.

Horowitz, K. and M. Planting (2006). Concepts and Methods of the U.S. Input-Output Accounts. Bureau
  of Economic Analysis of the U.S. Department of Commerce.

IEA (2007a). Energy balances of non-oecd count2007 2007. Technical report, IEA.

IEA (2007b). Energy balances of oecd countries 2007. Technical report, IEA.

IEA     (2007c).        Key      world    energy    statistics.       Technical       report,     IEA.
  https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/KeyWorld2017.pdf.

IMF (2013).     Energy subsidy reform: Lessons and implications.        Technical report, IMF.
  https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2016/12/31/Energy-Subsidy-Reform-
  Lessons-and-Implications-PP4741.

IWG (2016). Technical support document: technical update of the social cost of carbon for regulatory
  impact analysis under executive order 12866. Technical report, Interagency Working Group on Social
  Cost of Greenhouse Gases, United States Government.



                                                   33
Jacobsen, M. R., C. R. Knittel, J. M. Sallee, and A. A. van Benthem (2019). The use of regression
  statistics to analyze imperfect pricing policies. Journal of Political Economy .

Jacobsen, M. R. and A. A. van Benthem (2015). Vehicle scrappage and gasoline policy. American
  Economic Review 105(3), 1312­38.

Kee, H. L., A. Nicita, and M. Olarreaga (2009). Estimating trade restrictiveness indices. Economic
  Journal 119, 172­199.

Kortum, S. and D. Weisbach (2016). Border adjustments for carbon emissions: Basic concepts and design.
  RFF Discussion Paper 16-09.

Levinson, A. (2009). Technology, international trade, and pollution from us manufacturing. American
  Economic Review 99(5), 2177­2192.

Lyubich, E., J. S. Shapiro, and R. Walker (2018). Regulating mismeasured pollution: Implications of
  firm heterogeneity for environmental policy. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108.

Maggi, G. (2016). Handbook of Commercial Policy, Chapter Issue Linkage, pp. 513­564. Elsevier.

Maggi, G. and A. Rodr´ iguez-Clare (1998). The value of trade agreements in the presence of political
 pressures. Journal of Political Economy 106(3), 574­601.

Maggi, G. and A. Rodr´
                     iguez-Clare (2007). A political-economy theory of trade agreements. American
 Economic Review 97(4), 1374­1406.

Manski, C. F. (1993). Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem. Review of
 Economic Studies 60, 531­542.

Marvel, H. P. and E. J. Ray (1983). The kennedy round: Evidence on the regulation of international
 trade in the united states. American Economic Review 73(1), 190­197.

Marvel, H. P. and E. J. Ray (1987). Intraindustry trade: Sources and effects on protection. Journal of
 Political Economy 95(6), 1278­1291.

Miller, R. E. and P. D. Blair (2009). Input-Output Analysis: Foundation and Extensions. Cambridge
  University Press.

Mullainathan, S. and J. Speiss (2017). Machine learning: An applied econometric approach. Journal of
 Economic Perspectives 31 (2), 87­106.

Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press.

Pauwelyn, J. (2013). Research Handbook on Environment, Health and the WTO, Chapter Carbon leakage
  measures and border tax adjustments under WTO law, pp. 448­506. Edward Elgar.

Pincus, J. J. (1975). Pressure groups and the pattern of tariffs. Journal of Political Economy 83(4),
  757­778.

Pindyck, R. S. (2019). The social cost of carbon revisited. Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management 94, 140­160.




                                                 34
Ray, E. J. (1981). The determinants of tariff and nontariff trade restrictions in the united states. Journal
  of Political Economy 89(1), 105­121.

Rodrik, D. (1995). Handbook of International Economics, Chapter Political Economy of Trade Policy,
  pp. 1457­1494. Elsevier.

Schleich, J. and D. Orden (2000). Environmental quality and industry protection with noncooperative
  versus cooperative domestic and trade policies. Review of International Economics 8(4), 681­697.

Shapiro, J. S. (2016). Trade costs, co2 , and the environment. American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy 8 (4), 220­54.

Shapiro, J. S. and R. Walker (2018). Why is pollution from u.s. manufacturing declining? the roles of
  environmental regulation, productivity, and trade. American Economic Review 108 (12), 3814­54.

Shapiro, J. S. and R. Walker (2020). Is air pollution regulation too stringent?

Stern, N. (2006). The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge University Press.

Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society. Series B 58 (1), 267­288.

Trefler, D. (1993). International factor price differences: Leontief was right! Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 101(6), 961­987.

Weitzman, M. L. (2009). On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate change.
 Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1), 1­19.

World Bank (2018). State and trends of carbon pricing 2018. Technical report.




                                                    35
                                            FIGURE I
                            Upstreamness, CO2 Intensity, and Trade Policy

Panel A: All Global Trade




Panel B: U.S. Only




Notes: Solid line is local linear regression of tariffs plus NTBs on upstreamness. Dashed line is local
linear regression of CO2 intensity on upstreamness. Each observation is an importer×industry (Panel
A) or an industry (Panel B). All lines use Epanechnikov kernel with bandwidth of 0.75.

                                                         36
                                                  FIGURE II
                                 Trade Protection Versus CO 2 Emission Rates

Panel A. Global hypothetical $40/ton carbon                     Panel B. U.S. hypothetical $40/ton carbon
tariff                                                          tariff




Panel C. Actual global tariffs                                  Panel D. Actual U.S. tariffs




Panel E. Actual global non-tariff barriers                      Panel F. Actual U.S. non-tariff barriers




Notes: Panels A and B plot a hypothetical carbon tariff of $40/ton. Each point in global data is an
importer×industry pair; each point in U.S. data is an industry. CO2 rate is total (direct+indirect) emissions
measured from inverting an input-output table. Line is linear trend; in Panels C and E, line is fitted from
regressions including importer fixed effects. Each graph excludes the top 1% of CO2 rates, tariffs, and NTB rate.
Numbers for line slopes correspond to the specifications and values of Tables II and III, column 5. Standard errors
are clustered by industry.



                                                              37
                                             FIGURE III
                   Correlation Between U.S. Import Tariffs and CO2 Emission Rates




Notes: Implicit carbon tax is the coefficient from a regression of import tariffs on CO 2 emission rates,
as in equation (1). Graph shows a separate regression for each year. Emissions intensity is estimated
from 2007 input-output tables and applied to all years. Circles show the coefficient estimates, bars
show robust 95% confidence intervals. Regressions use instrumental variables; total CO 2 is
instrumented with direct CO2.




                                                         38
                                            FIGURE IV
                 Covariance of Trade Protection and CO 2 Emission Rates, by Country




Notes: Implicit carbon tax is the coefficient from a regression of import tariffs plus NTBs (ad valorem
equivalent) on a constant and on total CO 2 emission rate (tons/$), measured from inverting the input-
output matrix, which accounts for both primary fossil fuels used in an industry and emissions embodied
in intermediate goods used in the industry. A separate regression is run for each country. Total CO 2 is
instrumented with the direct CO2 emissions rate from the input-output table, measured in the same
industry but in the ten smallest other countries. Data from year 2007. Graph excludes five Exiobase
countries missing NTB data: Bulgaria, Cyprus, Malta, Slovakia, and Taiwan. Red circles are point
estimates, vertical bars are robust 95% confidence intervals.




                                                        39
                                                  FIGURE V
                          Implicit Carbon Tax on Traded Goods, by Country




Notes: Implicit carbon tax is the coefficient from a regression of import tariffs plus NTBs (ad valorem
equivalent) on CO2 emission rates and a constant, separately for each country. Data correspond to
Figure IV. Graphs include five rest-of-world groups, one per continent.




                                                        40
                                           FIGURE VI
              Political Economy Explanations for CO2 Subsidies Implicit in U.S. Imports




Notes: Each blue circle represents the coefficient on total CO 2 intensity, instrumented by direct CO2
intensity, from a regression of tariffs+NTBs on CO 2 intensity. The red bar depicts the robust 95
percent confidence interval. Each regression includes one additional political economy control,
indicated at the left part of the graph. Regressions are weighted by the value of imports.




                                                         41
                                    TABLE I
           Cleanest and Dirtiest Manufacturing Industries in Global Data
                                          CO2 Rate           Import      Non-Tariff
                                        (Tons/$)×1000      Tariff Rate    Barriers
                                             (1)               (2)          (3)
Panel A. Cleanest industries
  Pork processing                            0.34             0.10          0.37
  Meat products n.e.c.                       0.36             0.10          0.37
  Sugar refining                             0.37             0.20          0.42
  Wood products                              0.37             0.01          0.03
  Motor vehicles                             0.40             0.03          0.05
  Mean of cleanest 5 industries              0.37             0.09          0.25

Panel B. Dirtiest industries
  Bricks, tiles                              1.54             0.02          0.02
  Coke oven products                         1.64             0.01          0.01
  Iron and steel                             1.74             0.01          0.02
  Phosphorus fertilizer                      1.93             0.02          0.11
  Nitrogen fertilizer                        2.53             0.02          0.11
  Mean of dirtiest 5 industries              1.88             0.02          0.05

Notes: CO2 rates are measured in metric tons of CO2 per thousand dollars of output,
calculated by inverting a global multi-region input output region from Exiobase.
Dollars are deflated to real 2016 values using U.S. GDP deflator. Global refers to the
mean value across all countries, weighted by the value of output; industries ordered
based on global emissions; n.e.c. means not elsewhere classified. Import tariffs are
ad valorem and measured in year 2007 CEPII Macmap data. Non-tariff barriers are
ad valorem, from Kee et al. (2009).




                                                        42
                                                     TABLE II
                               Association of Import Tariffs and CO2 Emissions Rates
                                   FS                    RF                   OLS                      IV
                              (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)
Panel A. All global trade (global input-output table)
CO2 rate                   1.38*** 1.54*** -44.69*** -17.19** -28.28*** -4.48                -32.31*** -11.17**
                            (0.09)    (0.08)     (13.24)      (8.16)   (8.42)     (6.17)       (8.41)   (5.40)
N                           2,021     2,021       2,021       2,021    2,021      2,021         2,021    2,021
Dependent Var. Mean         0.001     0.001       0.052       0.028    0.052      0.028         0.052    0.028
K-P F Statistic               --        --          --          --       --         --         228.96   352.59

Panel B: U.S. Imports (U.S. data)
CO2 rate                 1.32*** 1.58***        -7.52*** -10.35*** -4.89*** -3.23***          -5.69*** -6.55***
                          (0.19)  (0.51)         (2.00)    (3.71)   (1.40)   (0.94)            (1.44)   (2.29)
N                           379    379             379      379       379      379               379      379
Dependent Var. Mean        0.001  0.001           0.018    0.016     0.016    0.018             0.018    0.016
K-P F Statistic              --     --              --       --        --       --              50.33    9.77

Weighted                               X                      X                      X                       X


Notes: Table shows regressions of import tariffs on CO 2 rates. Weights are the value of imports. Panel A uses
global Exiobase data; Panel B uses U.S. data. Each observation in Panel A is an importer×industry; each
observation in Panel B is an industry. Panel A includes importer fixed effects. All regressions include a constant.
The endogenous variable is the total CO 2 emissions rate (tons/$) measured from inverting the input-output matrix,
which accounts for both primary fossil fuels used in an industry and emissions embodied in intermediate goods
used in the industry. For Panel A, the instrument is the direct CO 2 emissions rate from the input-output table,,
measured in the same industry but in the 10 smallest other countries. For Panel B, the instrument is the CO 2
emissions rate measured from MECS and CM, which accounts for primary fossil fuels used in an industry and
electricity consumed in the industry. Odd-numbered columns are unweighted, even-numbered columns are
weighted by the value of the trade flow. Emissions rates measured in metric tons of CO2 per dollar of output.
Output is measured in 2016 US$, deflated with the U.S. GDP deflator. FS is first-stage, RF is reduced-form, OLS
is ordinary least squares, IV is instrumental variables. All data from year 2007. Standard errors clustered by
industry are in parentheses. Asterisks denote p-value * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** <0.01.




                                                        43
                                                    TABLE III
                           Association of Non-Tariff Barriers and CO2 Emissions Rates
                              FS                      RF                     OLS                    IV
                         (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)
Panel A. All global trade (global input-output table)
CO2 rate              1.38*** 1.54*** -124.15*** -116.51** -85.58*** -73.22*               -89.78*** -75.67**
                       (0.09)     (0.08)     (40.92)      (43.81)     (24.33) (36.75)       (26.75) (29.38)
N                      2,021       2,021      2,021        2,021       2,021     2,021       2,021     2,021
Dep. Var. Mean         0.001       0.001      0.126        0.088       0.126     0.088       0.126     0.088
K-P F Statistic          --          --         --           --          --        --        228.96   352.59

Panel B. U.S. imports (U.S. data)
CO2 rate             1.32*** 1.58***       -63.34*** -59.13*** -41.04*** -17.98*** -47.96*** -37.41***
                      (0.19)      (0.51)    (16.68)   (20.78)    (7.44)    (4.15)   (10.03) (12.33)
N                       379        379        379       379       379       379       379       379
Dep. Var. Mean         0.001      0.001      0.109     0.079     0.109     0.079     0.109     0.079
K-P F Statistic          --         --         --        --        --        --      50.33      9.77

Weighted                           X                          X                    X                      X


Notes: Table shows regression of NTB rates on CO2 rates. Columns 1 through 4 are weighted by the value of
imports. Panel A uses global Exiobase data; Panel B uses U.S. data. Each observation in Panel A is an
importer×industry; each observation in Panel B is an industry. Panels A includes importer fixed effects. All
regressions include a constant. The endogenous variable is the total CO 2 emissions rate (tons/$) measured from
inverting the input-output matrix, which accounts for both primary fossil fuels used in an industry and emissions
embodied in intermediate goods used in the industry. For Panel A, the instrument is the direct CO2 emissions
rate from the input-output table, measured in the same industry but in the 10 smallest other countries. For Panel
B, the instrument is the CO2 emissions rate measured from MECS and CM, which accounts for primary fossil
fuels used in an industry and electricity consumed in the industry. Odd-numbered columns are unweighted, even-
numbered columns are weighted by the value of the trade flow. Emissions rates measured in metric tons of CO2
per dollar of output. Output is measured in 2016 US$, deflated with the U.S. GDP deflator. FS is first-stage, RF
is reduced-form, OLS is ordinary least squares, IV is instrumental variables. All data from year 2007. The
dependent variable is the ad valorem NTB rate from Kee et al. (2009). Standard errors clustered by industry are
in parentheses. Asterisks denote p-value * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** <0.01.




                                                         44
                                       TABLE IV
         Political Economy Explanations for Implicit Carbon Taxes in Trade Policy
                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Panel A. All global trade
CO2 rate                -120.55*** -32.90 -120.76***-121.42***-120.92***-120.44***
                          (33.73)  (25.60)  (33.17)   (35.50)   (34.12)   (33.62)
N                          1,990    1,990    1,990     1,990     1,990     1,990

Panel B. All global trade, instrument for political economy
CO2 rate                -120.55*** 34.61 -111.66***-125.64*** -101.50** -119.33***
                           (33.73)    (38.88)      (40.04)  (47.61) (43.86) (33.95)
K-P F Statistic               --       43.29        27.20    41.97   10.15   21.05
N                           1,990      1,990        1,990    1,990   1,990   1,990

Panel C. U.S. imports
CO2 rate                -49.72***       2.74    -51.99*** -47.50*** -49.75*** -54.32***
                          (9.90)      (10.19)    (10.54)   (10.32)   (12.19)   (10.45)
N                          358          358        358       358       358       358

Upstreamness                             X
Intra-industry                                       X
Import pen. ratio                                                X
Labor share                                                                 X
Mean wage                                                                               X

Notes: Dependent variable in all regressions is sum of tariffs and NTBs. Each observation is
a country*industry (Panels A and B) or industry (Panel C). In all regressions, the CO 2 rate is
the total CO2 rate (tons/$) from inverting an input-output table, which is instrumented with
the direct CO2 rate. In panel B, political economy variables (upstreamness, intra-industry
share, etc.) are also treated as endogenous. The Panel B regressions use a second instrument
equal to the mean of each political economy variable in the industry of interest across the ten
smallest other countries in the data, measured by gross manufacturing output. Panels A and B
use Exiobase data, panel C uses U.S. data. Panels A and B include country fixed effects. All
regressions include a constant. Standard errors clustered by industry are in parentheses.
Asterisks denote p-value * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** <0.01.




                                                          45
                                                TABLE V
                 Effects of Setting Tariffs and NTBs to Mean, Model-Based Estimates
                                           Change in         Change in CO2
                            Change in CO2 Real Income          Intensity        Climate       Social
                            Emissions (%)     (%)              = (1) - (2)      benefits      welfare
                                 (1)           (2)                 (3)            (4)          (5)
Panel A. Global Total
  Global Total                 -3.59%           0.65%           -4.24%          0.08%         0.57%

Panel B. By region
  Pacific Ocean                33.31%           1.02%          32.29%             --            --
  Western Europe               23.33%           0.90%          22.43%             --            --
  Eastern Europe                0.77%           0.99%           -0.22%            --            --
  Latin America                 -3.36%          0.74%           -4.10%            --            --
  North America                 -3.80%          0.26%           -4.06%            --            --
  China                         0.03%           0.22%           -0.19%            --            --
  Southern Europe              54.67%           0.64%          54.03%             --            --
  Northern Europe              26.96%           1.06%          25.90%             --            --
  Indian Ocean                  -5.15%          0.31%           -5.46%            --            --
  Rest of World                -14.96%          0.93%          -15.89%            --            --

Panel C. Decomposition
  Scale                        0.20%              --              --              --            --
  Composition                  -1.29%             --              --              --            --
  Technique                    -2.50%             --              --              --            --

Panel D. By Fossil fuel
   Coal                         -2.63%             --               --              --            --
   Oil                          -4.65%             --               --              --            --
   Natural gas                  -3.97%             --               --              --            --
Notes: Global change in real income refers to the weighted mean percentage change in countries' real
incomes due to a counterfactual policy, where weights equal each country's baseline income. In all
baseline and counterfactual scenarios, intra-national tariffs and NTBs are assumed to equal zero.




                                                        46
           ONLINE APPENDIX:
THE ENVIRONMENTAL BIAS OF TRADE POLICY
              JOSEPH S. SHAPIRO
             UC Berkeley and NBER
            joseph.shapiro@berkeley.edu




                       A-1
Contents
A Data Details                                                                                                                    3
  A.1 Concordances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    3
  A.2 Global Input-Output Data . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
  A.3 Political Economy Variables . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    7
  A.4 Trade Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  A.5 Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
  A.6 Tariffs On Intermediate Versus Final Goods         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12

B Econometrics                                                                                                                   13

C Implicit Carbon Tariffs: Sensitivity Analyses                                                                                  14
  C.1 Political Economy Causes: Sensitivity Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                             17

D Informal Discussion of Trade Policy Theories                                                                                   18

E Quantitative General Equilibrium Model                                                                                         20
  E.1 Model Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
  E.2 General Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   23
  E.3 Scale, Composition, and Technique Decomposition                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25
  E.4 Other Counterfactual Results . . . . . . . . . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   26




                                            A-2
A      Data Details
For most outcomes, I report separate results using U.S. data, primarily for data quality
reasons--the U.S. provides a second and independent measure of CO2 emissions, provides
greater industry detail (around 350 NAICS 6-digit industries), reports effective and not just
statutory tariff rates, and generally provides higher-quality and better-documented data.
The U.S.-only analysis uses U.S. data for both tariffs and CO2 emissions, and therefore
implicitly assumes that emissions rates in other countries are the same as in the U.S. The
global analysis does not make this assumption. Online Appendix A.5 describes additional
details on data used to measure U.S. CO2 emissions.

A.1      Concordances
The paper uses several concordances across definitions and years of industry and product
codes. As a general guide, raw data on traded goods, tariffs, and NTBs are at the level of
a 6-digit harmonized system (HS) code. Raw U.S. data are at the level of a 6-digit North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code. Exiobase uses industry codes based
on the International Standard Industrial Classification, version 3.1. WIOD also uses its own
industry codes. I use published concordances between these various industry codes. I use
weighted concordance files when possible, i.e., which express the share of an industry's output
in one classification which corresponds to each possible industry in a different classification.
Ultimately, I concord raw data to the industry definition of the relevant analysis (Exiobase,
U.S., or WIOD).
    Concording Exiobase files are fairly straightforward. Exiobase industries were constructed
to closely reflect ISIC industries, so I construct a concordance by matching names between
these two industry classifications.
    Linking U.S. industry codes is more complicated. A few concordances link 2007 NAICS
codes to other industry codes. Some of the U.S. political economy explanations are from
the May 2007 Current Population Survey, which defines industries using 2007 U.S. census
codes (i.e., the codes defined for use in the 2007 U.S. Economic Census, which is distinct
from the decennial population census; these codes differ from NAICS codes). I use Census
Bureau files to link these census industries to 2007 NAICS industries.1 The unionization
coverage data I use as one political economy explanation use industry codes from the 2000
U.S. census, so I use the same concordance file to link these to 2007 NAICS codes. One
sensitivity analysis aggregates the U.S. data to 21 ISIC industries; I link NAICS to ISIC
codes using a Census concordance.2
    Another set of concordances links U.S. industry codes for other years. The 2006 MECS
data are at the level of 2002 NAICS codes, so I also link these to ISIC codes using U.S.
Census Bureau files.3 U.S. input-output tables use an input-output industry classification
  1
     Downloaded from https://www.census.gov/people/io/files/IndustryCrosswalk90-00-02-07-12.xls, visited
8/18/2017.
   2
     Downloaded from https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/concordances/concordances.html, visited
8/8/2017.
   3
     Downloaded from https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/concordances/concordances.html, visited
8/8/2017.




                                                  A-3
which is similar but not identical to NAICS. I use a file that is part of the 2007 input-output
table which contains a concordance between 2007 input-output codes and 2012 NAICS codes.
I concord 2012 NAICS codes to 2007 NAICS codes using a concordance file from the U.S.
Census Bureau which includes industry shares (file EC1200CBDG1). The PAC contributions
data are at the level of 1987 Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC); I link these to NAICS
codes using a concordance from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry database (Becker
et al. 2013). A few datasets report NAICS codes for some observations at 2, 3, 4, or 5 digits;
for these more aggregated values, I construct concordances at this more aggregated level and
then translate industry codes appropriately.

A.2     Global Input-Output Data
I use Exiobase (specifically, version 2.2.2, industry-by-industry, fixed product sales assump-
tion) because it distinguishes 48 countries and 163 industries, about 50 of which are in
manufacturing. Five of the "countries" are actually aggregates that include all countries in
a given region that are not separately identified in the data, such as the aggregate, "Rest
of Asia." Exiobase is supported by the European Union. Other global multi-region input-
output tables, like the World Input-Output Database (WIOD), typically distinguish only
20-60 industries, only 15-20 of which are tradable manufacturing industries.
    Much of the global value chain literature uses the World Input Output Database (WIOD)
and related multi-region input-output tables. I focus on Exiobase, which I believe has not
been used in this literature, since it has far richer industry detail than WIOD and related
datasets. Exiobase is widely used in industrial ecology research (e.g., Tukker et al. 2013;
Moran and Wood 2014; Wood et al. 2015). I report some sensitivity analyses using WIOD
(Timmer et al. 2015).
    Exiobase is built from several primary data sources (Wood et al. 2015). Exiobase com-
bines supply and use output tables for the EU27 via Eurostat, and for 16 other countries that
together cover over 90 percent of global GDP. It measures trade using BACI, which is based
on the UN's Comtrade database, and using the UN's services trade databases. To harmonize
data across countries, Exiobase also uses data from FAO and the European AgroSAM, the
IEA, and other data sources. National fossil fuel use comes from IEA sources, while some
industry detail comes from Pulles et al. (2007). Exiobase uses Euros as its base currency;
I convert Euros to dollars using the mean annual exchange rate from the IMF's Interna-
tional Financial Statistics and deflate to 2016 dollars using the U.S. GDP deflator. The
main Exiobase sample is restricted to observations with non-missing tariffs, NTBs, and CO2
rates.
    Like all global multi-region input-output tables, Exiobase applies statistical algorithms
to harmonize these different datasets. National input-output tables also do this; Horowitz
and Planting (2006) describe the process. The final data must satisfy many accounting
identities; for example, imports must equal exports, subject to trade imbalances; industry-
specific values must add up to national values; the value of intermediate goods plus value
added must equal gross output; etc. Harmonization also expresses all countries in the same
industries and using the same price concepts.
    How does Exiobase compare to other multi-region input-output tables? Several stud-
ies compare Exiobase to WIOD and Eora. These studies find that the numbers in these


                                             A-4
databases are not especially sensitive to the different algorithms used to construct these
tables (Geschke et al. 2014), that consumption-based CO2 accounts (sometimes called a
country's "carbon footprint") or raw materials that each country consumes generally differ
by less than 10-15 percent across these databases (Moran and Wood 2014; Giljum et al. 2019),
and that disaggregation to more industry detail, which is Exiobase's focus, tends to produce
more accurate analysis of CO2 (Steen-Olsen et al. 2014; de Koning et al. 2015). The Global
Trade and Analysis Project (GTAP), which constructs another multi-region input-output
table, is widely used in computable general equilibrium (CGE) analyses in part since it in-
corporates a ready-made CGE model, simplified coding language, online support services,
and hundreds of parameters. GTAP, however, also includes only around 20 manufacturing
industries, and its data construction are less well documented than some other input-output
tables. WIOD is generally seen as having higher data quality, which may be because it
has fewer countries (43 in WIOD versus 190 in Eora), which lets WIOD rely on data from
higher-quality statistics agencies and require less imputation for the additional countries.
Exiobase covers 43 countries plus five rest-of-world aggregates, which is similar to WIOD.
The possibility of measurement error in these data is one reason why I report results from
three separate input-output tables ­ Exiobase, WIOD, and U.S. national data ­ and also ob-
tain completely independent measures of CO2 emissions for use as an instrumental variable
in the U.S. data.
    Comparing the U.S. and Exiobase data is complicated by the fact that U.S. NAICS
industry codes and Exiobase industry codes do not easily concord to each other and require
applying multiple many-to-many concordances. To provide such a comparison while limiting
additional measurement error, I select the 30 Exiobase manufacturing industries that have
a one-to-one or one-to-many mapping to 4- or 6-digit NAICS codes (thus excluding those
with many-to-many links). For these 30 Exiobase industries, I then calculate the mean total
emissions rate from the U.S. data (weighting across 6-digit U.S. NAICS industries within
an Exiobase industry by the value of shipments). In logs, a regression of the U.S. CO2
rate calculated from Exiobase data on this rate calculated from U.S. data gets a regression
coefficient of 1.035 (robust standard error 0.020), with an R-squared of 0.989. In levels,
this regression coefficient is 0.801 (0.210), with an R-squared of 0.56. These are strong
correlations, though for a focused sample; since Exiobase is constructed from national input-
output tables it is perhaps unsurprising that its patterns for the U.S. are similar to those of
the national U.S. input-output table.
    I calculate gross output in Exiobase 2.2 (which does not directly report it) as follows.
Gross output Y equals the sum of intermediate inputs I and factor payments L, where
factor payments are defined to include payments to labor, payments to capital including
profits (i.e., including markups), and taxes:

                                          Y =I +L                                        (A.1)

To measure intermediate inputs I in millions of Euros for each country×industry, I take
the sum across rows (within each column) of the Exiobase Use table. To measure factor
payments per gross output L/Y , I use the Exiobase Factor Inputs table and exclude entries
recording employment in hours per million Euros or in workers per million Euros. I then
calculate L/Y as the sum across rows (within each column) of this table. Finally, simple



                                             A-5
manipulation of (A.1) shows that gross output for each country×industry is

                                                 I
                                          Y =        L
                                                1-   Y

where I and L/Y are calculated from the Use table and Factor Inputs table as described
above.
    Given this measure of gross output, I follow Antr`     as et al. (2012) and Antr`as and Chor
(2018) in calculating upstreamness. In the raw Exiobase input-output table, each row is an
origin country×sector and each column is a destination country×sector. Each entry in this
table is in terms of Euros of inputs per Euro of output (i.e., the table is in coefficient form).
I convert this to Euros by multiplying each entry by the gross output of the destination
country×sector. I calculate total international exports Xij from domestic industry i to
foreign buyers of industry j as the sum of this table across columns (within a row), excluding
columns with the same origin and destination country. I calculate total international imports
Mij from foreign industry i to domestic industry j as the sum of this table across rows (within
a column) which have the same origin and destination country.
    The main results use CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion, which is the best-
measured and accounts for most greenhouse gas emissions. I also report results using other
greenhouse gas emissions. I incorporate two corrections for outliers in the raw data. First,
for each greenhouse gas separately, I replace emissions from nitrogen fertilizer production
with emissions from phosphorus fertilizer emissions from the same country. Second, for the
crude oil extraction industry, I replace non-combustion methane emissions with combustion
methane emissions. In both cases, raw data from Exiobase are outliers and exceed estimates
from other sources. For similar reasons, in regressions including non-manufacturing goods, I
exclude one mining industry with outlier values of emissions rates, "Extraction, liquefaction,
and regasification of other petroleum and gaseous materials," which is distinct from crude
oil or natural gas extraction.
    The quantitative model requires data on CO2 emissions from production of each fossil
fuel in each country. I obtain these data from reports using the International Energy Agency
containing data from the year 2007 (IEA 2009a,b), which list the physical units of each fossil
fuel produced in each country. I convert these into CO2 using standard conversion rates
of physical units of fossil fuel (i.e., tons or terajoules) to metric tons of CO2 from the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA 2014).
    In the sensitivity analysis using WIOD, I measure environmental outcomes using data on
total CO2 emissions. I replace the roughly 5 percent of WIOD country×industry observations
which have missing CO2 values to instead have the mean global CO2 emissions rate for that
industry, multiplied by the country×industry's reported gross output. If a country×industry
reports zero output, I set CO2 emissions for that country×industry also to equal zero. To aid
computation, I replace the roughly 2 percent of country×industry observations that report
zero output to have output 10-7 . Because WIOD does not separately distinguish types of
mining, in the WIOD estimates all mining activities are combined into one sector, and both
electricity generation and transportation are combined into the "other industries" sector.
A few WIOD international flows are negative, primarily representing gross fixed capital
formation and changes in inventories and valuables. In WIOD estimates that aggregate



                                              A-6
over industry categories or countries and use trade values as weights in this aggregation, I
assume these negative flows instead have values of zero. As with Exiobase, I exclude the five
countries missing NTB data (Bulgaria, Cyprus, Malta, Slovak Republic, and Taiwan).
    One adjustment is needed to the data to match the quantitative model outlined below.
Both Exiobase and WIOD report inventory adjustments for each country×sector, which in
some cases are negative. I interpret negative inventory adjustments as output produced in
the prior year, then produced and consumed in the current year. I revise total output and
bilateral intermediate goods trade to reflect this adjustment (Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare
2014 apply a similar adjustment).

A.3      Political Economy Variables
I group the political economy variables into those reflecting the demand for versus supply
of protection. The global data come from Exiobase, but the U.S.-specific data with greater
industry detail come from a range of sources. Optimal tariffs are perhaps the simplest. I
use estimates of the export supply elasticity for the U.S. at the 10 digit harmonized system
code level from Soderbery (2015); the results are qualitatively similar using estimates from
Broda and Weinstein (2006).
    A few variables reflect demand for low protection from customers. Industries may lobby
for low protection on goods they use as inputs. Industries with a large share of intra-industry
trade, i.e., where both exports and imports are common, may have less trade protection since
importers lobby for protection while exporters (who are concerned with retaliation) lobby
against protection. I measure intra-industry trade using the common measure 1 - |x        i -mi |
                                                                                         xi +mi
                                                                                                  ,
where xi and mi represent total exports and imports in industry i (Krugman 1981). These
data come from the Census Bureau's Imports and Exports of Merchandise data series.
    Another set of political economy variables reflects an industry's demand for protection on
its own goods. Declining or "sunset" industries may obtain more government support since
sunk costs prevent entry and incentivize incumbents to lobby to protect remaining rents.
I calculate the change in the value of shipments for each industry between the years 1977
and 2007, adjusted by industry-specific output deflators, using data from the NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database. Industries more exposed to foreign trade have more to
gain from protection. I measure the import penetration ratio as log of the total imports
divided by the value of shipments, in levels for the year 2007 and as a trend over the
period 2002-2007, using data from the NBER-CES database for gross output and Imports of
Merchandise for imports. Industries with more workers have more stakeholders potentially
benefiting from protection; I calculate each industry's labor share as total workers divided by
the value of shipments, using data from the NBER-CES database. Industries with a large
share of low skill or low wage workers may obtain protection as a tool for redistribution,
either out of general concern for equity or as an alternative to other transfers. I measure
mean wages and the share of workers with some college education, using data from the May
2007 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS-ASEC).4
   4
     A worker's industry is defined from her current job for employed workers, or the most recent job for
workers who are unemployed or not in the labor force. I measure the share of workers with at least some
college education. For wages, I measure the hourly wage for the Outgoing Rotation Group if it is reported.




                                                   A-7
    One additional variable measures the "local" air pollution for each industry. I combine
the six major air pollutants that the Clean Air Act targets and that are typically mea-
sured: carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx ), particulate matter smaller than 2.5
micrometers (PM2.5 ), particulate matter smaller than 10 micrometers (PM10 ), sulfur dioxide
(SO2 ), and volatile organic compounds (VOC). I measure emissions of each pollutant from
the year 2008 data of the National Emissions Inventory (NEI), a national dataset created by
the Environmental Protection Agency that measures the tons of pollution emitted from each
plant or other source. The costs of these emissions vary over space and across pollutants.
To provide a scalar measure of these costs, I use a measure of the marginal damage for each
pollutant in each U.S. county, from Muller and Mendelsohn (2012). These damages reflect
leading estimates of how air pollution affects health, agriculture, amenities, etc. For each
industry, I calculate the damage rate as emissions per industry×pollutant×county times
damages per pollutant×county, summed across counties and pollutants, and divided by the
industry's revenues.
    A separate set of variables reflects the cost of organizing an industry to lobby for pro-
tection, i.e., the supply of protection. A challenge in lobbying is overcoming the free-riding
problem within each industry to pay for the costs of lobbying (Olson 1965). Concentrated
industries or industries with a few larger firms can better overcome the challenge. I measure
industry concentration as the share of an industry's output accounted for by the four largest
firms, using data from the Economic Census (specifically, the Census of Manufacturers).
I calculate mean firm size as the total value of shipments for the industry divided by the
total number of establishments in the industry, also using data from the Economic Census.
Using the same data, I calculate the standard deviation of firm size (Bombardini 2008).
Since capital intensity tends to increase concentration, and is also a primary determinant
of comparative advantage and U.S. imports, I also measure the capital share as the value
of the capital stock divided by gross output, using the NBER-CES database. High trans-
port costs and geographic dispersion make an industry less geographically or economically
concentrated, so more difficult to organize. I measure shipping costs per dollar×kilometer,
using data from the U.S. Imports of Merchandise series and CEPII's measure of geographic
distance between countries. I measure geographic dispersion as entropy across states, using
data from County Business Patterns.5 Disadvantaged industries, including those with a high
share of workers who are unemployed, may have greater incentive to lobby since their oppor-
tunity cost of doing so is lower. I measure unemployment rates of workers where industry is
defined according to the current or most recent industry worked, using data from the May
2007 CPS. Unions provide an organized association to lobby for protection, so I measure
unionization rates using processed values from the May 2007 CPS (Hirsch and MacPherson
Otherwise I calculate hourly wages as total wage and salary income for the previous calendar year, divided
by the product of weeks worked last year and usual hours worked per week last year. I calculate wages
using the individual (earnings) survey weights, and calculate education using the standard individual survey
weights.
    5
      Formally, the analysis defines geographic dispersion as j yij lnyij , where yij  Yij /Yi , and where Yij is
output of state j and Yi is total output. In County Business Patterns, each observation lists total employment
in a given state×industry. Some values are suppressed due to confidentiality, but identified as falling in one
of twelve employment size bins (1 to 19; 20 to 99; etc.). I impute these values as the midpoint of each bin,
and impute the top bin (>100,000) as 125,000.




                                                      A-8
2003). I also use one direct though incomplete measure of lobbying on contributions to
Political Action Committees (PACs), using data from the Center for Responsive Politics.
   Upstreamness turns out to be the most relevant of these variables. Formally, for a closed
economy with S industries, upstreamness is U = [I - dij Yj /Yi ]-1 1. Here, U is an S × 1 column
vector where each entry is the upstreamness value for one industry, I is the S × S identity
matrix, dij is the input-output coefficient (i.e., the dollars of sector i goods needed to produce
a dollar of industry j goods), Yi is the output of industry i, and 1 is a vector of ones. The
term dij Yj /Yi represents an S × S matrix where each entry equals the share of output from
industry i that industry j purchases. Antr`   as et al. (2012) show that this measure, originally
from Fally (2012), is analytically equivalent to the upstreamness measure described in Antr`    as
and Chor (2013). Versions of these definitions for global multi-region input-output tables
are similar, though each observation is an industry×country rather than just an industry
(Antr`as and Chor 2018).
   For the U.S. data, I measure upstreamness using the 2007 U.S. input-output table after
redefinitions. Appendix Figure II, Panel D, plots upstreamness separately for all global
production and for U.S. production. In all these graphs, the most upstream industries
are on the left and the most downstream industries are on the right. The full measure of
upstreamness in Panel D ranges from 5 (most upstream) to 1 (most downstream)

A.4     Trade Policy
Most of the trade policy data are straightforward. The NTB values exclude five countries
that are in Exiobase but that I hence exclude from much of the analysis: Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Malta, Slovakia, and Taiwan. In cases where tariff data are missing for Luxembourg, I
replace them with tariffs for Belgium. I interpret NTBs as applying to all international
trade, including between EU countries (Chen and Novy 2012). The country-by-country map
in Figure V shows values for many individual countries that are part of regional aggregates
like "Rest of Europe" or "Rest of Asia"
    The NTB data have some limitations. Unlike tariffs, they are the result of calculations
and are not raw data. At the same time, they are widely used in research on trade policy
(Irwin 2010; Lim~  ao and Tovar 2011; Novy 2013; Handley 2014); Bagwell and Staiger (2011,
p. 1250) describe them as "the best [NTB] measures that are available." These data differ
by importer and 6-digit HS code, though not by importer-exporter pair.
    The time coverage of the NTB data precedes recent policy changes. Between 2009 and
2016, temporary trade barriers including anti-dumping policies, countervailing duties, and
safeguards increased on high income economies' intermediate goods imports from China.
These patterns have been less pronounced for final goods trade with China, trade with
other countries, or emerging economies (Bown 2018). The U.S. has also increased tariffs in
its 2018-2019 trade war on a wide range of goods--initially on intermediate goods, though
eventually covering much trade with China. I report some results analyzing these recent
changes in tariffs.
    I do not use data on other trade policy instruments since they are not readily available
for all countries, though Bond et al. (2019) find some evidence of links between upstreamness
and protection using data on export tax equivalents of China's value added tax rebates.
    The U.S. tariff data are reported at the level of a 10-digit Harmonized System (HS) code,


                                               A-9
and I use a version linked to six-digit North American Industrial Classification System codes
(NAICS; see Schott 2008). I calculate U.S. effective import tariff rates as the total duty
collected, divided by the cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) value of trade.
    One sensitivity analysis compares cooperative and non-cooperative tariffs for the U.S.,
China, and Japan. The U.S. applies non-cooperative tariffs to Cuba and North Korea. China
applies non-cooperative tariffs to Andorra, the Bahamas, Bermuda, Bhutan, the British
Virgin Islands, the British Cayman Islands, French Guiana, Palestinian Territory (West Bank
and Gaza), Gibraltar, Monserrat, Nauru, Aruba, New Caledonia, Norfolk Island, Palau,
Timor-Leste, San Marino, the Seychelles, Western Sahara, and Turks and Caicos Islands.
Japanese non-cooperative tariffs apply to Andorra, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Lebanon,
North Korea, and Timor-Leste (Ossa 2014).
    Appendix Figure II, Panel A, plots the density of tariffs, excluding the top 1% for visual
clarity. The mean global tariff is three to five percent, while the 99th percentile globally
is sixty percent. U.S. import tariffs are lower, with mean and median around two percent
and the 99th percentile at nearly fifteen percent. Appendix Figure II, Panel B, plots the
density of NTBs. For all global trade, tariffs and NTBs have somewhat similar values; for
U.S. imports, average NTBs exceed average tariffs.

A.5     Emissions
Most emissions data are described in the main text. All tons in this paper refer to metric tons.
All discussion of CO2 refers to CO2 from fossil fuel combustion, which is best measured and
accounts for a large majority of CO2 emissions, except one sensitivity analysis that includes
CO2 from process emissions and other greenhouse gases (methane and nitrous oxides).
    CO2 accounts for roughly 76 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions, methane (CH4 )
accounts for 16 percent, nitrous oxide (N2 O) for 6 percent, and fluorinated gases like hy-
drofluorocarbons (HFCs) for 2 percent (IPCC 2014). CO2 accounts for 82 percent of U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions (USEPA 2019). Methane is emitted from extraction, transporta-
tion, and processing of coal, oil, and natural gas, in addition to coming from agriculture
and landfills. Researchers have a general consensus on the magnitude of CO2 emissions, but
are still debating and improving measurement of methane emissions, particularly from fossil
fuels (e.g., Alvarez et al. 2018).
    For analyses of the U.S. only, the paper uses four other CO2 datasets. One is the U.S. de-
tailed benchmark input-output table after redefinitions for 2007, produced by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis. For this purpose, I use the industry-by-industry total requirements table.
The second data source is the U.S. Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey (MECS),
which reports physical quantities of fossil fuels combusted for a large sample of manufactur-
ing plants in the year 2006. (MECS is only conducted every few years.) The third dataset
is the Census of Manufactures (CM), which reports expenditure on electricity and on total
fossil fuels for each 6-digit NAICS industry in the year 2007. Because MECS is a sample of
only 10,000 plants, I use MECS to measure each industry's tons of CO2 emissions per dollar
of fossil fuel expenditure, and multiply this by the CM data on each industry's total fossil
fuel expenditure. The fourth is U.S. emissions coefficients reporting mean national tons of
CO2 emitted per dollar of coal, oil, and natural gas input, obtained from the U.S. Energy
Information Agency and Environmental Protection Agency.


                                             A-10
     For the analysis of the U.S. input-output table, I measure price per BTU produced of
each fossil fuel (coal, crude oil, and natural gas) from the Energy Information Agency's
year 2016 Annual Energy Review, and I measure metric tons of CO2 per BTU using EPA
emissions factors.6 Analysis of the U.S. data excludes observations with missing emissions
or trade policy data.
     I use the publicly available version of MECS. In measuring energy consumption as fuel in
trillion BTU, I assume that suppressed values less than 0.5 (denoted with an asterisk) equal
zero. For withheld cells (denoted by Q or W), I impute the value as manufacturing's overall
share of BTU from a fuel, multiplied by the industry's total BTUs.
     As the main text notes, the U.S. analysis uses U.S. data for both tariffs and CO2 emis-
sions. This approach relying on the U.S. data is similar to how the Waxman-Markey bill,
which passed the U.S. House but not the Senate in 2009, and other U.S. CO2 cap-and-trade
proposals would measure CO2 emissions for border tax adjustments. Some also argue that
measuring CO2 emissions for a carbon border adjustment from domestic emission rates rather
than from the CO2 content of imports would have a stronger legal basis at the WTO (Staiger
2018). At the same time, this strong assumption of the U.S.-only analysis is important to
bear in mind.
     The paper's main approach to measuring total emissions involves inverting an input-
output table. The diagonal of an input-output table, which generally has the largest values
in an input-output table, describes outputs from an industry that are used to produce output
in the same industry. This implies that fossil fuels which are used to produce fossil fuels
(e.g., oil used to power a drill that is used to extract oil) are captured in this approach since
they appear on the diagonal of the input-output table.
     Appendix Figure II, Panel C, plots the density of these total CO2 emission rates, sepa-
rately for all global trade and for all U.S. imports. For U.S. and global trade, the median
CO2 emission rate is 0.5 to 1.0 tons CO2 per thousand dollars of output. Emissions rates for
the U.S. have a longer right tail since the U.S. data have more industry detail.
     Measuring CO2 emissions from an input-output table can involve several pitfalls. One
pitfall is that using the average national price of a fossil fuel assumes that all industries
face this price. Input-output tables measure expenditures in currency (e.g., dollar) terms,
while CO2 emissions are in physical quantities (metric tons of CO2 ). The data on CO2
emissions use the mean national price of each fossil fuel (e.g., dollars per ton of coal) to
translate from currency to quantities. Emission rates (e.g., tons of CO2 emitted per ton of
coal) are then used to translate from quantities of fossil fuels to quantities of CO2 . Bulk
discounts, transportation costs, market power, and other forces can make fossil fuel prices
differ across industries. Another potential pitfall is that one fossil fuel can vary in its CO2
intensity--different varieties of coal, for example, have modestly different CO2 emitted per
ton of coal. Additionally, some fossil fuels are physically transformed into products ("feed-
stocks"), rather than being burned, such as crude oil transformed into plastic. Moreover,
input-output tables abstract from heterogeneity within a country×industry--large firms, or
firms that export to specific destinations, can have different emissions than the average firm
(Lyubich et al. 2018).
  6
    Data          from           https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-03/documents/emission-
factors mar 2018 0.pdf, visited 11/19/2019.




                                                 A-11
    I address these pitfalls in a few ways. I address heterogeneity in fossil fuel prices and CO2
rates in part by constructing instrumental variables for CO2 rates, described below. I address
feedstocks by using measures of CO2 intensity from Exiobase that exclude fossil fuels used
for feedstocks. I abstract from heterogeneity in emission rates within a country×industry.
    I am not aware of approaches besides the use of input-output tables that can measure
emission rates from all industries and countries, and particularly to account for emissions
embodied in intermediate goods. National surveys of firms can measure emission rates
directly; as described below, I use one such survey for the U.S., and it does not substantially
change estimates. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) describes two
other approaches to measuring CO2 --"Tier 2" uses country-specific data on emission factors
and other variables, and "Tier 3" uses country-specific specialized engineering models and
location specific data that are tailored to national circumstances. Because it is country-
specific, Tier 3 is difficult to use for comparisons across all countries and industries, and I
am not aware of data for all countries and industries using the Tier 2 approach.
    An example may clarify what this approach does and does not measure. The emission
rate for the vehicle manufacturing industry includes the coal, oil, and natural gas burned
to produce the steel, rubber, engine, and assembly of the vehicle, and transportation of the
components between the respective manufacturing plants. The emissions rate for vehicle
manufacturing does not account for combustion of goods like gasoline that are complements
or substitutes for manufactured vehicles. I report sensitivity analyses which adjust the
emission rate for energy-consuming durable goods like cars to account for the energy services
used to operate them.

A.6     Tariffs On Intermediate Versus Final Goods
I discuss one exercise that may both provide insight on data quality and a public good for
research. Some research defines tariffs on intermediate and final goods based on a United
Nations Broad Economic Codes (BEC) classification of roughly a dozen broad industry
codes into materials, intermediate inputs, and consumer goods (Mishra and Spilimbergo
2011; Amiti et al. 2014; Brandt et al. 2017).
    The data in this paper allow an alternative approach. For each source country in Ex-
iobase, I define the third of industries that are most upstream as "intermediate goods" and
the third of industries that are least upstream as "final goods." For each destination country
(importer), I then calculate the mean tariff on "intermediate goods" and the mean tariff
on "final goods." I separately calculate weighted and unweighted averages. An advantage
of this approach is that it defines intermediate and final good tariffs based on input-output
links between industries, rather than on written industry titles. In case these data are useful
for other research, I have posted them, along with the associated BEC averages, online at
http://joseph-s-shapiro.com/data.html.
    My and the BEC definitions obtain similar mean tariffs--mean weighted tariffs for in-
termediate goods are 2.3 and 2.6 percent in my and the BEC measures, respectively; and
tariffs for final goods are 6.5 and 6.3 percent. My measure has more dispersion ­ tariffs
have a standard deviation of 8.8 versus 7.0 percent ­ in part since Exiobase allows more
detailed industry codes than the BEC, and since the set of which industries are upstream
varies slightly across countries in my approach but not in the BEC classification. In a dataset


                                              A-12
where each observation is an importer×industry (with two industries, "intermediate" and
"final"), a regression of my tariff measure on the BEC measure and a constant obtains a
regression coefficient of 0.75 (robust standard error 0.11) in levels or 1.28 (0.11) in logs.


B      Econometrics
In equation (1) from the main text, trade policy t is the dependent variable and the emissions
rate E is the independent variable, for three reasons: this fits with the theoretical interpre-
tation that an industry's emissions rate is correlated with other political determinants of
trade policy; this allows empirical tests of whether the coefficient  represents correlation of
CO2 with omitted political economy variables that determine trade policy; and this allows
the coefficient  to be interpreted as the implicit carbon tariff.
    Alternatively, one could consider the reverse regression of the emissions rate E on the
level of trade policy t. I also show some results using this reverse regression. Trade policy
could potentially affect emissions intensities, either through changing import shares (e.g.,
affecting emissions embodied in intermediate goods) or through affecting productivity (via
reallocation, entry, etc.). Some evidence for individual country liberalization episodes sug-
gests that trade liberalization affects plant-level emissions of air or climate change pollution
(Martin 2011; Cherniwchan 2017), though I am not aware of any direct evidence on how trade
policy systematically affects emissions rates of global bilateral trade flows, which would an
interesting subject for for future research.
    The instrument is only designed to address attenuation bias due to measurement error.
Omitted variables and reverse causality are not problems here because this descriptive anal-
ysis estimates the covariance of CO2 intensity and trade policy within each country, not a
causal effect of CO2 intensity.7 First-stage regressions and the associated F statistics can
test whether this instrument is strong. Because direct emissions constitute a large part of
total emissions, this instrument is likely to be strong.
    Because this instrument is designed to address measurement error, the main question for
validity is whether any measurement error in direct and total emissions is independent. If
so, then this instrument can eliminate attenuation bias due to measurement error. If not,
then the IV estimates may be biased towards the OLS (i.e., the IV estimates will still suffer
from attenuation bias, though less than OLS).
    For the U.S. data, this instrument may help correct measurement error since the instru-
ment is built from a separate dataset, MECS, which measures physical fossil fuel consumption
separately by industry. Documentation of U.S. input-output tables does not mention MECS
(Horowitz and Planting 2006).
    In the global data, the instrument still may help address potential measurement error,
but because direct and total emissions are measured from the same dataset, the instrument's
validity is not certain. Many countries' industrial surveys collect plant-level data on electric-
   7
    Since trade policy can change trade volumes, one might wonder whether reverse causality affects the
weights Xijst used to calculate Ejs . This is not a primary concern here for two reasons. First, this does not
change the descriptive interpretation of  in equation (1) as the association between trade policy and CO2
intensity. Second, I report some results at the i × j × s level, which do not require averaging over trading
partners.




                                                    A-13
ity and fossil fuel expenditures, which suggests that input-output tables may measure direct
emissions with limited measurement error. Usually, these surveys just ask about total ex-
penditures on "materials" without disaggregating by sourcing industry, which suggests they
may less accurately measure total emissions. Additionally, energy is typically purchased
from a limited number of suppliers (in some countries, state-owned firms), and many coun-
tries survey these suppliers. At the same time, the instrument in the global data may not
completely eliminate measurement error.
    In some settings, using instrumental variables that completely and certainly satisfy the
exclusion restriction is central to a paper's arguments. This is not the case here, and my
interpretation is that the U.S. instrument is more likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction
than the global instrument is. In part the instruments are not critical here because they are
solely designed to address measurement error, which is a possible but not a central concern
in input-output data. Little if any prior research constructs instruments for an input-output
table exclusively out of concern for measurement error. Moreover, in either the global or
U.S. analysis, the qualitative conclusions from OLS are similar to those of IV estimates. The
main conclusion from this analysis is that measurement error, if anything, means that the
true global subsidies in trade policy could even be somewhat larger in absolute value than
the large subsidies I estimate.
    In equation (1), the destination country fixed effect µj implies that this regression com-
pares trade policy across industries within a country. The thought experiment is a country
applying similar trade policy on dirty and clean goods. This counterfactual fits the political
economy of choosing trade policy, which is made by national authorities. I also show sensi-
tivity analyses without these fixed effects. The idiosyncratic error contains all unmodeled
determinants of import tariff rates.
    Equation (1) does not estimate a causal effect of CO2 intensity on tariffs. Rather, it is a
descriptive regression showing the covariance of carbon intensity and trade policy within each
country, and so recovers the carbon tariff implicit in trade policy. As discussed earlier, Section
5 develops the interpretation that underlying political economy forces determine tariffs as
a function of variables that are omitted from equation (1); these forces are correlated with
CO2 intensity.
    Limiting the main analysis to manufacturing makes the global and U.S. data consistent,
since the U.S. MECS data are only available for manufacturing, and is consistent with much
of the trade literature. The measure of total CO2 intensity in all these analysis accounts for
emissions embodied in intermediate goods from all sectors, not just manufacturing. I report
sensitivity analyses that also include other tradable goods (agriculture and mining).


C     Implicit Carbon Tariffs: Sensitivity Analyses
Appendix Table I reports numerous other estimates of the implicit CO2 subsidies. Row 1
repeats the main estimates from Tables 2 and 3. Row 2 reports marginal effects from a tobit,
since some industries have zero tariffs or NTBs. Row 3 reports an instrumental variables
tobit where direct CO2 intensity is the instrument for total CO2 intensity. Row 4 clusters
standard errors by the importing country.
    Rows 5-7 report estimates that allow for nonlinear effects of CO2 . Row 5 estimates the



                                              A-14
dependent and independent variable in logs, and so estimates an elasticity. This specification
excludes observations with zero tariff or NTB. Row 6 specifies the CO2 rate as a quadratic
polynomial, and reports estimates of the slope t/E at the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile
of the distribution of CO2 values. Row 7 estimates a nonparametric regression (a third-order
B-spline) and reports the average marginal effect.
    Rows 8-15 report other ways of cleaning and aggregating data. Row 8 replaces the
bottom and top percent of the dependent and independent variables as equal to the 1st and
99th percentile values. Row 9 includes non-manufactured goods (agriculture and mining),
alongside the manufactured goods analyzed in most of the paper. Row 10 uses a dataset
defined at the level of a bilateral trading pair and industry (i×j×s rather than j×s). Row
11 uses the same approach but adds exporter fixed effects.8 Row 12 aggregates to one
industry per observation. Row 13 includes intra-national trade (i = j ) in the measurement
of emissions rates, with an intra-national tariff and NTB rate of zero.
    Rows 14-16 use other measures of emissions. Row 14 considers only direct emissions,
measured from the input-output table. Row 15 includes both the direct and total emissions,
both measured from the input-output table. Row 16 uses data on all greenhouse gases and
sources in Exiobase, including nitrous oxide (N2 O), methane (CH4 ), and emissions of each
greenhouse gas from non-combustion processes.
    Rows 17-19 consider other ways of measuring the emissions rate of energy-consuming
durable goods. The baseline regressions ignore emissions from goods that are complements
or substitutes with the focal good. For example, changing tariffs on cereal might change
consumption of milk, but the energy intensity of cereal in this analysis does not account
for the energy intensity of milk. While estimating a flexible demand system of many cross-
elasticities across goods in the global economy is beyond the scope of this paper, measuring
emissions from consumption is potentially most important for durable goods that require
energy to operate, including transportation goods like cars and appliances like air condi-
tioners.9 For these goods especially, abstracting from the energy that is complementary to
consuming these goods provides an incomplete picture of the emissions due to trading these
goods. This is relevant because energy-consuming durables are relatively downstream and
are relatively clean according to the approach of this paper.
    Rows 17-19 take two approaches for energy-consuming durables. Row 17 excludes energy-
consuming durable household goods from the analysis, including machinery and equipment
not elsewhere classified (a category including appliances), motor vehicles, trailers, semi-
trailers, and other transport equipment. Row 18 assumes that the emissions rate for these
durable goods is an unweighted average of the emission rate for these durable goods and the
emission rate for energy in the importing country. Row 19 assumes that the emission rates
   8
     One alternative candidate explanation for tariff escalation is that countries offer preferential market
access to developing countries, which specialize in upstream goods. Under this explanation, controlling for
exporter fixed effects would attenuate both tariff escalation and implicit tariffs. The estimates of row 11,
which include these fixed effects, are actually larger in absolute value than the estimates of row 10, which
do not use these fixed effects, which could suggest that this candidate explanation is not the predominant
driver of tariff escalation or of the environmental bias of trade policy.
   9
     The question of how to account for emissions from consumption versus production of international
services trade, such as international airplane flights, is also important. Because tariffs do not apply to trade
in services, and because the Kee et al. (2009) data I use on NTBs cover goods and not services, I leave the
analysis of NTBs involving services and the environment to future research.



                                                     A-15
for these goods is a weighted average of the emission rate for these goods and for energy in
the importing country, with weights of 5 percent and 95 percent, respectively. The emission
rate for energy averages over petroleum refining, natural gas extraction, and all forms of
electricity production, where weights equal the gross output of each industry in the importing
country. These different weighting schemes reflect evidence on the importance of emissions
from manufacturing versus operation for these goods (Union of Concerned Scientists 2013;
Nahlik et al. 2015; Amienyo et al. 2016).
     Rows 20 through 25 show other sensitivity analyses. Row 20 shows the reverse regression
of emissions rates E on trade policy t. Row 21 replaces the usual tariff measure on goods,
dt, with a life cycle measure (I - A)-1 dt. This accounts for tariffs on inputs, and inputs to
inputs, etc. Row 22 estimates the regression without importer fixed effects. Row 23 uses
data from the World Input Output Dataset (WIOD). Row 24 adds industry fixed effects.
Row 25 excludes manufactured agricultural goods and manufactured food products.
     Most results in Appendix Table I are similar to the main estimates, though some vary in
their magnitudes. I highlight some of the more important differences here. Tobit estimates
obtain larger estimates of implicit subsidies for NTBs but not tariffs, since more observa-
tions have zero NTBs. The estimates that allow for nonlinearity in CO2 rates generally find
negative slope, though the magnitude differs across the support of CO2 rates--the quadratic
estimates in row 6, for example, imply a wide range of estimated global subsidies, while
nonparametric estimates in row 7 imply a global subsidy of about $100/ton. Incorporating
intra-national trade (row 13) modestly increases the weighted but decreases the unweighted
estimates in absolute value. Direct emissions have a similar association with trade policy
as total emissions do; when a regression includes both, the coefficient on total emissions
accounts for more of the total subsidy, though neither estimate is precise, perhaps in part
due to multicollinearity. Excluding energy-consuming durable goods from the analysis or
adjusting emission rates of these goods to account for energy used in their consumption does
not substantially change the estimated subsidy in absolute value. The reverse regression has
smaller coefficients since it reverses the dependent and independent variables. The WIOD
data still imply subsidies but are imprecise, partly because they only have 15 tradable man-
ufacturing industries. Adding industry fixed effects nearly eliminates the implicit subsidy.
This is perhaps unsurprising since industry-level estimates in row 12 are similar to baseline
estimates in row 1, though this does suggest that whatever economic forces create these sub-
sidies operate at the industry level and are similar within an industry and across countries.
Excluding agricultural and food manufactured products produces smaller estimates of the
implicit subsidies.
     Appendix Table I, rows 26-27, focus on the recent trade war by analyzing U.S. import
tariffs at the end of 2018. Row 26 estimates the implicit subsidy for U.S. import tariffs
using tariff data from 2017, as in Figure II. Row 27 augments these data with the sum
of five rounds of tariffs imposed in 2018, which targeted washers, solar panels, aluminum,
and Chinese imports. I measure these tariffs using data from Fajgelbaum et al. (2020).
Unweighted estimates show a modest decrease in trade policy's environmental bias, of nearly
a dollar a ton, while weighted estimates show a smaller increase. These estimates are mixed
because while much attention focused on dirty goods like aluminum or steel, the most CO2 -
intensive goods like refined petroleum and cement did not experience tariff changes in this
time period. Some goods with larger increases in tariffs in this period, like semiconductor


                                            A-16
manufacturing or laundry equipment manufacturing, are not especially CO2 -intensive. Row
28 repeats the estimates of row 27, but controls for each industry's upstreamness. Even in
2018, controlling for upstreamness still eliminates the estimated association between trade
policy and CO2 intensity.
    I also separately analyze subsidies to CO2 implicit in cooperative versus non-cooperative
tariffs. Some non-members of the World Trade Organization face higher tariffs not negotiated
cooperatively. The tariff data report non-cooperative tariffs for three importers--the U.S.,
Japan, and China. The U.S. calls these "Column 2" tariffs; China and Japan call them
"general rate" tariffs (see Online Appendix A.4).
    Appendix Table II shows evidence of implicit carbon subsidies in both cooperative and
non-cooperative tariffs. This suggests that whatever political economy force creates these
implicit subsidies must operate for both cooperative and non-cooperative policy. The U.S.
has a CO2 subsidy of $4.50 to $6/ton in cooperative tariffs and a subsidy of $60 to $80/ton
in non-cooperative tariffs. Consistent with Figure IV, China does not have a clear implicit
subsidy in most of its tariffs. Japanese tariff rates are similar across the two types of tariffs,
and correspondingly, the estimated implicit CO2 subsidy in Japan is generally similar for
non-cooperative and cooperative tariffs.

C.1     Political Economy Causes: Sensitivity Analyses
Appendix Table IV shows sensitivity analyses. Panels A, B, and C show that weighted
regressions are qualitatively similar to the unweighted versions. Controlling for upstreamness
attenuates the global estimated subsidy in trade policy from -$87 to $6. The instruments
are strong for upstreamness, the labor share, and mean wages. The weighted estimates have
weaker instruments for the other explanations, which may bias these estimates towards the
OLS values. One might wonder whether the correlation between total CO2 and upstreamness
reflects measurement error in the input-output table, since both upstreamness and total
CO2 emissions are measured from the input-output table. U.S. direct CO2 emissions are not
subject to this concern, since they are measured from completely distinct data (MECS) and
not from the input-output table. Panels D and E show that OLS estimates using direct CO2
emissions are similar to IV estimates for total CO2 emissions. Controlling for upstreamness
in column (2) attenuates the correlation between CO2 emissions and trade protection by
more than 90 percent. Again, controlling for the other political economy variables matters
much less.
    Appendix Table V reports regressions controlling for all these political economy expla-
nations at once. Columns (1) through (3) show estimates for all global trade. Columns (4)
and (5) show estimates for U.S. imports only. The U.S. has data on more political economy
explanations. Columns (1), (2) and (4) use linear instrumental variables regression, while
columns (3) and (5) use Lasso with instrumental variables (Belloni et al. 2016). All these
regressions instrument total CO2 intensity with direct CO2 intensity. To ease interpretation
of coefficients for the controls, I have re-scaled all except CO2 intensity to be z-scores (i.e.,
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation). I leave CO2 intensity in
tons/$ rather than z-scores to facilitate comparison with other tables.
    These estimates suggest that other political economy forces, and especially upstreamness,
account for an important share of the association between CO2 intensity and trade policy.


                                              A-17
These estimates find negative associations between trade policy and CO2 intensity that are
smaller than in estimates without political economy controls. Controls attenuate the asso-
ciation between CO2 and trade policy to $-25 to $-28 and render it statistically insignificant
(Appendix Table V).
    All the estimates in Appendix Table V identify upstreamness as a strong predictor of
trade policy, even conditional on the other political economy variables. Upstreamness is
the only explanation for which this is true. Upstreamness also has large magnitude effects
on trade policy. In the global data, Lasso retains only the CO2 rate and upstreamness.
In the U.S. data, Lasso retains only three variables in the selected model: CO2 intensity,
upstreamness, and shipping costs.


D      Informal Discussion of Trade Policy Theories
This Appendix informally discusses how theories of trade policy might rationalize the paper's
findings. It is useful to distinguish two reasons why countries choose trade policy. One is
to exploit market power and terms-of-trade externalities. Another is to satisfy domestic
industries which lobby for high tariffs on their output.
    Some trade policy instruments, like NTBs and non-cooperative tariffs, are chosen inde-
pendently by countries and are typically not negotiated with other countries. In theories of
explaining such non-cooperative trade policy (Grossman and Helpman 1994; Goldberg and
Maggi 1999), both the terms-of-trade externality and political economy forces determine
tariffs. In these frameworks, governments value the welfare of their citizens, which decreases
overall with protection, but governments also value campaign contributions and other sup-
port from industry, which increases with the protection industries receive. These frameworks
can accommodate industries' lobbying for low tariffs on industries they use as intermediate
inputs (Gawande et al. 2012). The finding of implicit carbon subsidies in non-cooperative
policy instruments, and the empirical relevance of upstreamness, are consistent with these
theories.
    Other trade policy instruments, like most tariffs, are cooperatively chosen by countries
through negotiation. Research has provided two broad explanations for why countries coop-
erate on trade policy (Grossman and Helpman 1994; Maggi and Rodr´       iguez-Clare 1998, 2007).
One is that cooperation helps decrease terms of trade externalities, though not necessarily
the political economy components of trade policy. A second explanation for cooperation is
that governments understand the political pressure of trade lobbies and the welfare costs of
protection. In this explanation, governments commit to free trade agreements in order to
tie their hands and obtain a more efficient domestic allocation of resources across industries,
while limiting the resulting political cost.
    In all these cooperative theories, political economy motives like lobbying for low upstream
tariffs potentially remain an important determinant of non-cooperative and cooperative trade
policy. In Grossman and Helpman (1995), cooperation does not change political economy
motives for trade policy. In the commitment theory, negotiation may attenuate but not elim-
inate political economy's effects on trade policy. These interpretations suggest that lobbying
competition between upstream and downstream industries may occur in both cooperative
and non-cooperative policies, and extends beyond any single model.



                                             A-18
    Another general interpretation of this is as follows. A goal of cooperative trade policy
negotiation (e.g., through the World Trade Organization) is to eliminate one externality
­ the terms-of-trade motive for trade policy ­ which leaves political economy motives re-
maining. This paper highlights that those negotiations, however, leave a second externality
untouched--an environmental externality which arises from political economy forces behind
trade policy.
    To be concrete about why counter-lobbying might create tariff escalation, consider the
example of a fairly upstream industry like steel and a fairly downstream good like cigarette
manufacturing. Many industries use steel as an input, either directly (they purchase steel)
or indirectly through global value chains (they purchase goods which use steel as an input,
or goods which use inputs which use steel as an input, etc.). Hence, many industries will
lobby for low tariffs and low NTBs on steel. By contrast, few industries use cigarettes as an
input, and hence few industries will lobby for low tariffs or low NTBs on cigarettes. Final
consumers might prefer low tariffs and low NTBs on both steel and cigarettes, but final
consumers are less well organized than industries, and hence have less lobbying influence.
Thus, countries end up with lower tariffs or NTBs on steel, and higher tariffs or NTBs on
tobacco products.10
    Finally, it is worth discussing one potential explanation from public finance. Diamond
and Mirrlees (1971) consider commodity taxation in a general setting. Even in a second-best
world where the government uses (distortionary) linear commodity taxes, which imply that
the first-best Pareto optimal outcome is infeasible, they show that the optimal tax system
maintains the economy at the production possibilities frontier. A corollary is that optimal
commodity taxes apply only to final and not intermediate goods.11
    Based on this theorem, one might conjecture that tariff escalation has an efficiency ra-
tionale. This interpretation might claim that downstream goods are final goods, and that
tariff escalation seeks to maintain production efficiency by putting tariffs on final rather
than intermediate goods. In this interpretation, while upstreamness accounts for trade pol-
icy's environmental bias, the link between upstreamness and trade policy could be caused
by government's desire for an efficient tax system rather than by lobbying. Additionally, if
tariff escalation reflected efficiency rather than political economy forces, then harmonizing
tariffs between upstream and downstream goods could decrease production efficiency even if
it benefited the environment.
    Two reasons suggest that production efficiency does not explain the prevalence of tariff
escalation. First, I find similar escalation in NTBs as in tariffs. NTBs do not raise revenue,
so optimal taxes would not include NTBs, except to the extent that they address market
failures. Hence, production efficiency does not explain why NTBs exist or have escalation.
Second, the production efficiency theorem does not rank the efficiency of different second-
  10
     In the global data, weighted across countries by the value of imports, steel has a mean upstreamness
value of 3.5, tariff of 1.3 percent, and NTB ad valorem equivalent of 1.5 percent. Tobacco products has
upstreamness of 1.2, tariff of 9.8 percent and NTB ad valorem equivalent of 43 percent. These are among
the most and least upstream industries in Exiobase.
  11
     One intuitive explanation is that under constant returns to scale, any tax on intermediate goods would
appear through changes in final goods prices. Then the government could collect the revenue through this
tax on final goods. But because taxing intermediate goods prices distorts firms' input choices, it moves the
economy away from production efficiency (Diamond and Mirrlees 1971, p. 24).




                                                   A-19
best tax systems by the degree to which they tax intermediate goods. This theory does not
permit stating that a tax or tariff structure which has more escalation is more efficient; it
merely states that the optimal tax system has no taxes on intermediate goods.12


E      Quantitative General Equilibrium Model
This section resembles the analytical model from the main text, but it allows for many
asymmetric countries and industries, specifies the functional form of climate damages, allows
for different CO2 intensity from different industries, allows for deficits, and allows the trade
elasticity to vary by industry.

E.1      Model Structure
Assumptions
Preferences are as in equation (5) from the main text. While it is common to assume CES
preferences across varieties within a sector and Cobb-Douglas preferences across sectors in
a static model, this does impose strong assumptions on the drivers of CO2 emissions. For
example, as mentioned in the introduction, increasing the purchase price of energy-intensive
durable good like air conditioners may lead consumers to use existing appliances longer,
which is a type of consumption substitution not modeled here. I do report a number of sen-
sitivity analyses involving energy-consuming durable goods specifically, but more broadly, it
is important to recognize that the common combination of CES and Cobb-Douglas prefer-
ences imposing strong restriction on potential consumption and emissions patterns.
    I specify the functional form of climate damages as

                                       f (Z ) = [1 +  (Z - Z0 )]-1                                    (E.1)

Here  represents a damage parameter, Z0 represents a reference or baseline level of global
CO2 emissions used to calibrate the damage parameter, and Z represents the global emissions
in a particular scenario.
    Several reasons support using this functional form for climate damages. It makes damages
multiplicative, which facilitates the analysis of counterfactuals using ratios. It also makes
damages proportional to real income. It permits calibration of the climate damage parameter
 so that a one-ton increase in CO2 emissions decreases global welfare by $40 in the year
2007, which corresponds with prevailing estimates from the climate change literature (IWG
2016). Additionally, it provides a simple functional form to accomplish these objectives. This
specification measures damages from emission changes only, since in baseline data, Z = Z0 ,
so the model abstracts from baseline climate damages.
    In the data I analyze, shipping represents a separate industry, which is connected through
input-output links to other industries (see Appendix Table VII). An alternative approach
  12
     A related potential explanation is that distortions in the economy aggregate through upstream input
purchases, so an efficient industrial policy would subsidize upstream sectors (Liu 2019). This interpretation
would argue for direct production subsidies rather than trade policies, and it also would not apply to an
undistorted economy already at the first-best.



                                                    A-20
would be to model shipping and associated emissions directly as a component of trade costs,
as in Shapiro (2016). I leave shipping as an industry rather than as a component of trade
costs since this approach allows shipping costs to adjust endogenously in the model due to
counterfactual policies, since this approach still accounts for oil use different energy intensity
of shipping across countries and goods (through the technology summarized in input-output
links), and since this lets me directly use the input-output table as reported in data, rather
than having to manually adjust it to remove shipping as a component of trade costs but not
an industry.
    Technology is as in equation (7) from the main text. I include a non-traded sector; one
could interpret this as a sector within infinite trade costs.
    The pollution emitted to sell goods to a particular destination j are
                                                           Xijs
                                         Zijs = is                                                 (E.2)
                                                      cis (1 + tijs )
The coefficient is equals the CO2 intensity of output in country i and sector s. This
parameter  equals zero for all industries besides coal extraction, oil extraction, and natural
gas extraction. For these three fossil fuel extraction industries,  equals the metric tons of
CO2 per real dollar of output of a given fossil fuel in a given country.
    Equations (14) and (15) from the main text may help clarify one important channel
which the analytical model misses but equation (E.2) captures. Traded goods tend to be
more pollution-intensive than domestically purchased goods, both due to long-distance trans-
portation and because trade tends to relocate energy-intensive goods production to countries
like China which are relatively pollution intensive. This effect tends to amplify the effect of
decreasing energy-intensive exports--not only does the counterfactual make countries emit
less to produce goods for export, but a dollar of goods produced for export tends to emit
more pollution than a dollar of goods for domestic production.
    Exports equal imports minus trade deficits:
                                           Xijs               Xjis
                                                  =                  - Di                          (E.3)
                                   j,s
                                         1 + tijs     j,s
                                                            1 + tjis

   Apart from allowing for deficits, equilibrium is as in the main text.

Baseline Equilibrium
The country×sector price index and unit cost function are as in equations (6) and (7).
    The data report the value of bilateral trade in intermediate goods between each pair of
origin and destination countries i and j and selling and buying industries s and k , Z          ~ijsk . I
use the tilde (~·) to highlight that these raw values from the data exclude tariffs. Data also
report final goods trade, indexed by selling but not buying industry, F        ~ijs . Define the value
of total bilateral trade as X ~ ijs = Z
                                      ~ijs + F~ijs . Below, I work with tariff-inclusive values of
                          ~
these variables, Xijs  Xijs (1 + tijs ), Zijs  Z  ~ijs (1 + tijs ), and Fijs  F
                                                                              ~ijs (1 + tijs ).
    Baseline expenditure is similar to the main text but accounts for trade deficits:

                              Xjs = js (Yj + Dj + Tj ) +                jsk Rjk                    (E.4)
                                                                   k




                                                  A-21
Substituting tariff revenues Tj = i,s Xijs tijs /(1 + tijs ) and the gravity equation (9) into the
country×sector expenditure equation (E.4) then simplifying gives the following expression
that I use for analyzing counterfactuals:
                                                tijl
                           Yj + D j +    i,l 1+tijl ijl (    k   jlk Rjk )
              Xjs = js                             tijl                        +        jsk Rjk             (E.5)
                                    1-       i,l 1+tijl ijl jl                      k

    Several terms here deserve explanation. I measure final good expenditure shares as js =
  i Fijs /  i,s Fijs . Value added in a particular country×sector equals the country×sector
revenue minus total intermediate inputs: Yjs = Rjs - i Zijs . Value-added can also be
written as the Cobb-Douglas cost share of factors times country×sector revenue:

                                        Yjs = (1 - js )Rjs                                                  (E.6)

Deficits equal Dj = s Djs , where Djs = i Xijs /(1 + tijs ) - Rjs . The intermediate good
cost share in country j of industry s in producing goods from industry k is jsk = Zjsk /Rjk ,
where Zjsk is the value of intermediate goods from industry s used to produce goods in
industry k and country j . The share of value added from an industry is yjs  Yjs /Yj . These
shares sum to one:
                                             yjs = 1                                   (E.7)
                                              s


Counterfactual Equilibrium
I rewrite these equations in changes. From equation (7), the cost function is the proportional
change in wages and intermediate goods prices, scaled by their Cobb-Douglas expenditure
shares:
                                             1-is   ^ iks
                                     c
                                     ^is = w
                                           ^i      P ik                                  (E.8)
                                                          k

   The change in trade costs reflects counterfactual tariffs and NTBs:

                                            (1 + tijs )(1 + nijs )
                                   ^ijs =
                                   
                                            (1 + tijs )(1 + nijs )

   From equation (E.5), the counterfactual change in expenditure is calculated from

                                             tijl
                   js w
                      ^ j Yj + D j +                ^                    ^ jk Rjk
                                        i,l 1+t ijl ijl          k   jlk R
                                                ijl
      ^ js Xjs =
      X                                                                             +            ^ jk Rjk
                                                                                             jsk R
                                            tijl
                                1-                 ^
                                        i,l 1+t ijl ijl jl                               k
                                               ijl


   Several terms in this equation deserve explanation. Because I use global GDP as the
numeraire, this treats baseline trade deficits Dj as a constant share of world GDP in any
counterfactual. Counterfactual revenues equal total bilateral sales to foreign and domestic
customers:
                                                    Xijs
                                    ^ is Ris =
                                    R                                                 (E.9)
                                               j
                                                  1 + tijs


                                                   A-22
From equation (E.6), counterfactual revenues can be calculated as R^ is Ris = w  ^is yis Yi /(1 -
                                                                              ^i y
                                                                       ^       ^
is ). From equation (9), bilateral sales can be calculated as Xijs = ijs ijs Xjs Xjs . From
equation (E.7), counterfactual industry shares are given by

                                                           y
                                                           ^is yis = 1                                              (E.10)
                                                  s


The numeraire can be expressed as i Y       ^i Yi = 1.
    For baseline data, these equations hold exactly. Under counterfactual tariffs or NTBs, I
solve this system to find the values (^
                                      cis , y
                                            ^is , w
                                                  ^i ) that make equations (E.8), (E.9), and (E.10)
hold with equality. I use these to find the resulting change in real income, which can be
written as
                                      V^j = Yj + Dj + Tj
                                                       P^j
From equation (E.2), I calculate the change in pollution and social welfare:

                                                          is R^ is Ris /c
                                                                        ^is cis
                                          ^i =
                                          Z           s

                                                            s is Ris /cis
                                                           ^ is /c
                                                          (R     ^is )Zis
                                                      s
                                             =
                                                              s   Zis
   Finally, the change in social welfare is
                                                          ^j
                                                          V
                                           ^j =
                                           W
                                                   [1 +  (Z - Z0 )]

E.2     General Decomposition
I first show a single equation including all the channels, and then discuss a diagram that
highlights each channel separately. We can write the change in pollution emissions due to a
counterfactual trade policy as follows:
                  ^ i,s
                  X F    F
                        Xi,s +X ^ I XI          Zii,s                ^ j,s
                                                                     X F    F
                                                                           Xj,s +X ^ j,s
                                                                                      I   I
                                                                                         Xj,s
   ^s =
   Z
                                   i,s i,s ^
                                           ii,s       +                                       ^ ij,s Zij,s /(1 + tijs )
                                                                                              
            i
                         ^i,s Xi,s
                         c                       Zs           i,j =i
                                                                            ^i,s Xj,s
                                                                            c                                Zs
                                                                                                                    (E.11)
                 Z^s Zs
    ^=
    Z       s
                                                                                                                    (E.12)
                s Zi,s

Equation (E.11) describes the change in emissions from fossil fuel s (coal, oil, or gas) due
to extraction of that fuel in country i. Equation (E.12) shows how the total change in
a country's emissions is a weighted sum of changes in emissions across fuels, weighted by
baseline emission shares of each fuel. Of course, changing production of other industries
affects these three fuels through input-output links, factor prices, and other channels.
    Comparing equation (E.11) with equation (14) from the analytical model of the main
text shows obvious parallels. Indeed, with two symmetric countries and two industries, and


                                                           A-23
without separating expenditure into its component on final and intermediate goods, equation
(E.11) simplifies to equation (14). The analytical model also discusses a second equation
(15) for the change in emissions. While an analogous derivation is straightforward here, with
many asymmetric countries the resulting equation is cumbersome and provides less insight.
    Appendix Figure IV separates equation (E.11) into several components. This figure
describes the equations for coal, but the terms are identical for each fossil fuel. Similarly, I
have written out all the terms for domestic coal sales only, but could write out similar terms
for coal exports. Each term in this figure represents the proportional change in one channel
due to a counterfactual policy. The numbers in parentheses refer to columns in Appendix
Table IX.
    In Appendix Figure IV, term (1) shows the first breakdown--the change in total emissions
from coal can be decomposed into the change in coal that is burned domestically and coal
that is exported. This is an exact decomposition because total emissions from coal equal
the weighted sum of emissions for domestic sales and exports, weighted by baseline emission
shares. These two channels correspond to the two terms in equation (E.11) above.
    Terms (2) and (3) of Appendix Figure IV show that the change in emissions due to
domestically sold coal combines two channels--one due to the change in coal prices (the
"price index channel") and the other due to change in nominal coal sales (the "nominal
revenue channel."). This is not an exact decomposition--one cannot take sums or products
of these two channels to obtain the exact change in emissions for domestic sales. One could
think of this as turning off certain channels in this general equilibrium model, and assessing
how the other channels contribute to the result.
    Terms (4) through (6) of Appendix Figure IV show that the change in nominal revenues
consists of three channels. Term (4) reflects the change in the share of expenditures going
to domestic rather than foreign sellers (       ^ ii,s ). Term (5) reflects the direct effect of the
change in tariffs (1/(1 + tii,s )), which change the wedge between consumer spending and
firm revenues. Of course, because I assume intra-national tariffs are zero, this channel does
not operate for domestic sales, though it does for exports. Term (6) reflects the change
in country×sector expenditure (X     ^ j,s ). Finally, terms (7) and (8) separate the change in
country×sector expenditure into the change in expenditure on final versus intermediate
goods.
    Appendix Table IX presents the numerical results of this decomposition. This is a de-
composition of the effect of each country harmonizing tariffs and NTBs, as in the main text.
Each column number in Appendix Table IX corresponds to the term of the same number in
Appendix Figure IV. Panels A, B, and C show patterns for oil, natural gas, and coal sepa-
rately. Column (9) shows total baseline emissions in billions of metric tons CO2 (GtCO2 );
these values add up to about 30 billion tons, which is close to published measures of total
CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion in the year 2007.
    Panel A of Appendix Table IX describes how this counterfactual affects emissions from oil,
which account for 37 percent of baseline emissions. Column (1) shows that the counterfactual
decreases emissions from exported oil by 8 percent, and decreases emissions of domestically
sold oil by 1 percent. This is intuitive--because the counterfactual makes trade policy on
energy-intensive goods (including oil) more stringent, emissions from trade in these goods
declines. Columns (2) and (3) show that most of the change in emissions from exports



                                               A-24
reflect a nominal change in spending on oil, rather than a change in the price of oil. This
separation is relevant since emissions reflect the real rather than nominal amount of oil
crossing international borders. Column (4) shows that the change in oil exports is primarily
due to reallocation of spending between foreign and domestic sources, i.e.,          ^ ijs . Column (5)
shows that the direct effect of trade policy is a minority of the total change in the value
of international trade in oil. Column (6) shows that the total change in spending on oil is
small, and columns (7) and (8) show that it is due about equally to lower spending oil as
both a final and intermediate good.
    These patterns in Pattern A of Appendix Table IX give a rule of thumb to interpret the
large decrease in emissions from oil. Recalling that      ^ ijs = (^
                                                                   cis ^ijs /P
                                                                             ^js )- s and noting that
the price index channel in column (2) has small magnitude, suggest that the direct effect of
changing trade costs, ( ^ijs )- s , accounts for a large share of the change in oil sales.
    One might expect this decrease in emissions from internationally traded oil to be offset
by an increase in domestic sales of oil, yet Panel A of Appendix Table IX suggests that this
does not occur. Why? Two forces do increase emissions of domestically sold oil--column
(4) shows that the counterfactual makes domestic purchases represent a larger share of
expenditure on oil, and column (7) shows that expenditure on oil as a final good increases
slightly, due to the additional tariff revenue the increase in oil tariffs provides. However,
other forces outweigh these channels: column (2) shows that the price of oil increases, which
decreases the real value of spending on oil and thus emissions from it; and column (8) shows
that spending on oil as an intermediate good falls, due in part to the decrease in demand
from other energy-intensive industries.
    Natural gas has fairly similar patterns to oil, though the magnitudes vary. Emissions
from traded natural gas fall by 13 percent, while emissions from domestically sold natural
gas fall by 1 percent. The direct effect of tariffs on trade in natural gas accounts for much
of this change (column 4). The increase in prices of natural gas tends to decrease emissions
(column 2), and changes in emissions from natural gas as a final and intermediate goods
somewhat offset each other (columns 7 and 8).
    Coal has somewhat different patterns, for a specific reason. India's import tariffs on coal
in 2007 were 50 percent, higher than most other Indian import tariffs and higher than import
tariffs on coal in other countries. In the years since, India has decreased its import tariffs
on coal. Nonetheless, because this counterfactual harmonizes tariffs for each importer across
industries, this counterfactual decreases India's tariffs on coal by more than 40 percentage
points. This single channel is large enough to increase emissions from internationally traded
coal substantially, and decrease emissions from domestically purchased coal. Because trade
in coal is only about 10 percent of coal in baseline data, however, the rapid percentage
growth in exports has limited effects on total global emissions. The decrease in demand for
coal as an intermediate good also substantially decreases global emissions.

E.3     Scale, Composition, and Technique Decomposition
Write global pollution Z as the product of total global output X , the share  of global
output that comes from each industry, and the emissions e per unit output for each industry:
Z = X e. Totally differentiating gives dZ/Z = dX/X + d/ + de/e. The first term on
the right-hand side here is the scale effect, the second term is the composition effect, and


                                                 A-25
the third is the technique effect. While this model has no technical change, this is a global
decomposition of country×industry data, so the technique effect in part reflects reallocation
of production within an industry across countries with different technologies.
    I implement this decomposition as follows. I measure composition as the baseline CO2
intensity of each industry, weighted by the change in the industry's share of global output:
                                                                                                -1
                                             Zis                ^ is Ris (P
                                                                R          ^iis )-1    i,sZis
                                           i                i
        Composition Effect =                     ·                                                   -1
                                           i Ris                R^ is Ris (P^iis )-1   is Ris
                                 s                         i,s

Here Ris , Zis , and Pis represent a country×industry's revenue, pollution emissions, and
price index, respectively. The first ratio in this expression is the baseline global emissions
intensity of industry s. The second ratio is the change in the real global output of this
industry, divided by the change in global output of all industries. I multiply these and sum
over industries, which provides the change in emissions intensity that would have occurred
with observed changes in composition (second ratio) valued at baseline emissions intensities
(first ratio). The third ratio is the inverse of the global baseline emissions intensity, so that
the composition effect represents a percentage change relative to baseline intensity. I measure
the scale effect as the change in real global output:
                                                           ^ is Ris (P
                                                           R         ^iis )-1
                                                     i,s
                            Scale Effect =                                    -1
                                                               i,s Ris

I measure the technique effect as a residual, equal to the counterfactual change in emissions,
minus the scale effect and minus the composition effect:

                                     i,s Zis
           Technique Effect =                - 1 - Scale Effect - Composition Effect
                                     i,s Zis


E.4     Other Counterfactual Results
For the main counterfactual, Panel A of Appendix Table VIII reports sensitivity analyses. I
report results using trade elasticities from Caliendo and Parro (2015), allowing for a larger
elasticity of substitution of two across the energy sectors (coal, gas, petroleum, and electric-
ity; the elasticity in baseline estimates is assumed to be one due to the baseline Cobb-Douglas
functional form); and using two alternative numerical algorithms. Most of these estimates
find broadly similar results to the main estimates. The change in global emissions is about
equally from tariffs and NTBs.
    The main text uses the quantitative model to study one counterfactual, and here I dis-
cuss several others. In the second counterfactual, only the EU imposes this policy change:
tijs = s tijs Xijs / s Xijs i = j ; j  EU ; tijs = tijs j       / EU . Harmonizing EU trade
policy between clean and dirty industries may be somewhat politically feasible since the
EU has a domestic climate change policy, is concerned about leakage, and supports strong
environmental policies.
    The third and fourth counterfactuals compare the consequences of changing tariffs and
NTBs to the levels of clean versus dirty industries. Specifically, for each country separately,



                                                 A-26
the third counterfactual increases tariffs to the mean tariff for the cleanest third of industries,
and the mean NTB to the mean NTB for the cleanest third of industries. The fourth
counterfactual undertakes the same exercise, but for the dirtiest third of industries.
    In the fifth counterfactual, all countries add a carbon tariff to existing policy: tijs =
Tijs + Eijs d. Here, Eijs is the emission rate and d is damages chosen to reflect the global
externality from CO2 emissions ($40/ton). In the sixth counterfactual, all countries set tariffs
and NTBs to zero: tijs = 0 i, j, s.
    I also investigated a counterfactual which holds trade policies for transportation equip-
ment fixed. This obtains similar results to the main counterfactual--global CO2 emissions
fall 3.8 percent and real income increases 0.7 percent. As emphasized earlier, this model an-
alyzes fossil fuel from production rather than consumption, so the primary policies affecting
oil demand in the model are those that affect shipping and that affect heavy-long distance
trade which tends to be oil intensive.
    Appendix Table VIII presents the results of these other counterfactual analyses. Panel
B considers the second counterfactual, in which the EU harmonizes trade policy between
clean and dirty goods. The effects of the EU policy resemble those of the global policy from
Table V, but the magnitudes are smaller. This counterfactual EU policy would decrease
global CO2 emissions by 1.8 percentage points while increasing global real income by 0.3
percentage points. Although global emissions fall, most of the increase in emissions is from
within the EU, which reflects the idea that the subsidies in trade policy this paper highlights
are global--low baseline EU tariffs and NTBs on dirty goods increases emissions from outside
the EU, and hence increasing those tariffs and NTBs tends to increase emissions from inside
the EU (though produce larger decreases from outside the EU).
    Appendix Table VIII, Panels C and D, show the effects of harmonizing trade policy to
the levels of clean versus dirty goods. Both counterfactuals decrease global CO2 emissions,
by 2.5 to 3.8 percent. Real income increases slightly in both counterfactuals, so global CO2
intensity falls by 4 percent. These counterfactuals suggest that harmonizing trade policy
between clean and dirty goods can decrease global CO2 emissions, regardless of whether the
counterfactual trade policy is changed to the level that clean or dirty goods initially face.
    Appendix Table IX, Panel E, considers a counterfactual in which all countries impose a
carbon tariff, i.e., increase existing tariffs by the marginal damage of CO2 emissions embodied
in trade policy and leave NTBs unchanged. This decreases global emissions by 2.5 percent.
    Appendix Table VIII, Panel F, eliminates import tariffs and NTBs. This policy reform
increases real income by 2.6 percent, which is large enough to cause an increase in global CO2
emissions. Here, the scale effect dominates any other effects of this policy on CO2 emissions.
    Why do some counterfactuals increase real income but decrease global CO2 emissions?
This happens because these reforms address two market failures--trade policy and global
CO2 emissions. Eliminating or harmonizing trade policy across goods can increase real
income. Because trade policy encourages consumption and production of dirty goods, elim-
inating this price signal also decreases consumption and production of those dirty goods.




                                               A-27
References
Alvarez, R. A., D. Zavala-Araiza, D. R. Lyon, D. T. Allen, Z. R. Barkley, A. R. Brandt,
  K. J. Davis, S. C. Herndon, D. J. Jacob, A. Karion, E. A. kort, B. K. Lamb, T. Lauvaux,
  J. D. Maasakkers, A. J. Marchese, M. Omara, S. W. Pacala, J. Peischl, A. L. Robinston,
  P. B. Shepson, C. Sweeney, A. Townsend-Small, S. C. Wofsy, and S. P. Hamburg (2018).
  Assessment of methane emissions from the u.s. oil and gas supply chain. Science 361 (6398),
  186­188.

Amienyo, D., J. Doyle, D. Gerola, Gianpiero, Santacatterina, and A. Azapagic (2016). Sus-
 tainable manufacturing of consumer appliances: Reducing life cycle environmental impacts
 and costs of domestic ovens. Sustainable Production and Consumption 6 (67-76).

Amiti, M., O. Itskhoki, and J. Konings (2014). Importers, exporter, and exchange rate
 disconnect. American Economic Review 104 (7), 1942­1978.

Antr`
    as, P. and D. Chor (2013). Organizing the global value chain. Econometrica , 2127­2204.

Antr`
    as, P. and D. Chor (2018). On the Measurement of Upstreamness and Downstreamness
 in Global Value Chains (1 ed.)., pp. 126­194. Routledge.

Antr`
    as, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012). Measuring the upstreamness of
 production and trade flows. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102(3),
 412­416.

Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (2011). What do trade negotiators negotiate about? empirical
  evidence from the world trade organization. American Economic Review 101(4), 1238­
  1273.

Bagwell, K., R. W. Staiger, and A. Yurukoglu (2018). Quantitative analysis of multi-party
  tariff negotiations.

Becker, R., W. Gray, and J. Marvakov (2013). Nber-ces manufacturing industry database.
  Mimeo, NBER.

Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, C. Hansen, and D. Kozbur (2016). Inference in high-
  dimensional panel models with an application to gun control. Journal of Business &
  Economic Statistics 34 (4), 590­605.

Bombardini, M. (2008). Firm heterogeneity and lobby participation. Journal of Internatoinal
  Economics 75(2), 329­348.

Bond, E., Y. Duan, T. Ji, and Y. Lu (2019). Trade and welfare effects of export tax: Theory
  and evidence from china's incomplete export vat rebate.

Bown, C. (2018). Protectionsim was threating global supply chains before trump. VOX
  CEPR Policy Portal .




                                            A-28
Brandt, L., J. V. Biesebroeck, L. Wang, and Y. Zhang (2017, September). Wto accession
  and performance of chinese manufacturing firms. American Economic Review 107 (9),
  2784­2820.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121(2), 541­585.

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of nafta. Review
  of Economic Studies 82, 1­44.

Chen, N. and D. Novy (2012). On the measurement of trade costs: direct vs. indirect
 approaches to quantifying standards and technical regulations. World Trade Review 11 (3).

Cherniwchan, J. (2017). Trade liberalization and the environment: Evidence from nafta and
 u.s. manufacturing. Journal of International Economics 105, 130­149.

Costinot, A. and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2014). Handbook of International Economics, Vol.
  4, Chapter Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization,
  pp. 197­262. North-Holland.

de Koning, A., M. Bruckner, S. Lutter, R. Wood, K. Stadler, and A. Tukker (2015). Effect
  of aggregation and disaggregation on embodied material use of products in input-output
  analysis. Ecological Economics 116, 289­299.

Diamond, P. A. and J. A. Mirrlees (1971). Optimal taxation and public production i:
  Production efficiency. American Economic Review 61(1), 8­27.

Fajgelbaum, P., P. Goldberg, P. Kennedy, and A. Khandelwal (2020). The return to protec-
  tionism. Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Fally, T. (2012). Production staging: Measurement and facts. Mimeo, UC Berkeley.

Gawande, K., P. Krishna, and M. Olarreaga (2012). Lobbying competition over trade policy.
 International Economic Review 53(1), 115­132.

Geschke, A., R. Wood, K. Kanemoto, and M. L. . D. Moran (2014). Investigating alternative
 approaches to harmonise multi-regional input-output data. Economic Systems Research .

Giljum, S., H. Wieland, S. Lutter, N. Eisenmenger, H. Schandl, and A. Owen (2019). The
  impacts of data deviations between mrio models on material footprints: A comparison of
  exiobase, eora, and icio. Journal of Industrial Ecology 23 (4), 946­958.

Giri, R., K.-M. Yi, and H. Yilmazkuday (2018). Gains from trade: Does sectoral hetero-
  geneity matter?

Goldberg, P. K. and G. Maggi (1999). Protection for sale: An empirical investigation.
 American Economic Review 89 (5), 1135­1155.

Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1995). Trade wars and trade talks. Journal of Political
  Economy 103(4), 675­708.


                                            A-29
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1994). Protection for sale. American Economic Re-
  view 84 (4), 833­850.

Handley, K. (2014). Exporting under trade policy uncertainty: Theory and evidence. Journal
  of International Economics 94, 50­66.

Hirsch, B. T. and D. A. MacPherson (2003). Union membership and coverage database from
  the current population survey: Note. Industrial and Labor Relations Review .

Horowitz, K. and M. Planting (2006). Concepts and Methods of the U.S. Input-Output
  Accounts. Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U.S. Department of Commerce.

IEA (2009a). Energy statistics of non-oecd countries 2009. Technical report, IEA.

IEA (2009b). Energy statistics of oecd countries. Technical report, IEA.

IPCC (2014). Ar5 climate change 2014: Mitigation of climate change. Technical report,
  IPCC.

Irwin, D. A. (2010). Trade restrictiveness and deadweight losses from us tariffs. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(3), 111­133.

IWG (2016). Technical support document: technical update of the social cost of carbon for
  regulatory impact analysis under executive order 12866. Technical report, Interagency
  Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases, United States Government.

Kee, H. L., A. Nicita, and M. Olarreaga (2009). Estimating trade restrictiveness indices.
  Economic Journal 119, 172­199.

Krugman, P. R. (1981). Intraindustry specialization and the gains from trade. Journal of
  Political Economy 89(5), 959­973.

Lim~ao, N. and P. Tovar (2011). Policy choice: Theory and evidence from commitment via
  international trade agreements. Journal of International Economics 85, 186­205.

Liu, E. (2019). Industrial policies in production networks. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 134 (4), 1883­1948.

Lyubich, E., J. S. Shapiro, and R. Walker (2018). Regulating mismeasured pollution: Impli-
  cations of firm heterogeneity for environmental policy. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108.

Maggi, G. and A. Rodr´ iguez-Clare (1998). The value of trade agreements in the presence of
 political pressures. Journal of Political Economy 106(3), 574­601.

Maggi, G. and A. Rodr´
                     iguez-Clare (2007). A political-economy theory of trade agreements.
 American Economic Review 97(4), 1374­1406.

Martin, L. A. (2011). Energy efficiency gains from trade: greenhouse gas emissions and
 india's manufacturing sector. Mimeo, UC Berkeley.



                                           A-30
Mishra, P. and A. Spilimbergo (2011). Exchange rates and wages in an integrated world.
 American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (4), 53­84.

Moran, D. and R. Wood (2014). Convergence between the eora, wiod, exiobase, and openeu's
 consumption-based carbon accounts. Economic Systems Research 26 (3), 245­261.

Muller, N. Z. and R. Mendelsohn (2012). Efficient pollution regulation: Getting the prices
 right: Corrigendum (mortality rate update). American Economic Review 102(1), 613­616.

Nahlik, M. J., A. T. Kaehr, M. V. Chester, A. Horvath, and M. N. Taptich (2015). Goods
  movement life cycle assessment for greenhouse gas reduction goals. Journal of Industrial
  Ecology .

Novy, D. (2013). Gravity redux: measuring international trade costs with panel data. Eco-
  nomic Inquiry 51(1), 101­121.

Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press.

Ossa, R. (2014). Trade wars and trade talks with data. American Economic Review 104 (12),
  4104­4146.

Pulles, T., M. van het Bloscher, R. Brand, and A. Visschedijk (2007). Assessment of global
  emissions from fuel combustion in the final decades of the 20th century: Application of
  the emission inventory model team. Technical report, TNO Report 2007-A-R0132/B.

Schott, P. K. (2008). The relative sophistication of chinese exports. Economic Policy 23(53),
  5­49.

Shapiro, J. S. (2016). Trade costs, co2 , and the environment. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 8 (4), 220­54.

Soderbery, A. (2015). Estimating import supply and demand elasticities: Analysis and
  implications. Journal of International Economics 96 (1), 1­17.

Staiger, R. W. (2018). The economics of trade agreements & the design of global climate
  accords. Frank D. Graham Memorial Lecture, Princeton University, April 19.

Steen-Olsen, K., A. Owen, E. G. Hertwich, and M. Lenzen (2014). Effects of sector ag-
  gregation on co2 multipliers in multiregional input-output analyses. Economic Systems
  Research .

Timmer, M. P., E. Dietzenbacher, B. Los, R. Stehrer, and G. J. de Vries (2015). An illustrated
  user guide to the world input-output database: the case of global automotive production.
  Review of International Economics .

Tukker, A., A. de Koning, R. Wood, T. Hawkins, S. Lutter, J. Acosta, J. M. R. Cantuche,
  M. Bouwmeester, J. Oosterhaven, T. Drosdowski, and J. Kuenen (2013). Exiopol - de-
  velopment and illustrative analyses of a detailed global mr ee sut iot. Economic Systems
  Research 25(1), 50­70.



                                            A-31
Union of Concerned Scientists (2013). Where your gas money goes. Technical report.

USEPA (2014). Emission factors for greenhouse gas inventories. Technical report.

USEPA (2019). Overview of greenhouse gases. Visited 9/9.

Wood, R., K. Stadler, T. Bulavskaya, S. Lutter, S. Giljum, A. de Koning, J. Kuenen,
 H. Schutz, J. Acosta-Fernandez, A. Usubiaga, M. Simas, O. Ivanova, J. Weinzettel, J. H.
 Schmidt, S. Merciai, and A. Tukker (2015). Global sustainability accounting-developing
 exiobase for multi-regional footprint analysis. Sustainability 7(1), 138­163.




                                          A-32
                   APPENDIX FIGURE I
Upstream Location, CO2 Intensity, and Trade Policy, by Country




                                  A-33
                        APPENDIX FIGURE I
Upstream Location, CO2 Intensity, and Tariff Rates, by Country (Continued)




                                        A-34
                                     APPENDIX FIGURE I
             Upstream Location, CO2 Intensity, and Tariff Rates, by Country (Continued)




Notes: In each graph, the solid red line is from a local linear regression of import tariffs on the
industry's upstreamness. The dashed blue line is from a local linear regression of CO 2 intensity on the
industry's upstreamness. Upstreamness is the simple measure of the share of an industry's output sold
to other industries as intermediate goods (rather than as final demand). All data from Exiobase. All
regressions use an Epanechnikov kernel with bandwidth of 0.75. Bulgaria, Cyprus, Malta, Slovakia,
and Taiwan are missing NTB rates, so the red solid line for these countries only includes tariffs.




                                                        A-35
                                       APPENDIX FIGURE II
                    Densities of Trade Policy, Carbon Intensity, and Upstreamness
Panel A. Density of tariffs




Panel B. Density of non-tariff barriers




Panel C. Density of Total CO2 intensity




(Continued on next page)




                                                     A-36
                                       APPENDIX FIGURE II
             Densities of Trade Policy, Carbon Intensity, and Upstreamness (Continued)

Panel D. Density of upstreamness




Notes: Graphs exclude top 1% of each variable. The value 5 represents the most upstream, while 1 is
the least upstream. Upstreamness measured as in Antràs et al. (2012).




                                                     A-37
                                       APPENDIX FIGURE III
                           U.S. Upstreamness and Components of Revenues




Notes: Data from the U.S. BEA use table for year 2007. Fossil fuel industries include natural gas
distribution, oil and gas extraction, electricity generation, petroleum refineries, and coal mining. For
smoothness, for each component of output separately, this analysis estimates a local linear regression of
the relevant component on upstreamness. The graph shows the fitted values from these regressions. The
y-axis is the share of an industry's total value of shipments which is accounted for by each of the four
listed components. The graph describes only manufacturing outputs (though counts intermediate inputs
from all industries).




                                                       A-38
                                                         APPENDIX FIGURE IV
                                                     Decomposition of Quantiative Model




Notes: Equation numbers correspond to columns in Appendix Table IX. The  symbols indicate that each channel represents the proportional change
due to a counterfactual policy.




                                                                       A-39
                                                 APPENDIX TABLE I
                                 Carbon Taxes Implicit in Trade Policy, Sensitivity Analysis
                                                   Global                                         US Imports
                                      Tariffs                 NTBs                    Tariffs                  NTBs
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)
1. Main estimates             -32.31*** -11.17**       -89.78*** -75.67**      -5.69*** -6.55***        -47.96*** -37.41***
                                (8.59)      (5.52)      (27.33)   (30.02)       (1.44)      (2.30)       (10.06)   (12.36)

Other econometrics
 2. Tobit (no IV)             -35.63***     -5.29     -157.58*** -146.00**     -6.19***   -3.61***      -270.19***-156.78***
                               (11.52)     (6.09)       (40.74)   (59.37)       (1.96)     (1.30)         (60.86)   (56.43)

 3. Tobit (IV)                -44.10*** -11.57** -191.05*** -154.37**          -7.22*** -10.04*** -480.32*** -369.11**
                               (15.40)   (5.74)    (56.30)   (70.22)            (2.29)    (3.59)   (132.43) (158.31)

 4. Standard errors           -32.31*** -11.17*** -89.78*** -75.67***             --            --         --         --
    clustered by importer       (7.71)    (3.30)   (11.67)   (12.84)              --            --         --         --

Nonlinearity
 5. Logs                         -0.65    -0.91**      -0.09***     -0.02       -0.64*          -0.22    -0.07***   -0.04*
                                (0.46)     (0.43)       (0.03)     (0.05)       (0.36)         (0.59)     (0.02)    (0.02)

 6. Quadratic in emissions
    no IV. CO 2 rate          -58.33***     3.58      -194.52*** -152.31       -10.15**         -1.29    -45.45*      8.17
                               (20.32)    (14.81)       (55.98) (113.86)        (4.65)         (5.63)    (25.49)    (27.49)
   CO2 rate2                  9,539.88** -3,508.35 34,582.94**34,420.37        1,260.10    -355.19       1,055.59 -4,798.88
                              (4,668.97) (4,695.02) (14,405.20)(34,372.49)     (807.49)   (882.31)      (5,166.68) (4,704.39)

   fitted slope, 10th pct.      -51.56      1.09        -169.99    -127.89       -9.22         -1.55      -44.67     4.62

   fitted slope, 50th pct.      -46.70     -0.70        -152.35    -110.34       -8.22         -1.84      -43.84     0.82

   fitted slope, 90th pct.      -30.26     -6.74        -92.77     -51.04        -4.86         -2.78      -41.02    -11.99

 7. Nonparametric               -18.56       --         -81.48       --          -4.89         -4.89      -41.04    -41.04
    marginal effect (no IV)

Other data cleaning and aggregation
 8. Winsorize dependent,     -25.49***    -10.66*      -90.36*** -75.69**      -5.75***   -6.42***      -51.40*** -38.01***
    independent variables      (6.60)      (5.39)       (27.73)   (29.95)       (1.62)     (2.29)        (10.45)   (12.69)

 9. Include non-manuf.        -32.31***     -9.91      -84.77*** -72.96**         --            --         --         --
    industries                  (8.59)     (8.96)       (24.07)   (33.21)         --            --         --         --

Weighted                                     X                       X                           X                     X
(Continued on next page)




                                                            A-40
                                                     APPENDIX TABLE I
                             Carbon Taxes Implicit in Trade Policy, Sensitivity Analysis (continued)
                                                   Global                                          US Imports
                                       Tariffs                 NTBs                     Tariffs                 NTBs
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)        (7)      (8)
 10. Multiple partners          -37.33** -11.23*        -82.63** -75.70**        -6.95*** -6.55*** -55.10*** -37.41***
     (i×j×s level data)          (16.49)     (5.84)      (32.19)    (29.63)       (2.10)       (2.29)     (12.34)  (12.34)

 11. i×j×s level data           -38.34**   -16.33**    -84.46**    -93.59**    -6.54***    -2.61*    -54.23*** -38.40***
    exporter fixed effects       (17.11)    (6.88)      (33.16)     (37.43)     (1.95)     (1.41)     (11.87)   (14.13)

 12. Industry-level data        -21.80**   -12.77**   -124.16**    -78.08*       --         --           --        --
    (no IV)                      (10.38)    (5.14)     (52.71)     (45.14)       --         --           --        --

 13. Add intra-national         -5.80*** -11.90***     -60.48** -81.84***        --         --           --        --
     trade                       (1.39)    (3.90)       (23.32)  (21.01)         --         --           --        --

Other measures of emissions
 14. Direct emissions       -27.48***       -11.53    -78.33*** -104.70***     -7.52*** -10.35***    -63.34*** -59.13***
                              (7.91)        (8.10)     (22.30)    (34.86)       (2.00)    (3.71)      (16.68)   (20.78)

 15. Direct emissions            49.89*     -21.03     183.49**   6.37           -1.86     -6.09**     -15.98   -35.63**
                                 (28.79)   (24.12)      (78.40) (135.57)        (1.81)      (2.49)    (16.17)    (16.04)
     Total emissions            -62.72**     6.55     -212.24*** -76.56        -4.29**    -2.70***   -35.86*** -14.87***
                                 (26.28)   (16.00)      (70.42) (100.21)        (1.66)      (0.87)     (9.14)     (4.16)

 16. Include all               -16.93***   -6.55**    -46.71*** -41.65**         --         --           --        --
     greenhouse gases            (4.48)     (2.56)     (14.34)   (16.95)         --         --           --        --

Consumption emissions from energy-consuming durable goods

 17. Exclude energy-           -35.30*** -16.50**     -98.47*** -113.23**      -9.60*** -17.40***    -60.92*** -66.09***
     consuming durables          (9.38)   (7.90)       (29.80)   (47.39)        (2.10)    (6.50)      (14.00)   (23.26)

 18. Adjust CO2 rates:    -32.91*** -12.33**          -91.04*** -83.46**       -6.04***   -8.34**    -50.89*** -47.66***
     50% goods, 50% energy (8.73)    (6.03)            (27.86)   (33.52)        (1.55)     (3.32)     (11.11)   (16.07)

 19. Adjust CO2 rates:         -32.71*** -12.02**     -90.51*** -81.35**       -6.39***   -11.07*    -53.86*** -63.25**
  5% goods, 95% energy           (8.69)   (5.90)       (27.69)   (32.39)        (1.67)     (6.29)     (12.31)   (30.48)



Additional sensitivity analyses
 20. Reverse regression       -0.0004*** -0.0002      -0.0006*** -0.0003**    -0.0040*** -0.0063     -0.0003** -0.0009
     (no IV)                    (0.0001) (0.0004)      (0.0001) (0.0001)       (0.0011) (0.0040)      (0.0001) (0.0006)

 21. Lifecycle tariffs           -7.80**     -5.04    -89.68*** -51.46**         --         --           --        --
                                  (3.56)    (9.31)     (26.99)   (25.28)         --         --           --        --

Weighted                                      X                       X                      X                      X
(Continued on next page)



                                                            A-41
                                                      APPENDIX TABLE I
                              Carbon Taxes Implicit in Trade Policy, Sensitivity Analysis (continued)
                                                        Global                                              US Imports
                                         Tariffs                      NTBs                      Tariffs                    NTBs
                                     (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)        (7)          (8)
 22. No importer fixed           -32.05***    -13.51*         -99.99     -83.65***        --              --         --           --
     effects                       (8.42)      (7.18)        (57.69)      (30.55)         --              --         --           --

 23. WIOD, not Exiobase            -11.62      -18.64         -19.54         -126.03      --              --         --           --
     (no IV)                      (12.47)     (18.57)        (40.09)         (92.67)      --              --         --           --

 24. Add industry fixed            28.80        7.48          -16.09         123.97       --              --         --           --
     effects                      (25.46)     (15.32)        (13.39)         (85.56)      --              --         --           --

 25. Exclude manuf.                 -5.29       -5.87       -75.67**         -40.81**   -5.70***    -6.68***      -36.55*** -37.67***
     food, ag. goods               (6.09)      (4.52)        (30.02)          (17.36)    (1.47)      (2.33)         (8.87)   (12.22)

Trade war in 2018
 26. U.S. tariffs in 2017           --             --            --            --       -4.80***     -4.14**         --           --
                                    --             --            --            --        (1.68)       (1.45)         --           --

 27. U.S. tariffs including         --             --            --            --       -3.97***     -4.29**         --           --
     2018 protectionism             --             --            --            --        (1.43)       (1.75)         --           --

 28. U.S. tariffs in 2018,          --             --            --            --         0.62         -0.18         --           --
     ctrl. for upstreamness         --             --            --            --        (1.57)       (1.75)         --           --

Weighted                                           X                            X                         X                       X


Notes: All regressions are instrumental variables estimates, except where otherwise noted. All regressions include a constant.
Parentheses show standard errors clustered by industry except in row 4. Hyphens indicate data which are same as row 1 or
which are not available (e.g., MECS survey does not cover non-manufacturing; WIOD versus Exiobase is not relevant for
U.S. microdata; all greenhouse gases are not separately reported for these U.S. data). Asterisks denote p-value * < 0.10, ** <
0.05, *** <0.01.




                                                                      A-42
                          APPENDIX TABLE II
   Carbon Taxes Implicit in Cooperative Versus Non-Cooperative Tariffs
                                  Cooperative            Non-Cooperative
                                 (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)
Panel A. U.S. import tariffs
CO2 rate                       -6.03***   -4.49**     -78.32*** -62.39***
                                (1.71)     (1.94)      (12.70)   (23.96)
N                                 374       374          374       374
Dep. Var. Mean                   0.020     0.013        0.324     0.275

Panel B. Japanese import tariffs
CO2 rate                    -54.72***      -44.70      -46.99**      -9.18
                              (16.61)     (27.00)       (19.06)     (13.43)
N                                47          47            47         47
Dep. Var. Mean                 0.074       0.040         0.072       0.027

Panel C: Chinese import tariffs
CO2 rate                        5.25       18.91        -60.50       -3.34
                              (10.12)     (12.01)      (54.50)      (68.22)
N                                 47         47           47          47
Dep. Var. Mean                  0.088      0.062        0.547        0.397

Weighted                                    X                         X

Notes: U.S. non-cooperative tariffs apply to Cuba and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Chinese non-cooperative tariffs apply to Andorra, the Bahamas, Bermuda, Bhutan, the British Virgin
Islands, the British Cayman Islands, French Guiana, Palestinian Territory (West Bank and Gaza),
Gibraltar, Monserrat, Nauru, Aruba, New Caledonia, Norfolk Island, Palau, Timor-Leste, San
Marino, the Seychelles, Western Sahara, and Turks and Caicos Islands. Japanese non-cooperative
tariffs apply to Andorra, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Lebanon, and Timor-Leste. Other countries receive cooperative tariff rates from these countries. See
Ossa (2014) for further discussion. All regressions include a constant. Standard errors clustered by
industry in parentheses. Asterisks denote p-value * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** <0.01.




                                                      A-43
                          APPENDIX TABLE III
        Political Economy Variables, Dirty versus Clean Industries
                                           Global              U.S.
Regression of variable on "Dirty":            (1)               (2)
Panel A: analyzed for all country×industries
 Upstreamness                             0.676***          0.756***
                                           (0.146)           (0.098)
 Intra-industry trade                       -0.152           0.252**
                                           (0.093)           (0.105)
 Import pen. ratio                          0.031           -0.579***
                                           (0.086)           (0.101)
 Labor share                              -0.146**          -0.536***
                                           (0.069)           (0.102)
 Mean wage                                  -0.107          -0.389***
                                           (0.127)           (0.104)
Panel B: analyzed for U.S. only
 Inverse export supply elasticity             --              -0.141
                                              --             (0.106)
 Output trends, 1972-2002                     --              0.026
                                              --             (0.105)
 Import pen. ratio 1997- 2002                 --              -0.085
                                              --             (0.105)
 Workers: share with college (%)              --             -0.176*
                                              --             (0.105)
 Four-firm concentration ratio                --              0.084
                                              --             (0.106)
 Mean firm size                               --              0.113
                                              --             (0.106)
 Standard deviation of firm size              --              0.030
                                              --             (0.106)
 Capital share                                --              0.058
                                              --             (0.105)
(Continued next page)




                                                    A-44
                         APPENDIX TABLE III
 Political Economy Variables, Dirty versus Clean Industries (Continued)
                                          Global              U.S.
Regression of variable on "Dirty":          (1)                (2)
 Shipping cost per
dollar×kilometer                             --                0.697***
                                             --                 (0.100)
 Geographic dispersion                       --                  -0.022
                                             --                 (0.106)
 Workers: unionized (%)                      --                0.669***
                                             --                 (0.100)
 Workers: unemployment                       --                  -0.063
                                             --                 (0.106)
 Local pollution                                               0.601***
                                                                (0.102)
 PAC contributions                             --               -0.188*
                                               --               (0.104)
Notes: Each table entry is the coefficient from a separate regression of the indicated variable on a dummy for
whether an observation has above-median total emissions rate and a constant; Column 1 also includes
country fixed effects. All variables are measured in z-scores. Regressions are weighted by the value of
imports. Standard errors clustered by industry in parentheses. Asterisks denote p-value * < 0.10, ** < 0.05,
*** <0.01.




                                                       A-45
                                  APPENDIX TABLE IV
           Political Economy Explanations for Implicit Carbon Taxes: One at a Time
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
Panel A. All global trade, weighted
CO2 rate                     -86.60***       6.36    -87.83*** -89.11** -87.02*** -90.90**
                               (33.44)     (40.92)     (33.00)  (35.71)   (33.64)  (37.97)

Panel B. All global trade, instrument for political economy, weighted
CO2 rate                      -86.60***     49.78      -76.18* -113.95*       -70.84*     -98.21*
                                (33.44)    (52.40)     (43.52)    (63.04)     (38.23)     (55.32)
K-P F Statistic                   --         28.9        9.6        3.9         21.7        24.8

Panel C. U.S. imports, weighted
CO2 rate                    -49.72***        2.74    -51.99*** -47.50*** -49.75*** -54.32***
                              (9.90)       (10.19)     (10.54)   (10.32)   (12.19)   (10.45)

Panel D. U.S. imports, direct CO 2 only
CO2 rate                     -70.12***   -4.75       -71.73*** -61.11*** -48.24*** -95.27***
                               (23.88)  (17.20)        (19.84)   (21.21)   (17.80)   (27.15)

Panel E. U.S. imports, direct CO 2 only, unweighted
CO2 rate                     -65.28***      3.11    -68.47*** -60.83*** -63.07*** -70.97***
                               (16.13)    (11.66)     (17.16)   (16.32)   (17.95)   (17.34)

Upstreamness                                 X
Intra-industry                                           X
Import pen. ratio                                                    X
Labor share                                                                      X
Mean wage                                                                                    X

Notes: Dependent variable in all regressions is sum of tariffs and NTBs. Each observation is a
country×industry (Panels A and B) or industry (Panels C, D, and E). In Panels A, B, and C, CO 2
rate is the total rate from inverting an input-output table, which is instrumented with the direct
CO2 rate. In panel B only, the political economy variables (upstreamness, intra-industry share,
etc.) are instrumented with the mean of each political economy variable in the industry of interest
across the 10 smallest other countries. Panels A and B include country fixed effects. All
regressions include a constant. Standard errors clustered by industry in parentheses. Asterisks
denote p-value * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** <0.01.




                                                        A-46
                                              APPENDIX TABLE V
                               Political Economy Explanations: All Controls Together
                                                   All global trade                             U.S. imports
                                           IV              IV            Lasso              IV              Lasso
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)
CO2 rate                                -29.237         -29.600         -24.780        -112.754*           -44.065
                                       (19.444)        (29.641)        (18.726)         (64.063)          (41.779)
Upstreamness                          -0.105***      -0.180***        -0.106***        -0.044***         -0.069***
                                        (0.017)         (0.029)         (0.017)          (0.016)           (0.015)
Intra-industry trade                     -0.004          -0.051            0              -0.007              0
                                        (0.010)         (0.053)            0             (0.015)              0
Import penetration ratio               -0.027**      -0.234***             0              -0.016              0
                                        (0.012)         (0.072)            0             (0.017)              0
Labor share                             -0.012*       -0.360**             0              -0.042              0
                                        (0.006)         (0.159)            0             (0.026)              0
Workers: mean wage                        0.003           0.126            0             -0.034*              0
                                        (0.019)         (0.078)            0             (0.020)              0
Inverse export supply elast.                --              --             --           -0.023**              0
                                                                                         (0.011)              0
Output trends 1972-2002                  --              --              --                0.007              0
                                                                                         (0.011)              0
Trend in import pen. ratio               --              --              --                0.026              0
                                                                                         (0.016)              0
Workers: share w/ college                --              --              --               -0.034              0
                                                                                         (0.028)              0
Four-firm conc. ratio                    --              --              --               -0.059              0
                                                                                         (0.038)              0
Mean firm size                           --              --              --               0.109*              0
                                                                                         (0.061)              0
Standard dev. of firm size               --              --              --              -0.120*              0
                                                                                         (0.062)              0
Capital share                            --              --              --                0.032              0
                                                                                         (0.025)              0
Shipping cost per dollar*km              --              --              --                0.034            0.034
                                                                                         (0.033)           (0.029)
Geographic dispersion                    --              --              --                0.083              0
                                                                                         (0.053)              0
Workers: unemployed                      --              --              --                0.001              0
                                                                                         (0.028)              0
Workers: unionized (%)                   --              --              --                0.025              0
                                                                                         (0.017)              0
Local pollution                                                                            0.008              0
                                                                                         (0.015)              0
PAC contributions                        --              --              --                0.028              0
                                                                                         (0.021)              0
Instrument political economy                              X
(Continued next page)


                                                         A-47
                                              APPENDIX TABLE V
                          Political Economy Explanations: All Controls Together (Continued)

Notes: Lasso entries of "0" mean the coefficient is exactly zero. CO2 intensity refers to total intensity from the input-
output table. Total CO 2 rate is instrumented with direct CO2 rate. In column 2, political economy variables are
instrumented with their mean in other countries. Columns 1-3 include country fixed effects. Country fixed effects and
excluded instrument are not penalized in Lasso estimates. All regressions include a constant. Standard errors clustered by
industry in parentheses.




                                                             A-48
                      APPENDIX TABLE VI
          Country Aggregation in General Equilibrium Model
Country                                    Aggregation
Australia
Japan
                                           Pacific Ocean
South Korea
Taiwan
Austria
Belgium
Germany
                                           Western Europe
France
Luxembourg
The Netherlands
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Lithuania
Latvia                                     Eastern Europe
Poland
Romania
Russia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Brazil
                                           Latin America
Mexico
Canada
                                           North America
United States
China                                      China
Cyprus
Spain
Greece
Italy                                      Southern Europe
Malta
Portugal
Turkey
Denmark
Finland
United Kingdom
                                           Northern Europe
Ireland
Norway
Sweden
India
                                           Indian Ocean
Indonesia
Rest of the World-Asia and Pacific
Rest of the World-Europe
Rest of the World-Africa
Rest of the World-America                  Rest of the World
Rest of the World-Middle East
South Africa
Switzerland




                                                            A-49
                                         APPENDIX TABLE VII
                                       Sectors and Trade Elasticities
                                                           Caliendo
                                                            & Parro     Shapiro   Bagwell et Giri et al.
Sector                                            Overall (2015)        (2016)    al. (2018) (2018)
Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, and Fishing         9.11      9.11        3.34      22.13       --
                                                   (1.05)    (2.01)      (3.63)     (1.31)      --
Coal and Peat Extraction and Related                5.38     13.53        3.45       5.38       --
                                                   (0.97)    (3.67)      (1.27)     (1.65)      --
Petroleum Extraction and Related                   13.53     13.53        3.45      22.38       --
                                                   (1.20)    (3.67)      (1.27)    (11.31)      --
Natural Gas Extraction and Related                  8.49     13.53        3.45         --       --
                                                   (1.20)    (3.67)      (1.27)        --       --
Other Mining                                        4.13     13.53        3.45       4.13       --
                                                   (0.73)    (3.67)      (1.27)     (0.92)      --
Food, Beverages, and Tobacco                        4.42      2.62        5.26      11.01      3.57
                                                   (0.24)    (0.61)      (2.10)     (1.42)    (0.27)
Textiles, Textile Products, and Leather             6.36      8.10       18.56       4.62      3.71
                                                   (0.16)    (1.28)      (5.59)     (0.90)    (0.16)
Wood; Wood and Cork Products                        8.19     11.50        5.90      10.47      4.17
                                                   (0.97)    (2.87)      (2.23)     (3.00)    (1.26)
Pulp and Paper                                      6.85     16.52        5.77       7.93      2.97
                                                   (0.18)    (2.65)      (3.00)     (2.06)    (0.18)
Coke, Refined Petroleum, and Nuclear Fuel           8.95     64.85        8.95         --      3.87
                                                   (0.47) (15.61)        (4.01)        --     (0.47)
Chemicals, Fertilizer, and Basic Plastics           3.44      3.13        1.55       8.15      3.75
                                                   (0.22)    (1.78)      (3.04)     (2.57)    (0.22)
Rubber and Plastic Products                         2.99      1.67        1.55       9.25      4.31
                                                   (0.48)    (2.23)      (3.04)     (3.58)    (0.50)
Glass, Cement, Other Non-Metallic Minerals          3.43      2.41        1.55       8.31      4.44
                                                   (0.37)    (1.60)      (3.04)     (8.00)    (0.38)
Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal                   7.99      5.45       12.94       9.13      6.84
                                                   (0.84)    (1.62)      (8.35)     (2.87)    (1.05)
Machinery N.E.C.                                    6.23      1.45       10.84       9.18      3.27
                                                   (0.21)    (2.80)      (2.84)     (2.19)    (0.21)
Electrical and Optical Equipment                    7.92      8.93       10.84       6.91      3.27
                                                   (0.20)    (0.93)      (2.84)     (3.63)    (0.21)
Transport Equipment                                 5.68      1.23        6.88       6.98      4.47
                                                   (0.51)    (0.70)      (3.66)     (2.88)    (0.80)
Manufacturing, N.E.C., Recycling                    5.25      3.98       12.76       5.25       --
                                                   (0.78)    (1.08)      (4.57)     (1.16)      --
Electricity Generation                              6.69      3.98        6.69      10.23       --
                                                   (1.00)    (1.08)      (3.17)     (4.99)      --
Services and all other industries                   6.69      3.98        6.69      18.45       --
                                                   (1.02)    (1.08)      (3.17)     (9.45)      --
Land, pipeline, air, and sea transportation         5.34      3.98        6.69         --       --
                                                   (1.02)    (1.08)      (3.17)        --       --




                                                         A-50
                                            APPENDIX TABLE VIII
        Effects of Counterfactual Tariffs and NTBs on CO2 Emissions and Welfare, Sensitivity Analysis
                                             CO2                    CO2 Intensity =     Climate       Social
                                          Emissions   Real Income      (1) - (2)        benefits      welfare
                                             (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)          (5)
Panel A: Sensitivity Analysis for Main Counterfactual
 1. Baseline estimates                     -3.59%       0.65%           -4.24%           0.08%        0.57%
 2. Trade elasticities: Caliendo-Parro     -5.66%       0.55%           -6.21%           0.13%        0.42%
 3. Larger energy elasticity               -2.53%       0.47%           -3.00%           0.06%        0.41%
 3. Harmonize tariffs only                 -1.75%       0.13%           -1.88%           0.04%        0.09%
 4. Harmonize NTBs only                    -2.26%       0.47%           -2.73%           0.05%        0.42%
 5. Algorithm: trust-region                -3.59%       0.65%           -4.24%           0.08%        0.57%
 6. Algorithm: Levenberg-Marquardt         -3.59%       0.65%           -4.24%           0.08%        0.57%

Panel B: Counterfactual sets EU tariffs and NTBs to mean
  Global total                             -1.84%        0.25%             -2.10%             --           --

   By region
     Pacific Ocean                         -1.63%         0.06%            -1.69%             --           --
     Western Europe                        20.35%         0.82%            19.53%             --           --
     Eastern Europe                         1.50%         0.12%             1.38%             --           --
     Latin America                         -4.65%         0.01%            -4.66%             --           --
     North America                         -0.12%         0.01%            -0.13%             --           --
     China                                 -0.97%         0.00%            -0.97%             --           --
     Southern Europe                       50.43%         0.58%            49.85%             --           --
     Northern Europe                       17.04%         0.96%            16.08%             --           --
     Indian Ocean                          -1.98%         -0.17%           -1.81%             --           --
     Rest of World                         -7.51%         0.04%            -7.55%             --           --

Panel C: Counterfactual sets tariffs and NTBs to mean of cleanest third of goods
  Global total                             -5.09%          0.06%            -5.15%          0.11%        -0.05%

Panel D: Counterfactual sets tariffs and NTBs to mean of dirtiest third of goods
  Global total                             -4.20%         1.13%              -5.33%         0.09%        1.04%

Panel E: All countries add a carbon tariff
  Global total                             -2.52%          0.45%           -2.97%           0.06%        0.39%

Panel F: All Countries set tariffs and NTBs to zero
   Global total                              1.31%          2.65%            -1.34%           -0.03%       2.68%
Notes: See notes to Table V. Unless otherwise noted, all estimates refer to changes in both tariffs and NTBs.
Global change in real income refers to the weighted mean percentage change in countries' real incomes due to a
counterfactual policy, where weights equal each country's baseline income. In all baseline and counterfactual
scenarios, intra-national tariffs and NTBs are assumed to equal zero.




                                                       A-51
                                                             APPENDIX TABLE IX
                                Components of Changes in Fossil Fuel Consumption Due to Counterfactual Trade Policy
                        Total      Prices                                 Nominal Revenue                               Baseline Counterfactual
                                                                                       Country×Sector Expenditure      Emissions Emissions
                                                       Expenditure     Revenue /                  Final   Intermediate
                                              Total      Share        Expenditure     Total      Goods          s
                          (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)
Panel A: Oil
  Domestic Sales        -1.2%      -0.3%     -1.0%         1.3%           0.0%           -0.7%         0.6%         -0.7%    5.7       5.7
  Exports               -8.2%      -0.6%     -6.4%        -7.5%          -1.5%           -0.8%        -0.7%         -0.7%    5.7       5.2

Panel B: Natural Gas
  Domestic Sales      -0.9%        -0.5%      -0.5%        0.0%           0.0%           -0.5%         0.6%         -0.6%    4.4       4.3
  Exports            -12.8%        -0.5%     -11.0%       -11.6%         -1.5%           0.7%         -0.6%         0.8%     1.5       1.3

Panel C: Coal
  Domestic Sales         -4.7%     0.5%       -5.2%      -3.2%             0.0%           -2.1%         -0.5%        -2.1%   12.6     12.0
  Exports                9.1%      0.3%       8.0%        8.0%            -1.1%            1.0%         -0.5%        1.1%     1.2      1.4
Notes: Emissions refer to 2007 baseline emissions in GtCO2. See text for definitions of each column in terms of the model.




                                                                          A-52
