                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               REBATES IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY:
      EVIDENCE FROM MEDICINES SOLD IN RETAIL PHARMACIES IN THE U.S.

                                         Pragya Kakani
                                        Michael Chernew
                                        Amitabh Chandra

                                       Working Paper 26846
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26846


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank Scott Hinds and Robert Evans from SSR Health, LLC for providing access to the data.
Researchers can obtain these data from SSR Health and obtain code from us to analyze these
data. We are also thankful to Kendra Singh for expert research assistance. Finally, Pragya Kakani
gratefully acknowledges funding support from the National Institute on Aging, through Grant
Number T32-AG000186 to the National Bureau of Economic Research, and from the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) T-32 Training Grant under Grant Number
T32HS000055. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institute on Aging or the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26846.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pragya Kakani, Michael Chernew, and Amitabh Chandra. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rebates in the Pharmaceutical Industry: Evidence from Medicines Sold in Retail Pharmacies
in the U.S.
Pragya Kakani, Michael Chernew, and Amitabh Chandra
NBER Working Paper No. 26846
March 2020
JEL No. I11

                                           ABSTRACT

Rising list prices are often used to illustrate the burden of prescription drug spending, but payers
routinely negotiate rebates from manufacturers that generate differences between list and net
prices. List prices are easily available and affect patient cost-sharing, but net prices are
confidential and affect innovation incentives. We use novel data on medicines sold in a retail
setting to quantify rebate growth, the sensitivity of pharmaceutical price indices to list versus net
prices, and contribution of net price growth to revenue growth. From 2012 to 2017, we find
average rebates increased from 32% to 48%, owing entirely to growth in rebate-levels over a
product lifetime rather than shifts towards high rebate products. Annual inflation of list prices
was 12% while that of net prices was 3%, implying that financial rewards to manufacturers per
unit sold have not grown proportionally to list prices. This pattern is mirrored in 19 of the 20 top
drug classes by revenue including insulins, where list and net price inflation were 16% and 2%
annually respectively. Finally, we find price growth explains 76% of revenue growth when
measured by list prices but 31% of revenue growth when measured by net prices. Moreover, new
product entry is the most important factor affecting pharmaceutical revenue growth. These
findings provide a cautionary note on using list prices for policy analysis.

Pragya Kakani                                     Amitabh Chandra
Harvard University                                John F. Kennedy School of Government
pkakani@g.harvard.edu                             Harvard University
                                                  79 JFK Street
Michael Chernew                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
Harvard Medical School                            and NBER
Dept. of Health Care Policy                       amitabh_chandra@harvard.edu
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
chernew@hcp.med.harvard.edu
1       Introduction

           Pharmaceutical companies are granted market-power through patents and exclusivity
periods. The resulting profits increase their incentives to innovate but can strain the ability of
patients, payers, and governments to afford these medicines. Rising list prices are often used to
illustrate the economic burden of prescription drug prices, but payers, including government payers,
routinely negotiate rebates (discounts) from manufacturers that generate differences between list
prices and net prices. The confidentiality of rebate data results in researchers and policy-makers
relying on list prices or assuming that rebates are fixed or unchanging. For example, several policy
and academic reports have have ignored net prices, or assumed that the average rebate is fixed at
5-20% (Health Care Cost Institute, 2017; Gellad et al., 2008). These assumptions are made for
convenience but may be incorrect. For example, economic forces such as changes in the relative
market power of pharmaceutical firms and purchasers or competition among drugs­ via entry and
exit­ may change rebating over time.
           Understanding the level and growth of list prices and prices net of rebates is important
for several reasons. First, because pharmaceutical companies receive net prices their incentives to
innovate are keyed to these profits using these prices. If list prices are larger than net prices or grow
faster, an analyses based on list prices would overstate the dead-weight loss from manufacturers
market power and the profits required to induce new innovation. Constructing price indices using
list prices would also overstate net price inflation, and thus exaggerate what policy responses like
indexing payment to inflation will accomplish. Similarly, analysis of list prices will overstate the
contribution of price increases on revenues. Second, pricing dynamics with list prices may be
different than those with net prices and relying on the former may cause commentators to believe
that more complicated models of imperfect competition­ like 'shadow pricing,' where tacit collusion
enables an entrant to pick a price higher than an incumbent's­ are more central for understanding
pharmaceutical pricing dynamics than simpler insights from price-theory (Hartung et al., 2015;
Bhattacharya and Vogt, 2003). Third, a divergence between list and net prices can reduce risk-
protection for patients because out-of-pocket costs such as coinsurance are often tied to list prices in
order to preserve the confidentiality of net prices.1 Finally, rebates are of interest in their own right
for they reflect the relative market power and business models of intermediaries such as pharmacy
    1
    For example, in a standard 2020 Medicare Part D prescription drug plan, patients' pay 25% of list prices out-
of-pocket after exhausting their deductible and until total spending exceeds the $9719 threshold for catastrophic
coverage. Similarly, uninsured patients are typically be responsible for the full list price.




                                                       2
benefit managers (PBMs), which may be changing over time. PBMs are often compensated on the
basis of list prices and negotiated rebates, meaning that PBMs may prefer drugs with higher list
prices and higher rebates. Unfortunately, little is known about rebate levels and how they have
changed over time.
            We use data from SSR Health, LLC, a private data aggregator, to shed light on the level
and growth of list prices and net prices in the US. SSR Health, LLC aggregates data on U.S. revenue
from SEC filings, list prices and US unit sales from Symphony Health, and dosing information from
FDA labels. Our sample is composed of branded drugs distributed in traditional retail pharmacies
and excludes drugs sold in hospitals or clinics. With data on revenues and quantities, we estimate
a net price for each product-formulation and rebates as the difference between list prices and these
average net prices (where the average is taken over all US payers). The focus on average net prices
received by manufacturers is key for interpreting our results; net prices can vary by market segment
(e.g., Medicaid, Medicare, Commercial) and specific payer but we cannot isolate this variation with
our data.
            Our primary analysis reports changes in average rebates, measured as the ratio between
list and net revenues. This ratio has a straightforward interpretation as the percentage reduction in
pharmaceutical revenue owed to rebates alone. Overall, we find that pharmaceutical rebates have
grown over time, calling into question the practice of assuming fixed rebates over time. We estimate
that the average rebate across products increased from 32% to 48% between 2012 and 2017, or 3.2
percentage points per year. We further document that this pattern is relatively consistent across
major drug classes. We find that rebates increased for 18 of the 20 largest drug classes by 2017
revenue, ranging from 1.8 to 7.6 p.p. per year.
            Next, we note that rebates may grow for two different reasons: substitution towards
relatively products with high rebates, through formulary design, or increasing rebate levels within
a product. We decompose the change in rebates over time into these drivers using methods have
been used to study the firm-level drivers of aggregate productivity growth in traditional sectors
such as manufacturing (Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan, 2001; Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson,
2008; Baily et al., 1991), and the hospital-level drivers of quality improvement (Chandra et al.,
2016). We find that annual growth in rebates is almost fully explained by within-product increases
in rebates rather than shifts towards products with larger rebates. If anything, there were shifts
into products with lower rebate levels including entry of drugs with lower rebate levels. This would
be consistent with drugs in high demand being able to maintain high net prices.


                                                  3
          This finding leads us to observing that growing rebates could result either from rising
list prices and stagnant net prices or stagnant list prices and falling net prices. We calculate that
annual inflation for the medicines in our analysis is 12% when estimated using nominal list prices
and 3% when estimated by nominal net prices. This compares to a 1.4% average annual inflation in
consumer goods from 2012-2017, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), and 3.8% annual
increase in commercial medical prices across 112 metropolitan areas from 2012 to 2016 (Health
Care Cost Institute, 2018).
          We use these insights to perform a case study of four drug classes that have routinely at-
tracted considerable policy attention: insulins, GLP-1 agonists for diabetes, direct-acting antivirals
for hepatitis C, and combination anti-virals for H.I.V. Much of the public reporting on insulins has
focused on rising list prices. We find, however, that rebates for insulins also increased from 39% to
68% from 2012 to 2017. This is due to 16% annual increases in list prices but 2% annual increases
in net prices. On the other hand, rebates for hepatitis C anti-virals increased from 4% to 47% from
2014 to 2017 driven by a decline in list and net prices by 1% and 19% per annum respectively.
For GLP-1 agonists for diabetes, both list and net prices rose by 22% and 13% per annum from
2012-2017 respectively. Finally, for combination anti-virals for H.I.V, list and net prices grew by
9% and 13% per annum from 2012-2017 respectively, resulting in lower rebate shares.
          Finally, we estimate the contribution of rising prices to growth in pharmaceutical rev-
enues. Pharmaceutical revenues are different than drug spending­ the former is what is received
by manufacturers while the latter includes payments to intermediaries such as wholesalers, PBMs,
and retailers. We use net and list prices to impute net and list pharmaceutical revenue and decom-
position methods to understand the sources of growth in pharmaceutical revenue. Using net prices,
we find that 31% of annual net revenue growth is explained by within-product price growth with
the remainder explained primarily by new product entry. The entry of new products is responsible
for the overwhelming balance of revenue increases, whereas volume decreases for existing products,
holding prices fixed, reduce revenues a lot more than the actual exit of a product. In contrast to
these facts, list price increases explain 76% average annual growth in pharmaceutical revenues and
would lead commentators to see a tight connection between revenues and list price increases and
perhaps infer that list price increases translate into directly into profits because marginal costs are
low.
          There are other reports suggesting that list prices have grown faster than net prices for
branded drugs (The Office of the Inspector General, 2019; IQVIA Institute, 2017; Sood et al.


                                                  4
2020; ?). The Office of the Inspector General (2019) documents increases in rebates specifically
for Medicare Part D, IQVIA Institute (2018) is an industry report suggesting rebate increases over
time, and Sood et al. (2020) highlight a correlation between list and net price growth.
          Our work is most similar to Hernandez et al. (2020), who also use SSR Health data
and a balanced sample of drugs, and estimate that list prices increased by 9.1% while net prices
increased by 4.5% annually (similar to our findings on within-product net price increases). We
build on Hernandez et al. (2020) in several ways. First, we connect price growth, volume growth,
entry and exit to revenue growth. Second, we do not ignore new drugs and our price indices
account for new drugs through chain-weighting. We believe that this provides a more accurate
measure of inflation than the price increases for products that always existed. Third, we report
differential trends in list and net prices of commonly used drugs. Finally, Hernandez et al. (2020)
measure average price growth by weighting products based on the number of units sold (i.e., tablets,
vials, or injections). This overweights products with small doses and more units relative to their
contribution to drug spending. In contrast, we weight products based on their revenue contribution
to drug spending, which is a more economically meaningful quantity. There are other differences
in sample construction where we believe our choices, detailed in the Appendix, is more robust.
          Another related paper is Dafny, Ody and Schmidt (2017) who note that direct-to-consumer
rebating in the form of pharmaceutical coupons has increased in recent years, and increases uti-
lization. However, Dafny, Ody and Schmidt (2017) are interested in copayment relief for patients
rather than the broader suite of rebates given to wholesalers, pharmacies, and PBMs, which all
affect net prices received by manufacturers. Our estimates include both copayment relief and other
sources of pharmaceutical rebates.
          The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data, Section III
characterizes the evolution of pharmaceutical rebating, Section IV illustrates differences in economic
analyses of price and revenue growth using list versus net prices, and Section V concludes.


2    Data

          Our primary data is provided by SSR Health, LLC, a private data aggregation company
which provides data on list and estimated net prices for pharmaceutical products. SSR Health,
LLC sells access to this data to pharmaceutical companies and investment firms to assist in their




                                                  5
business decisions. The SSR Health, LLC dataset is restricted to branded products2 , which account
for the vast share of pharmaceutical spending (Long, 2018). The data excludes unbranded generic
products and products sold by private companies.             3   Their data include 1117 branded products
encompassing 3271 product-formulations from 2007 onwards. These include data on quarterly
revenues in the US by product from SEC filings. While not legally mandated, the industry norm,
driven by investor demand, is to report US sales for economically material products. Thus, US
revenue data is available for most pharmaceutical products with meaningful sales. SSR Health also
purchases data on unit sales and list prices from Symphony Health. Symphony Health is a private
data vendor that estimates unit sales using data on prescriptions filled from pharmacies. Units are
typically defined as a price per pill / vial / pen / patch. The list price provided by SSR Health,
LLC via Symphony Health refers to the Wholesale Acquisition Cost (WAC). Wholesale Acquisition
Cost is the unit list price that the pharmacy pays when purchasing medicines from distributors
(Dabora, Turaga and Schulman, 2017). Average net prices are then estimated for each product as
manufacturer revenue per unit sold. Thus, the average net price per product-formulation refers to
the average estimated price received by the manufacturer net of rebates to all parties (e.g., insurers,
pharmacy benefit managers, distributors, or patients). The average net price is taken across payers
from all segments­ Medicare, Medicaid, and commercial. Notably, the average net price is lower
than the average cost paid by society, as it is not inclusive of the costs of distribution borne by the
distributor and pharmacy or the administrative costs of benefit management borne by the payer.
           The data also includes information on U.S. market launch, exit, and loss of exclusivity
dates. We classified drugs into therapeutic classes using the hierarchical Anatomical Chemical
Therapeutic (ATC) categories, defined by the World Health Organization. Further details on the
classification of drugs into ATC categories are provided in the Appendix Section 1.
           These data have three noteworthy limitations that we sought to mitigate. First, the unit
sales data from Symphony Health may be measured with sampling error. This is especially likely
to occur in non-traditional distribution channels such as hospitals, clinics, or specialty pharmacies
where Symphony Health's coverage is weaker. Second, data provided by pharmaceutical companies
or Symphony Health can be missing for certain products or product-years. This is most likely to
occur for smaller products with less commercial significance. Finally, revenue data in quarterly SEC
   2
     The data include branded products that have lost exclusive marketing rights but are still sold under the brand
name.
   3
     Major pharmaceutical companies are typically public, but there are notable exceptions such as Purdue Pharma-
ceuticals and Boehringer Ingelheim.




                                                        6
fillings is typically recorded earlier than unit sales data from Symphony. Specifically, revenue data
is recorded when products are sold to distributors and pharmacies while unit sales data are recorded
when prescriptions are filled by patients. This can lead to excess variation in estimates of net prices
that are measured in narrow time bins or during new product launches and loss-of-exclusivity when
distributors and pharmacies may be building or depleting inventory.
           We took several steps to address these limitations. First, we limited our analysis to
product formulations on the market at any point between 2012-2017 as the data are more complete
during this time period, and SSR Health reports greater accuracy of unit sales data in more recent
years. We also focused on 1962 drugs for non-rare diseases likely to be sold in retail pharmacies,
which account for $114 Billion in 2017 net US revenue. Specifically, we dropped formulations that
were either injectable, oncology products, vaccines, diagnostic compounds, implants or devices, or
products approved for an orphan indication by the FDA. 4 5 . The excluded products accounted for
$155.2B in revenue, as shown in Appendix Exhibit 1.
           We excluded 1016 disproportionately small product-formulations with missing data for
1 or more years between 2012-2017 despite the product being on the market at the time. These
product-formulations accounted for $10.8 Billion in 2017 net US revenue. We also excluded 118
products, accounting for $9.1 Billion in 2017 net US revenue, experiencing loss-of-exclusivity within
one year of baseline or endline. We also excluded 32 products, accounting for less than $1 Billion
in 2017 net US revenue, that were not linked to ATC categories or with outlier changes in net or
list prices during the study period. Finally, we only include a product-years in the analysis if the
product is offered for the full year. We report estimates at the annual level to smooth over timing
differences in the reporting of revenue and unit sales. Further details on the data limitations, our
approach, and our exclusions are provided in the Appendix Section 2.
           Our final sample includes 726 total product-formulations. Due to product entry and exit,
the sample includes 561 product-formulations in 2012 and 682 product-formulations in 2017. In
2012, the average net revenue associated with each product-formulation was $106 Million, with all
product-formulations representing $59.3 Billion in net revenue. In 2017, the mean net revenue asso-
   4
     We did not exclude products where the only approved Orphan indication was for a pediatric condition, as this
often suggests that the product is used in a broader population in practice. For example, the Hepatitis C product
Sovaldi is approved for the Orphan indication of pediatric Hepatitis C despite being used in the broader Hepatitis C
population.
   5
     The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) publishes estimates of average net prices for drugs paid by
Medicare Part B, which would include many drugs offered in a hospital outpatient setting, but these numbers exclude
Medicaid rebates and so do not represent average net prices received by manufacturers. At the time of writing this
paper, Medicaid covered approximately 72 million people



                                                         7
ciated with each product-formulation was $136 Million, with all product-formulations representing
$92.9 Billion in net revenue. Additional summary statistics on the final sample can be found in
Appendix Exhibits 1 and 2.


3     Evolution of pharmaceutical rebating

3.1   Total growth in rebate share

          We first report the size of rebates over the 2012-17 period across the full-sample. We do
this by comparing growth in actual pharmaceutical revenue to a counterfactual in which products
were sold at list, as opposed to net, prices. The difference between the counterfactual revenue at
list prices and actual pharmaceutical revenue represents the rebate share. The rebate share in a
given year can be interpreted as the total reduction in pharmaceutical spending due to rebates in
this sample, holding quantities in that year constant.
          Formally, the total rebate share in year t (rebatet ) can be expressed as equation 1. Here,
pnet
 i,t reflects the estimated net price for product-formulation i in year t, and St represents all

products on the market for the full year t.

                                                            list   - pnet
                                                 iSt qi,t (pi,t       i,t )
                                   rebatet =                      list
                                                                                                      (1)
                                                        iSt qi,t pi,t

          The results from these analyses are depicted in Exhibit 1 (Panel A). From 2012-2017 we
estimate that the total rebate share increased by 16 p.p. from 32% to 48% of list prices. This
corresponds to an annual growth in total rebate shares of 3.2 p.p. To demonstrate the robustness
of this result, we assess the sensitivity of these results to several alternatives adjusting our exclusion
criteria related to data completeness, loss of exclusivity, and outliers (Appendix Exhibit 3).


3.2   Drivers of of rebate share growth

          The growth in rebates over time may be driven by multiple dynamics; changes in rebates
could reflect changing rebate levels within product or shifts into products with differing rebate
levels. Moreover, market share shifts could happen among products existing in both periods, due
to the entry of new products, or due to product exit. To determine the relative contribution of these
forces, we first decomposed the rebate change across each pair of adjacent years in our study period
(e.g., 2012-2013, 2013-2014, etc.) into four components per equation 2. Notably, performing the
decomposition on an annual basis rather than from 2012 to 2017 reduces the component explained

                                                    8
by entry and exit. This is analogous to a chain-weighted approach to calculate quantities such
as inflation and GDP growth, which also relies on estimation in narrower temporal categories to
reduce the impact of the changing bundle of goods offered.



   rebatet - rebatet-1          =             it-1 (rit - rit-1 ) +                    (it - it-1 )  (rit-1 - rebatet-1 )
 Annual change in avg. rebate       iBt,t-1                                  iBt,t-1

                                              Withint,t-1                                      Betweent,t-1

                                    +             (it - it-1 )  (rit - rit-1 )
                                        iBt,t-1

                                                        Crosst,t-1

                                    +              i,t (rit - rebatet-1 ) +                 i,t-1 (rebatet-1 - rit-1 )
                                        iNt,t-1                                  iXt,t-1

                                                     Entryt,t-1                                  Exitt,t-1
                                                                                                                         (2)


                                                               qit plist
                                                                    it
                                                   it =                  list                                            (3)
                                                              iSt i tpit
                                                                    q


                                                             plist
                                                              it - pit
                                                                       net
                                                     rit =                                                               (4)
                                                                 plist
                                                                   it

          The term it is defined by equation 3 and refers to market share, measured as the share
of list revenue, in year t attributable to product i among the set St of all products offered in year
t. The term rit is defined in equation 4 and is the share of list price rebated for product i in year
t. The term Bt,t-1 refers to the set of products offered in both periods t and t - 1, Nt,t-1 refers
to the set of products offered in year t but not year t - 1, and Xt,t-1 refers to the set of products
offered in year t - 1 but not year t. Finally rebatet is defined as in equation 1 and refers to the
average rebate in year t.
          Thus, in equation 2, the withint,t-1 term is the component of rebate growth from year
t - 1 to t that is fully explained by growth in the rebate for each product-formulation, assuming
market shares do not change. Meanwhile, the betweent,t-1 , crosst,t-1 , entryt,t-1 , and exitt,t-1
terms together comprise the component of rebate growth from year t - 1 to t attributable to
market share increases among product-formulations with higher rebates. Specifically, betweent,t-1
is the component attributable to increasing market share among product-formulations that already
had relatively high rebates in period t - 1, crosst,t-1 is the component attributable to increasing


                                                               9
market share among product-formulations with growing rebate shares, entryt,t-1 is the component
attributable to the entry of relatively high rebate products in period t, and exitt,t-1 is the component
attributable to the exit of relatively low rebate products in period t. These terms will be negative
if the forces that they measure move in opposite directions to overall rebate growth.
           The results of this analysis are in Exhibit 1 (Panel B). Growth in average market-wide
rebate shares is entirely explained by growth in rebates within products over time. Market share
shifts have actually tended towards products with lower rebates. This is consistent with products
in high demand being able to negotiate higher net prices. If there were no shift in market share
across products, including no product entry or exit, then rebates would have increased 4.8 p.p.
per year rather than 3.2 p.p. per year on average. Conversely, shifts in market share towards
product-formulations with lower rebates reduced rebate growth by 1.6 p.p. per year on average.


3.3    Rebate trends by drug class

           We investigated heterogeneity in rebate share growth in the largest 20 drug classes by
total net revenue. We focused this analysis on the narrowest grouping of drugs available (ATC-
level4 class) as these drugs could reasonably be considered imperfect substitutes.6 In 2012, this
sample of 20 drug classes accounted for 30% (169) of the product-formulations and 58% ($34.2
Billion) of net revenue in study sample. Similarly, in 2017, these drug classes accounted for 31%
(213) of the product-formulations and 59% ($54.6 Billion) of net revenue in our study sample. For
each drug class, we estimated rebate shares from 2012-2017 using equation 1. We then decomposed
rebate share growth into components related to within product rebate growth and market share
shifts towards products with differing rebate levels, per equation 2. Appendix Section 4 provides
more detail on the selection of classes for this analysis.
           The results from this analysis are in Exhibit 2. There is heterogeneity across classes
in rebate growth, but almost all classes considered experienced growth in rebates. 18 of the 20
drug classes depicted saw increases in rebate shares, ranging from 1.8 p.p. to 7.6 p.p. per year.
The only classes to see a reduction in rebates were combinations of direct-acting anti-virals for
H.I.V., where rebates decreased by 1.4 p.p. per year, and proton pump inhibitors for peptic ulcers
   6
     We excluded from consideration any classes capturing a miscellaneous assortment of drugs within an ATC-level3
class. As an example, we exclude the ATC-level 4 class J01XX, which captures "other antibacterials for systemic
use". This includes all antibacterials that are not defined by another ATC-level4 class. We also exclude classes
defined by a broad mechanism of action, in which specific products are not close substitutes. As an example, we
exclude the ATC-level4 category L04AA which captures selective immunosuppressive drugs. This includes drugs
like Cellcept, which prevents organ rejection after transplant, and orencia, which is for auto-immune diseases like
rheumatoid arthritis.


                                                        10
and gastroesophageal reflux disease, where rebates decreased by 1.2 p.p. per year. Consistent
with our earlier results, for all the drug classes experiencing rebate growth, the within-product
average annual rebate growth was fully or near-fully explained by increases in rebate growth within
product, rather than shifts towards products with larger rebates. However, there is heterogeneity
across classes on the role of market share shifts: in 9 out of the 18 classes in which rebates grew,
market share shifts actually pushed towards product-formulations that reduced rebate growth.


4     Contrasting economic analyses of net and list prices

          The level of pharmaceutical rebates and changes in rebating over time imply that analyses
of pharmaceutical pricing will yield different results depending on whether net or list prices are
used. In this section we illustrate this point by demonstrating differences in price indices overall
and by drug class and in the contribution of price increases to estimates of total pharmaceutical
revenue growth.


4.1     Estimates of pharmaceutical price inflation

4.1.1    Laspreyres price inflation

          We estimated list and net price growth per treatment course, or for an annual supply when
a standard treatment course was not defined. This exercise is richer than the simply focusing on
rebates, because increasing rebates, as illustrated in Exhibit 2, could be consistent with increasing,
flat, or decreasing net prices so long as list prices grew faster or did not decline as quickly. This
exercise also allows us to highlight the dollar value of divergence between list and net prices.
          We estimate a pharmaceutical price inflation index by measuring inflation from t - 1 to
t using a Laspreyres inflation index estimated on the basis of products available in both periods
t - 1 and t. We then estimate a chain-weighted or compound annual inflation rate by multiplying
the Laspreyres inflation indexed for each year-pair from 2012-2017.
          Formally, we apply equation 5 to estimate a Laspreyres inflation index between years
                                                                                       list and g net
t - 1 and t using prices for the set of products appearing in both t - 1 and t. Here, gt -1,t    t-1,t

refer to the estimated price inflation between years t - 1 and t, calculated using list price and net
price, plist     net
        i,t and pi,t refer to prices for product-formulation i in year t, qi,t and refers to unit sales,

and Bt,t-1 is the set of product-formulations offered in both years t and t - 1.



                                                  11
                        c
                                    i  Bt-1,t (pc       c
                                                i,t - pi,t-1 )qi,t-1
                       gt -1,t =                                     , c  (list, net)                (5)
                                      i  Bt-1,t (pc i,t-1 qi,t-1 )

          We then calculate a compound annual inflation rate, g2012,2017 by applying equation 6.

                                                                    1/5

                             g2012,2017 =                   gt-1,t + 1    -1                         (6)
                                             t[2013,2017]

          Exhibit 3 includes details on the annual Laspreyes inflation indices estimates underly-
ing the compound annual inflation rate by drug class and across all drug classes. We find that
estimation with list prices yields a compound annual inflation rate of 12% while estimation with
net prices yields a compound annual inflation rate of 3%. This illustrates that financial rewards
to pharmaceutical firms per unit sold has not grown in proportion to list price increases. This
compares to a 1.4% average annual inflation in consumer goods from 2012-2017, as measured by
the consumer price index (CPI), and 3.8% annual increase in commercial medical prices across 112
metropolitan areas from 2012 to 2016 (Health Care Cost Institute, 2018).
          We also estimate annual inflation estimates separately for the 20 largest ATC-level 4
drug classes as estimated by total revenue in the study period. While there is some heterogeneity
across drug classes, list price inflation was greater than net price inflation for 19 of 20 drug classes.
To benchmark these results to the CPI, we find that 13 of the 20 largest ATC-level 4 drug classes
experienced net price inflation higher than price inflation for consumer goods, but all 20 experienced
list price inflation that exceeded CPI. We emphasize that the comparison to CPI is only for bench-
marking purposes; there is no reason to believe that prices should growth at CPI.
          These estimates of price inflation have limitations that are shared by all price indices of
the type that we have constructed. Our estimates measure inflation on a fixed bundle of goods
available in both years of each year-pair and understate inflation because we do not capture higher
prices among entering products in the year they enter. We did not control for the quality of new
drugs, so if newer drugs are better then our estimates overstate inflation. Moreover, our estimates
also overstate the inflationary burden on consumers because we do not have data on generics­ the
entry of generics causes substitution towards generics because of lower prices; these lower prices
are not observed.




                                                    12
4.1.2   Growth in the average cost per therapeutic regimen

          We also estimated an alternative price inflation measure, the average price per therapeutic
regimen, for the 20 largest ATC-level 4 drug classes. This alternative measure is informative beyond
the Laspreyres inflation index for two main reasons. First, it allows us to quantify the magnitude
of price increases on spending in dollar terms. Second, it allows us to account for product entry
and exit from year-to-year.
          To illustrate our approach transparently, we first perform this analysis on a subset of the
ATC-level 4 drug classes presented in Exhibit 2 for which SSR Health, LLC collected information on
dosing for at least 5 product-formulations between 2012 and 2017. We create an index of the average
price per treatment course or annual supply within the class. We do this by weighting product-
formulations within a sub-category based the product-formulation's market share of treatment
courses or annual supplies sold that year. This provides a simple interpretation for the average
price within a drug class in a given year; it is the average price paid by a patient that year for a
course or annual supply of a therapy within the drug class.
          Exhibit 4 summarizes the trends in list and net pricing for four drug categories: insulins,
GLP-1 agonists for diabetes, direct-acting antivirals for hepatitis C, and combination anti-virals
for H.I.V. In addition to being of policy interest, these four categories highlight how classes can
differ in the evolution of net and list prices, even in cases where rebate share is increasing. In the
case of insulins, list prices grew 16% per annum while net prices remained relatively flat, growing
at 2% per annum. Among, GLP-1 analogues for diabetes saw increases in both prices, but list
prices grew faster (22% per annum) than net prices (13%). Meanwhile, list and net prices for
HCV anti-virals increased from 2012-2014 on average by 62% and 88% per annum respectively.
This is attributable to Sovaldi, a product considered much more highly effective than predecessors
and priced accordingly. However, from 2014 to 2017, net prices decreased 19% per annum while
list prices remained stable (1% per annum decrease). This coincides with the entry of additional
new-generation HCV therapies (e.g., daklinza, harvoni, epclusa, viekira / XR, zepatier). Finally,
H.I.V products saw almost equal growth in list and net prices (9% vs. 11% per annum).
          Finally, we quantified the mechanisms underlying changes in average prices per thera-
peutic regimen. As in the case of rebates and revenue, there are several reasons why average prices
may change from year-to-year including increases in the price of products available in both years
or shifts to more expensive products. Shifts towards more expensive products may be due to shifts



                                                 13
towards more expensive products already on the market, the entry of higher cost products, or exit
of lower cost products. We sought to disentangle the contribution of these forces by decomposing
the change in average price per therapeutic regimen using an approach similar to the decompo-
sitions of rebate growth in section 3.2. We then compared how the results of this analysis differ
depending on whether we use list or net prices.
          We do this by first defining ikt , which refers to product i's share of all therapeutic
regimens sold within class k in year t, per equation 7. Here xikt refers to the the number of
                                                                                       k refers to
therapeutic regimens of product-formulation i in drug class k sold in in period t and St
the set of all products available in period t. A therapeutic regimen may be defined as either the a
one-time treatment course or an annual supply, depending on the class.

                                                          xikt
                                            ikt =                                                    (7)
                                                         iS k xikt
                                                             t


          We then define the average price per therapeutic regimen within a drug class k in year
t using list and net prices per equation 8. Here, plist     net
                                                   ikt and pikt refer to the list and net price for
                                                  k
product-formulation i in drug class k in year t, St,t-1 refers to the set of all products in class k that

are offered in at least one year between t - 1 and t, and, again, ikt refers to product i's share of
all therapeutic regimens sold within class k in year t.


                                ¯c
                                pk,t-1 =              pc
                                                       ikt  ikt , c  list, net                       (8)
                                             k
                                           iSt,t -1


          We finally decompose the annual growth in price per therapeutic regimens into five com-
                                       ¯list
ponents by applying equation 9. Again, p         ¯net
                                         k,t and pk,t are the average price per therapeutic regimen

in drug class k in year t as estimated by list and net prices, plist     net
                                                                ikt and pikt are the list and net price

per therapeutic regimen for product-formulation i in drug class k in year t, ikt is the market share
                                             k
of drug formulation i in class k in year t, Bt,t-1 is the set of product-formulations in drug class
                                     k
k that are available in both years, Nt,t -1 is the set of product-formulations in drug class k that
                                            k
are available in year t and not t - 1, and Xt,t-1 is the set of product-formulations in drug class k

available in year t - 1 but not year t.




                                                        14
        ¯c
        p       ¯c
          k,t - p k,t-1           =                  ik,t-1 (pc      c
                                                              ikt - pik,t-1 ) +              (ikt - ik,t-1 )(pc        ¯c
                                                                                                              ik,t-1 - pk,t-1 )
                                            k
                                          iBt,t                                     k
                                                                                  iBt,t
Avg. growth in price per course                 -1                                      -1


                                                       Withink
                                                             t,t-1                                  Betweenk
                                                                                                           t,t-1


                                      +              (ikt - ik,t-1 )  (pc      c
                                                                        ikt - pik,t-1 ) +                  ikt (pc     ¯c
                                                                                                                 ikt - p k,t-1 )
                                            k
                                          iBt,t                                                   k
                                                                                                iNt,t
                                                -1                                                    -1


                                                              Crossk
                                                                   t,t-1
                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                           Entryt,t-1


                                      +                      pc
                                                     ik,t-1 (¯         c
                                                              k,t-1 - pik,t-1 ), c  (list, net)
                                            k
                                          iXt,t -1


                                                          Exitk
                                                              t,t-1
                                                                                                                               (9)
           Intuitively, we decompose growth in average prices per therapeutic regimen into compo-
nents that reflect the contribution of increases in the price of existing products versus shifts towards
more expensive products. Specifically, the within terms are the component of annual increases in
the average price per therapeutic regimen increases that is fully explained by growth in the aver-
age price for each product-formulation, assuming market share does not change. Meanwhile, the
between, cross, entry, and exit terms together comprise the components of growth in average prices
per therapeutic regimen attributable to market share increases among product-formulations with
higher prices. Specifically, the between terms are the components attributable to increasing market
share among formulations that already had relatively high prices per therapeutic regimen in period
t - 1, the cross terms are the components attributable to increasing market share among product-
formulations with growing prices, the entry terms are the components attributable to the entry of
relatively high price products in period t, and the exit terms are the components attributable to
the exit of relatively low price products in period t. Again, these terms can also be negative if these
forces detract from growth in average prices per therapeutic regimen
           Exhibit 5 illustrates the results of this decomposition for insulins, GLP-1 agonists for
diabetes, direct-acting antivirals for hepatitis C, and combination anti-virals for H.I.V. It shows
that within product price increases, market share shifts towards lower price product-formulations,
and entry of new products all can play an important role in explaining increases in the average
price per therapeutic regimen with considerable heterogeneity across drug classes. For example,
when estimated using list prices, within product price increases explain 98% of increase in prices
per therapeutic regimen for insulins but only 27% of increases in prices per therapeutic regimen


                                                                15
for Hepatitis C anti-virals. This is because the majority of price increases for Hepatitis C anti-
virals was driven by shifts from older to newer generation medications with greater efficacy. This
heterogeneity persists both when analyzed with list and net prices. For Hepatitis C anti-virals, the
contribution of net price changes to increases in the average net price per therapeutic regimen is
actually negative. This reflects decreasing net prices among product-formulations on the market,
in most years.


4.2   Pharmaceutical revenue growth and the contribution of price growth

            Given the popular concern that growth in pharmaceutical revenues is driven considerably
by price increases rather than increasing use or innovation (e.g., Hernandez et al. (2019)), we sought
to quantify the degree to which annual growth in pharmaceutical revenue can be explained by
growth in prices for products already on the market versus changes in the quantity of product
used, entry of new products, and the exit of existing products. We then compared how the results
of this analysis differ depending on whether we use list or net prices.
            We used a decomposition approach similar to the decompositions of rebate and price
growth presented in sections 3.2 and 4.1.2. Here, plist     net
                                                   i,t and pi,t refer list and net price per unit for

product-formulation i in year t, qi,t and refers to unit sales, St,t-1 is the set of product-formulations
offered in at least one year between years t - 1 and t, Bt,t-1 is the set of product-formulations
offered in both years t and t - 1, Nt,t-1 is the set of product-formulations offered in year t but not
t - 1, and Xt,t-1 is the set of product-formulations offered in year t - 1 but not t.



           pc
            i,t qi,t -             pc
                                    i,t-1 qi,t-1 =                 qi,t-1 (pc      c
                                                                            i,t - pi,t-1 ) +             (qi,t - qi,t-1 )pi,t-1
 iSt,t-1                 iSt,t-1                         iBt,t-1                               iBt,t-1

             Growth in revenue                                     Withint,t-1                           Betweent,t-1

                                                     +             (qi,t - qi,t-1 )  (pc      c
                                                                                       i,t - pi,t ) +              qi,t pc
                                                                                                                         i,t
                                                         iBt,t-1                                         iNt,t-1                  (10)
                                                                         Crosst,t-1                         Entryt,t-1

                                                     +             -qi,t-1 pc
                                                                            i,t-1 , c  (list, net)
                                                         iXt,t-1

                                                               Exitt,t-1


            Equation 10 decomposes growth in drug revenues across all drugs into several components
using an approach that is analagous to the approaches used in sections 3.2 and 4.1.2. The within


                                                                   16
term captures the annual growth in drug revenue explained exclusively by price increases in products
available in both years, assuming quantities consumed do not change. The between, cross, entry,
and exit terms therefore collectively capture the degree to which revenue growth is explained by
changes in quantities. Specifically the between term captures the component of drug spending
growth due to increases in quantity (volume) among products available in both periods (while
prices are fixed). The cross term captures the component of revenue growth due to increases in
the quantity for the product-formulations for which prices also increased. Finally, the entry term
reflects gained revenue from new products and exit term reflects lost revenue from exiting products.
Assuming entering and exiting products have non-zero sales in the years they are available, the
entry term will be positive and the exit term will be negative. The within, between, and cross
terms may be positive or negative depending on whether they contribute or detract from growth
in revenues.
          Finally, we determined the average annual contribution of each component in equation
10 to annual drug revenue growth over the full study period using an approach resembling our
analysis of rebate share growth in section 3.2. For each term, this was computed by simply adding
the annual components from each year-pair from 2012-2013 to 2016-2017 and dividing by the total
change in rebates from 2012-2017. For example, to estimate the average share of annual revenue
growth accounted for by within-product rebate growth (Within share 2012,2017 ), we apply equation
11.


                                                      t[2013,2017] withint,t-1
                 W ithin share2012,2017 =              c                    c                    (11)
                                              iSt-1,t pi,t qi,t -  iSt-1,t pi,t-1 qi,t-1

          Our results, depicted in Exhibit 6, show that within product price increases (within term )
play a smaller role in explaining revenues increases when estimated using net rather than list prices.
Using net prices, 31% of average annual pharmaceutical revenue growth is explained by growth in
prices for products available in both years (within term ). As a benchmark, if this price growth
had mirrored CPI inflation then this percentage would be 18% . The remaining 69% of revenue
growth that is not explained by price growth is explained primarily by new product entry (entry
term ), while volume decreases of existing products, holding prices fixed contribute negatively to
revenue growth (between term ). The negative association between price effects and volume effects
should not be interpreted to mean that we have estimated a demand curve, but that equilibrium
price increases and volume decreases are happening at the same time. The exit term is small in



                                                 17
magnitude meaning that product exit per se is not a meaningful driver of manufacturers revenues,
relative to the direct effect of losing volume on an existing product.
          In contrast, using list prices, we would estimate that that 76% of average annual pharma-
ceutical revenue growth is explained by growth in prices for products available in both years (within
term ). These differences have large implications for how we view the sources of revenue growth
for manufacturers: using net prices instead of list prices for the calculation of revenues halves the
contribution of price increases to revenue growth; new product entry is the most important source
of revenue growth, and volume decreases of existing products reduce pharmaceutical revenue.


5    Conclusion

          We used data on pharmaceutical products sold via retail pharmacy for non-rare diseases
to illustrate how our understanding of pharmaceutical price inflation is meaningfully impacted by
one's use of list versus net prices. Over the 2012-17 period, pharmaceutical price inflation was 12%
per year using list prices but only 3% per year using net prices. We also show that average rebate for
increased from 32% to 48% over the same period. We also document heterogeneity in these rebate
trends by drug class. Our results also challenge the conventional narrative around the magnitude of
price increases for the same drug. We find that price growth for already marketed products explains
76% of annual drug spending growth when measured by list prices but explains a third 31% of annual
drug spending growth when measured by net prices. Meanwhile, analyzing net prices reveals that
new product entry explains the bulk of revenue growth. Taken together, these results suggest
that new product entry is the most important factor driving growth in pharmaceutical revenue.
Furthermore, analysts and economists working in public policy should be extremely cautious in
drawing policy conclusions based on list prices alone. If nothing else, the focus on net prices would
reduce the reliance on more complicated models of imperfect competition­ like 'shadow pricing'­
over simpler insights from price-theory (Hartung et al., 2015; Bhattacharya and Vogt, 2003).
          The divergence between list and net prices has uncertain welfare effects. On the one
hand, this trend implies that the total cost of medicines to payers has not increased as dramatically
as trends in list prices would suggest. These savings are partially passed to consumers or taxpayers
in the form of lower plan premiums. However, if there is imperfect competition among PBMs or
insurers, part of these savings are likely to be retained by PBMs or insurers (Dafny, Duggan and
Ramanarayanan, 2012; Ho and Lee, 2017). To the extent that savings are being retained as profit



                                                 18
by intermediaries who are not responsible for innovation, they reduce incentives for innovation
without improving affordability. For all these reasons, our analysis does not reveal whether net
prices are higher or lower than the social optimum.
          On the other hand, because patients' out-of-pocket costs are often pegged to list prices,
growing list prices mean that patients are paying for an increasing share of pharmaceutical spending
through out-of-pocket payments. We can perform a simple calculation to benchmark this phenom-
ena. For example, our results suggest that, for fast-acting insulins from 2012-2017, revenue based
on list prices grew from $5.3 to $13.2 Billion while net revenue only grew from $2.9 to $3.5 Billion.
This implies that if a diabetic patient in a standard Medicare Part D plan and between his or
her deductible and the catastrophic coverage threshold is purchasing a fast-acting insulin, then his
or her out-of-pocket payment (25% of list price) would have accounted for 37% of pharmaceutical
revenue under 2012 list prices and rebate shares and 75% of pharmaceutical revenue under 2017
list prices and rebate shares. Thus, while insured patients with fewer health needs may benefit
from lower premiums associated with rebates, sicker or uninsured patients may be worse off and
may forgo valuable drugs (Herkert et al., 2019). As a result, growing rebates may be regressive
and may have reduced the financial protection from insurance. We underscore that this is just an
illustrative calculation, and heterogeneity in prescription drug plans and the non-linearity of in-
surance contracts makes it difficult to precisely estimate the share of total pharmaceutical revenue
accounted for by out-of-pocket payments.
          There are noteworthy caveats to our analysis. Our results may not generalize to a broader
set of products including biologic drugs those provided in hospitals, clinics, or for rare-diseases; it is
possible that market structure for these drugs is different. Second, because of using chain-weighted
indices, our estimates of price inflation does not consider the price of new products in their year
of entry, which understates inflation. Pushing in the other direction, our estimates will overstate
inflation experienced by patients because products go generic and we lack data on the prices of
generics. Third, we are unable to adjust for the quality of new drugs and this will cause us to
overstate inflation if newer drugs are better. Finally, we cannot segment trends by payer markets,
which differ substantially in rebating behavior. As a result our analysis does not translate easily
to policy simulations involving specific payer-segments such as Part D, Medicaid, or commercial
insurance.
          Our analysis rules out simple substitution towards higher rebate products, but cannot un-
cover the mechanism underlying faster growth in list than net prices, or the sources of heterogeneity


                                                   19
across drug classes. This limitation reflects our design­ we do not observe exogenous changes to
competition. This should be an active area for other work and there are several hypotheses worth
exploring. First, it is possible that because PBMs are compensated based on a combination of
list prices and negotiated rebates, PBMs prefer products with higher list prices and higher rebates
thus increasing rebating behavior over time. Second, it is possible that increasing competition
within drug class reduces net prices over time. One example of this may be HCV anti-virals, where
net price decreases coincided with the release of multiple new treatments were released from 2013
onwards. Competition from new branded products may be partially responsible for decreases in
net prices for HCV products from 2014-2017, where new product entry may have allowed payers to
demand larger rebates by creating more options for formulary design. While prior work has found
limited impact of competition on list prices (see Sarpatwari et al. (2019)), our findings highlight
the importance of studying the effect of competition on net prices. Third, it is possible that, in-
creasing market power by purchasers (e.g., PBMs, insurers, distributors) may increase negotiated
rebates. Finally, it is possible that rebate increases are due to increases in the share of pharmaceu-
tical spending done via government programs mandating rebates such as Medicaid and the 340B
Program. For example, rebates for H.I.V. declined modestly from 2012-2017. One hypothesis is
that this may reflect Medicaid coverage for a disproportionate share (42%) of all H.I.V. patients,
so it is possible that Medicaid rules concerning mandatory rebates may prevent a large divergence
between list and net prices for this drug class. Disentangling these explanations for rebate growth
is worthy grounds for future research.




                                                 20
21
22
23
24
25
26
Appendix

1. Assignment of drugs to Anatomical Therapeutic Classication (ATC) classes

           ATC categories provide a 4-tiered classification system for each drugs, where each tier
offers a different level of granularity; level-1 codes are the broadest while level-4 codes are the
narrowest. We performed this mapping using a two-step process. First, we linked the National
Drug Number (NDCs) associated with each product-formulation to ATC categories using RxNorm,
an NIH provided tool that provides linkages between various drug identifiers. This procedure linked
64% to a single ATC-level 4 category, the narrowest level of classification. The remaining 36% of
drug formulations where either linked to multiple ATC-level 4 codes (26%)7 or were not linked to
any ATC-level4 codes (10%)        8   by RxNorm.
           In cases where RxNorm linked product-formulations to multiple or no ATC-level4 codes,
we manually assigned the product-formulation to the most appropriate ATC-level 4 code based on
the mechanism of action, FDA approved indication, and documentation from other government
agencies such as the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and drug manufacturers where possible.
We were unable to link only 20 (0.6%) of product-formulations.9
           In cases where RxNorm linked to a single ATC code, we still manually reviewed each ATC
code to assure an appropriate match. For 20 (0.6%) product-formulations, we manually modified
the ATC code as it appeared RxNorm had an error. This typically occurred when the product was
a combination product but RxNorm assigned it to the ATC-4 code for only one active ingredient.
   7
     Drugs can erroneously link to multiple ATC-level4 codes for two main reasons. First, if the active ingredient in
the drug appears in products for other indications, then the RxNorm may link the drug to each of the indications
even if the brand was only approved for one. As an example, Protopic (tacrolimus) is approved for eczema whereas
Prograf (tacrolimus) is approved for preventing rejection of organ transplants. However, because they both have
tacrolimus as the active ingredient, they both were linked to ATC-level4 code D11AH (agents for dermatitis excluding
corticosteroids) and L04AD (calcineurin immunosuppressants). Second, there are cases where a drug includes multiple
ingredients. In many of these cases, there is an ATC code for the combination drug but RxNorm will return each ATC
code individually. For example, Janumet (sitagliptin phosphate / metformin hcl) is a diabetes medication. There is
an ATC4 code containing combination metformin HCL + sitagliptin phosphate (A10BD). However RxNorm will also
return the code for metformin HCL (A10BD) and sitagliptin phosphate (A10BH) individually.
   8
     Product-formulations can also erroneously fail to link to any ATC-level 4 code for multiple reasons. First,
some drugs do not have an ATC code. In these cases we used the ATC-level 4 code of competitors with the same
mechanism of action, when available. For example, Calquence (acalabrutinib) is a bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK)
inhibitor for adults with mantle cell lymphoma. It does not have an ATC-level4 code but its main competitor
Imbruvica (ibrutinib), also a BTK inhibitor, is assigned to the ATC4 code L01XE. Thus we manually assigned
Calquence into L01XE. Second, some drugs actually do have an ATC code but the generic name associated with the
NDC is listed in a slightly different way than in the ATC codebook, resulting in a failure to match. For example,
the generic name for Seebri Neohaler is listed as glycopyrrolate in RxNorm and SSR. While there is no ATC code
for glycopyrrolate per se, there is an ATC-level4 code for glycopyrronium bromide (R03BB). Glycopyrrolate is the
active moiety of glycopyrronium bromide. Thus we manually linked Seebri Neohaler to R03BB.
   9
     These included aurstat (2 formulations), biafine, hylatopic / plus (5 formulations), lacrisert, lodosyn, mugard,
neutrasal, skelaxin (2 formulations), tetrix, theracys, tropazone (2 formulations), and zyflo / cr (2 formulations).


                                                         27
          This approach to assigning drugs to ATC codes using a multitude of sources is similar to
approaches used previously (Kesselheim et al., 2015).


2. Limitations of SSR data and Exclusions

          We use data from SSR Health, LLC on list prices, net prices, revenue and unit sales. While
these data provide the best available evidence on net prices to manufacturers by drug classes, the
data do have important limitations. Most notably:
          1. Symphony Health data on unit sales are measured with error - IQVIA and Symphony
estimate unit sales from the subset of channels reporting to them. While data are relatively complete
for drugs sold via traditional retail pharmacies, the coverage is less likely to be complete for products
typically sold in non-traditional channels such as clinics, hospitals, and some specialty pharmacies.
Underestimating sales for products sold in these channels can lead to overestimated net prices.
          2. Discrepancies between when revenue and units sold are recorded ­ Manufacturers record
revenue based on drug sales to wholesalers whereas IQVIA and Symphony record unit sales based
on units dispensed at the pharmacy. Thus the transactions between wholesalers and pharmacies
are mediated by inventories, and this can cause errors in net price estimates. This is most likely to
be problematic for estimating net prices over narrow time bins. Moreover, at the time of product
launch, product exit, or loss of exclusivity the lag between inventory and sales may be larger, exac-
erbating this type of error. This is because pharmacies are more likely to be building or depleting
their inventory at this time.
          3. Data on units per therapeutic course / annual supply­ SSR Health, LLC provides es-
timates for units therapeutic course / annual supply only for select product-formulation combina-
tions. These data are particularly likely to be incomplete for product-formulations with limited
sales in recent years. This can make comparing prices and determining market share across drugs
in certain categories more challenging.
          4. Data do not capture generic sales ­ This feature limits the comprehensiveness of drug
sales data for categories with high generic penetration.
          5. Missing data ­ Companies do not always report drug sales in SEC filings and IQVIA
and Symphony may also stop reporting drug sales. This may result in years where data on drugs
is missing despite it being on the market.
          Given these limitations, we limited our analysis to years and drug classes where the data
were relatively reliable. For analyses requiring units per treatment course or annual supply, we


                                                   28
limited our analysis to classes where this data was available for several products.
           Specifically, for our main analysis, we applied several exclusions. First, we restricted
our analyses to products likely to be sold predominantly in retail pharmacies and for non-rare
diseases, for which Symphony Health data are more complete. To do this, we applied several
exclusions to exclude products likely distributed via clinics and hospitals. We first excluded all
product-formulations where one or more formulations of the product-formulation had an injectable
form according to SSR Health, LLC, with the exception of product-formulations that are typically
self-administered (e.g., insulins). We excluded these product-formulations because a wide-array of
injectable product-formulations are generally provided in clinics or hospitals, where IQVIA and
Symphony are more likely to be inaccurate (e.g., botox, contrast material, etc.). We identified
self-administered injectables exempt from this exclusion using published lists of self-administered
product-formulations by the Centers for Medicare and Medicare Services (CMS). CMS maintains
these lists to identify product-formulations excluded from coverage in physician offices or hospitals
via Medicare Part B. The lists do not include all self-administered product-formulations, but in-
cludes products where CMS feels it necessary to clarify coverage. Thus it includes most injectable
product-formulations that are self-administered.10 .
           We excluded all other product-formulations for oncology, as these may be provided at a
provider's office or hospital and thus have non-traditional distribution patterns. Indeed in Medicare,
oral oncology product-formulations for which there is an infused version are typically covered by the
physician (Part B) or hospital benefit (Part A) rather than Part D. We identified oncology products
manually.11 We also excluded inhaled vaccines, diagnostic products, and implantable product-
formulations (e.g., Intra-uterine devices) as these would typically be provided at a provider's office.
We similarly excluded iron chelating product-formulations, used to treat iron poisoning usually in
an acute setting.12
           We then excluded product-formulations for rare diseases as these are more likely to have
specialty distribution channels and potentially be more subject to sampling error. To do this,
we first excluded product-formulations classified for expanded exclusivity by the FDA as Orphan
  10
     The lists can be found here: https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/reports/sad-exclusion-list-
report.aspx?bc=AQAAAAAAAAAA&
  11
     The ATC-level2 code "L01" does include anti-tumor preparations. However other codes also include oncology
treatments. For example, Provenge is a personalized immunotherapy for prostate cancer. It appears under the
ATC-level2 code "L03" for immunostimulants. However this category also includes non-cancer treatments, such as
old-generation treatments for hepatitus C.
  12
     Vaccines were identified using the ATC-level2 code "J07". Diagnostic products were identified using the ATC-
level2 codes "V09", "V08", "V04", and the ATC-level4 code "B05XA". Implantable drug formulations were identified
using SSR Health¡ LLC data. Iron chelating product-formulations were identified using the ATC-level4 code "V03AC"


                                                       29
product-formulations. However, we did not exclude products that were only approved for an or-
phan indication via approval for a pediatric indication, as is suggestive that the product is actually
more widely used. We also excluded product-formulations that were approved for diseases classi-
fying as orphan indications, but did not receive orphan status presumably because they did not
demonstrate clinical superiority. Specifically we excluded product-formulations approved for cystic
fibrosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension, acromegaly, and multiple sclerosis. These were identified
manually.
            We then excluded several product-formulations due to missing or unreliable data. Specif-
ically we excluded product-formulations that had missing data between 2012-2017 despite being
on the market. We also excluded products facing loss of exclusivity within one year of baseline or
endline as Symphony Health data are more likely to be inaccurate around this time. We excluded
products that we could not assign to ATC codes. Finally, we excluded product-formulations that
had an increase or decrease in list or net prices of over 5 standard deviations in one year between
2012-2017.
            Our final sample included 726 branded product-formulations on the market in at least
one year between 2012 and 2017. The number of product-formulations excluded at each step are
provided in Appendix Exhibit 1. Summary statistics on the final sample can be found in Appendix
Exhibit 2.


3. Sensitivity of rebate share analyses to alternative exclusions

            We assessed the sensitivity of our main analysis of rebate share growth to alternative
exclusions, with results illustrated in Appendix Exhibit 3. Overall, we find our results robust to
alternative exclusion criteria.




                                                 30
4. Rebate share analysis by class

           We performed the analysis of rebate share growth and price inflation by drug class on
the 20 ATC-level 4 categories with the highest total sales revenue from 2012-2017 (Exhibit w).
However, we excluded ATC-level 4 categories with 2 or fewer product-formulations offered across
the study period. We also excluded poorly defined ATC-level 4 categories or ATC-level 4 categories,
which include drugs that are not substitutes.13




  13
    We excluded the following ATC-level 4 categories for being poorly defined or including poor substitutes: N03AX
(other antiepileptics), N06AX (other anti-depressants), L04AX (other immunosupressants), J05AX (other antivirals),
C10AX (other lipid modifying agents), C10BX (HMG CoA reductase inhibitors, other combinations), S01XA(other
opthalmologics), N06DX (other anti-dementia drugs), A06AX (other drugs for constipation), A02BX (other drugs for
peptic ulcer and gastrooesophageal reflux disease (GORD)), C09DX (angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), C01EB
(other cardiac preparations), N05AX (other antipsychotics), N02AX (other opioids),N07XX (other nervous system
drugs), R03DX (Other systemic drugs for obstructive airway diseases), D10AX (Other anti-acne preparations for
topical use), S01GX (Other antiallergics), D05AX (Other antipsoriatics for topical use), N05CM (Other hypnotics and
sedatives), D11AX (Other dermatologicals), D01AE (Other antifungals for topical use),A10BX (Other blood glucose
lowering drugs, excl. insulins), J01XX (Other antibacterials), D06AX (Other antibiotics for topical use), D06BX
(Other chemotherapeutics for topical use), M03BX (Other centrally acting agents), J02AX (Other antimycotics for
systemic use), N05BX (Other anxiolytics), G02CX (Other gynecologicals), A07XA (Other antidiarrheals), A11EX
(Vitamin B-complex, other combinations), B03AE (Iron in other combinations), D07XA (Corticosteroids, weak,
other combinations), R06AX (Other antihistamines for systemic use), J05AE (Protease inhibitors), L04AA (Selective
immunosuppressants)


                                                        31
32
33
34
References

Baily, Martin Neil, David Campbell Charles Hulten, Timothy Bresnahan, and
  Richard E. Caves. 1991. "Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing Plants." Brookings pa-
  pers on economic activity, Microeconomics, 1992.

Bhattacharya, Jayanta, and William Vogt. 2003. "A Simple Model of Pharmaceutical Price
  Dynamics." The Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2).

Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson. 2016. "Health
  Care Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector." American
  Economic Review, 106(8).

Dabora, Matan C., Namrata Turaga, and Kevin A. Schulman. 2017. "Financing and
  Distribution of Pharmaceuticals in the United States." JAMA, 317(1).

Dafny, Leemore, Christopher Ody, and Matthew Schmidt. 2017. "When Discounts Raise
  Costs: the Effect of Copay Coupons on Generic Utilization." American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 9(2).

Dafny, Leemore, Mark Duggan, and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan. 2012. "Paying a
  Premium on your Premium? Consolidation in the US Health Insurance Industry." American
  Economic Review, 102(2).

Foster, Lucia, John C. Haltiwanger, and Cornell John Krizan. 2001. "Aggregate Pro-
  ductivity Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence." In New developments in productivity
  analysis. University of Chicago Press.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. "Reallocation, Firm Turnover,
  and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?" American Economic Review, 98(1).

Gellad, Walid F., Sebastian Schneeweiss, Phyllis Brawarsky, Stuart Lipsitz, and Jen-
  nifer S. Haas. 2008. "What if the Federal Government Negotiated Pharmaceutical Prices for
  Seniors? an Estimate of National Savings." Journal of General Internal Medicine, 23(9).

Hartung, Daniel M., Dennis N. Bourdette, Sharia M. Ahmed, and Ruth H. Whitham.
  2015. "The Cost of Multiple Sclerosis Drugs in the US and the Pharmaceutical Industry: Too
  Big to Fail?" Neurology, 84(21).

                                              35
Health Care Cost Institute. 2017. "2017 Health Care Cost and Utilization Report."

Health Care Cost Institute. 2018. "Understanding How Price Growth Affected Areas Differently
  Across the Country."

Herkert, Darby, Pavithra Vijayakumar, Jing Luo, Jeremy I. Schwartz, Tracy L. Ra-
  bin, Eunice DeFilippo, and Kasia J. Lipska. 2019. "Cost-related Insulin Underuse Among
  Patients with Diabetes." JAMA internal medicine, 179(1).

Hernandez, Inmaculada, Alvaro San-Juan-Rodriguez, Chester B. Good, and Walid F.
  Gellad. 2020. "Changes in list prices, net prices, and discounts for branded drugs in the US,
  2007-2018." JAMA, 323(9).

Hernandez, Inmaculada, Chester B. Good, David M. Cutler, Walid F. Gellad, Natasha
  Parekh, and William H. Shrank. 2019. "The Contribution of New Product Entry Versus
  Existing Product Inflation in the Rising Costs of Drugs."

Ho, Kate, and Robin S. Lee. 2017. "Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets." Economet-
  rica, 85(2).

IQVIA Institute. 2018. "Medicine Use and Spending in the US: a Review of 2017 and Outlook
  to 2022."

Kesselheim, Aaron S, Bo Wang, Jessica M Franklin, and Jonathan J Darrow. 2015.
  "Trends in Utilization of FDA Expedited Drug Development and Approval Programs, 1987-2014:
  Cohort Study." Bmj, 351.

Long, Doug. 2018. "Global Generic and Biosimilar Trends and Insights."

Sarpatwari, Ameet, Jonathan DiBellow, Marie Zakarian, Mehdi Najafzadeh, and
  Aaron S. Kesselheim. 2019. "Competition and Price Among Brand-name Drugs in the Same
  Class: A Systematic Review of the Evidence." Plos medicine, 16(7).

Sood, Neeraj, Rocio Ribiero, Martha Ryan, and Karen Van Nuys. 2020. "The Association
  Between Drug Rebates and List Prices (White paper)." Leonard D. Schaffer Center for Health
  Economics Policy.




                                               36
