                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CAPITAL FLOW WAVES--OR RIPPLES? EXTREME CAPITAL FLOW MOVEMENTS
                          SINCE THE CRISIS

                                        Kristin J. Forbes
                                       Francis E. Warnock

                                       Working Paper 26851
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26851


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kristin J. Forbes and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Flow Waves--or Ripples? Extreme Capital Flow Movements Since the Crisis
Kristin J. Forbes and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 26851
March 2020
JEL No. F3

                                          ABSTRACT

Has the occurrence of "extreme capital flow movements"--episodes of sudden surges, stops,
flight and retrenchment--changed since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC)? This paper addresses
this question by updating and building on the dataset and methodology introduced in Forbes and
Warnock (2012) to calculate the occurrence of sharp capital flow movements by foreigners and
domestics into and out of individual countries. The results suggest that the occurrence of these
extreme capital flow movements has not increased since the GFC. The drivers of these episodes,
however, appear to have changed since the GFC. Extreme capital flow movements are less
correlated with changes in global risk, and are more difficult to explain with basic global,
regional and domestic variables. What used to be large global "waves" in international capital
flows have more recently become idiosyncratic "ripples".


Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and CEPR
and also NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26851
Additional data for paper is available at https://mitmgmtfaculty.mit.edu/kjforbes/research/
I. Introduction

    The global financial landscape has changed fundamentally since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC)--
from the widespread use of "unconventional" monetary policy tools, to the extended period of
extremely low interest rates in advanced economics, to the greater use of prudential and
macroprudential policies. Each of these changes could affect cross-border capital flows, either
aggravating or mitigating the sharp movements in capital flows that can create an array of challenges.
Concerns about capital flow volatility have motivated an extensive academic literature, with a seminal
analysis in Calvo (1998) defining "sudden stops" as periods when net capital flows decline sharply.
Forbes and Warnock (2012) extended this framework to focus on changes in gross capital flows,
identifying sharp increases and decreases in capital flows by foreigners and domestics (instead of
aggregating them), and showed that this more comprehensive identification strategy yielded important
insights on the occurrence, patterns, and drivers of extreme capital flow movements. 1 This approach
and the corresponding data set of "capital flow waves" were subsequently used in a number of papers
to address a variety of questions. 2 Extending this dataset, however, was complicated by a transition to
new global standards for capital flow data over the subsequent years. This paper extends the dataset on
capital flows and episodes from Forbes and Warnock (2012) and shows that over the last decade there
have been noteworthy changes in the incidence, and especially the drivers, of these extreme capital
flows episodes. Since the GFC, capital flows have moved more in "ripples" rather than "waves", and
these ripples were driven less by changes in risk measures and other global developments.

    Forbes and Warnock (2012) characterized four types of extreme capital flow episodes based on
gross flows--surges, stops, flight and retrenchment--and showed important ways in which these
episodes were fundamentally different than those based on net flows. More specifically, the incidence
of episodes varies meaningfully depending on whether they are defined based on gross or net flows,
with definitions based on net flows often counterintuitive. For example, during the height of the GFC,
identification based on net flows suggested that there were a large number of surge episodes (i.e., that
countries were receiving abnormally high amounts of net capital inflows during the worst financial crisis
in generations), but very few stop episodes (i.e., that investor appetite to invest abroad was
unaffected). This seemingly puzzling behavior makes sense, however, if episodes are instead defined
based on gross flows. Using this approach during the GFC, there were essentially no surges of inflows by

1
 For surveys of the empirical capital flows literature, see Koepke (2019) and Hoggarth, Jung and Reinhardt (2016).
2
 See, among others, Benigno et al. (2015), Cavallo et al. (2015), Bianchi and Mendoza (2018), Li et al. (2019),
Mercado (2019), Scheubel et al. (2019), Malmendier et al. (forthcoming) and Bandaogo and Chen (forthcoming).

                                                                                                                 2
foreigners and many sudden stops of inflows by foreigners, but in many cases these were masked by a
"retrenchment" as many countries' residents brought previous investments home from abroad. In
other words, the puzzling behavior of net capital inflows was driven more by the behavior of domestics
than foreigners. 3 Another important insight from using gross capital flows (instead of net) to identify
episodes is that it suggested different factors were associated with sharp capital flow movements. For
example, global risk--a variable shown to play a pivotal role in a wide array of financial decisions--was
associated with all types of extreme capital flow episodes based on gross flows, but not significantly
related to either surges or stops based on the traditional approach using net flows. 4

    While a number of papers have built on Forbes and Warnock (2012) and used the corresponding
flow data, episode definitions and broader approach, one challenge for more recent work is that the
underlying flows dataset was created at a time when global standards for collecting capital flow data
were transitioning from BPM5 to BPM6, making the underlying dataset quite difficult to extend. 5 That
transition has now been completed, greatly improving the availability of long quarterly time series on
gross flows. Moreover, almost a decade has passed since the analysis in Forbes and Warnock (2012),
and the global economic environment has changed in many ways. To help motivate research on these
changes, this paper compiles an updated data set on quarterly flows and calculates the corresponding
extreme capital flow episodes. The new dataset includes revised data and extends the dataset by 10
years (previously from 1980q1 ­ 2009q1, now ending in 2018q4) for 58 advanced economies and
emerging markets, with a corresponding set of extreme capital flow episodes (beginning in 1985q4
because the methodology to identify episodes requires 24 quarters of flow data). The dataset is posted
online and available at https://mitmgmtfaculty.mit.edu/kjforbes/research/. This paper also replicates
parts of the analysis from Forbes and Warnock (2012), as preliminary evidence on what may have
changed over the last decade.

    There are many reasons to re-examine the incidence and drivers of extreme capital flow episodes--
and several reasons why key relationships may have changed (see Avdjiev et al., 2019). "Sudden surges"
of capital inflows can lead to substantial challenges, such as asset price bubbles, an inefficient allocation
of resources, and currency appreciation that hurts export competitiveness. Large increases in capital

3
  In fact, each country defined as having a surge episode based on the net flows data ­ but not using the gross data
­ had a retrenchment episode.
4
  For examples of the important role for risk found in subsequent work, see Rey (2013), Bruno and Shin (2015),
Barrot and Servén (2017), and Goldberg and Krogstrup (2019). For an opposing view on the role of risk, see Cerutti,
Claessens, and Rose (forthcoming).
5
  For a short primer on the transition from BPM5 to BPM6, see Warnock (2015).

                                                                                                                  3
inflows also increase vulnerabilities to the inevitable "sudden stop" that follows--when the abundant
capital inflows reverse and correspond to sharp falls in asset prices and currency depreciations, which in
turn feed into high inflation and increased challenges repaying debt in foreign currency.6 These
challenges from volatile capital flows are particularly imposing for countries with weaker institutions
and financial systems. Understanding what variables drive capital flow volatility, and if those
relationships have changed, is therefore of primary importance to countries around the world,
particularly emerging economics.

    Moreover, over the last decade many of the factors that are widely believed to affect the volumes
and volatility of global capital flows have fundamentally changed. The volume of cross-border capital
flows is meaningfully smaller than before the crisis and less dominated by bank flows--one of the more
volatile types of flows. One factor behind this reduction in cross-border flows (particularly of banks) is
tighter prudential requirements and a greater use of macroprudential policies. 7 Has this reduced the
volatility of capital flows and incidence of sharp capital flow movements? At the same time, many AEs
have reduced their policy interest rates to around zero and adopted "unconventional" monetary
policies to provide additional stimulus and promote recovery from the GFC. Has this extended period of
low interest rates and "unconventional" policies stimulated excessive volumes and volatility in global
capital flows--a concern raised by senior policymakers? 8 Over the last decade commodity prices have
been unusually volatile, emerging markets have become more important drivers of global growth, and
many measures of uncertainty have been unusually elevated (Forbes 2020). Have the factors that drive
capital flow episodes changed post-GFC? For example, Goldberg and Krogstrup (2019) suggest risk
measures have played a less prominent role in driving capital flows over the last decade, while Burku et
al. (2020 suggest that fluctuations in the US dollar have become more important.

        To better understand any of these changes in capital flow volatility over the last decade, this
paper begins by drawing on the data and methodology developed in Forbes and Warnock (2012). It
begins by updating and extending the quarterly data on gross capital inflows and outflows by foreigners
and domestics through 2018q4, supplementing IMF data from the Balance of Payments Statistics with


6
  On the costs (and benefits) of capital flows, see Prasad et al. (2003) and Henry (2007).
7
  For evidence, see Aiyar et al. (2014) and Forbes et al. (2017).
8 Examples of these concerns by senior policymakers are: the "currency wars" raised by Guido Mantega (former

Finance Minister of Brazil), the "monetary tsunami" discussed by Dilma Rousseff (former President of Brazil), and
the G-7 statement establishing ground rules to address the potential effects on exchange rates of different
monetary policy tools (Group of Seven, 2013, "Statement by G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors,"
February 12, available at: www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm130212.htm)

                                                                                                                    4
country-specific sources and then addressing gaps when possible (as done in the initial data
compilation). Then it uses the methodology in Forbes and Warnock (2012) to identify four types of
"extreme" capital flow episodes (surges, stops, flight and retrenchment), based on when domestic or
foreign investors substantially increase or decrease capital flows into or out of a country. This not only
extends the dates for which episodes are available, but also provides updated episodes for the pre-crisis
window (during which data revisions change the dating of episodes for some countries). 9 Next, it
follows Forbes and Warnock (2014) by identifying if these episodes were debt- or equity-led, and then
also tests if they are led by portfolio flows (equity and debt) or banking flows.

    Adding the new years, countries, and observations to the dataset in Forbes and Warnock (2012) also
allows us to address a new question that was not possible in the earlier work: have the patterns of
extreme capital flow movements and their relationship with global variables (such as monetary policy)
changed since the 2008 crisis? Do the patterns support arguments that a period of unprecedented easy
monetary policy in advanced economies (both from low interest rates and a new set of unconventional
policy tools) has driven surges of capital to emerging markets, and subsequently provoked sudden stops
when the easy monetary policy began to be reversed?

    The results suggest that capital flow episodes continue to be bunched together during certain
periods (in what were called "waves" in Forbes and Warnock, 2012), but that over the last decade there
is a lower incidence of extreme capital flow movements for the sample as a whole. Episodes have been
occurring more in "ripples" than "waves". The largest "ripples" that have occurred since 2009 were in
2015, when the U.S. Federal Reserve raised the Federal Funds rate for the first time in nearly a decade:
24% of countries experienced a sudden stop and 22% experienced a retrenchment. These incidence
rates are much smaller than the peaks during the pre-crisis period (of 32% and 33%, respectively) and
well less than the peaks during 2008-2009 (of 79% and 64%, respectively). When focusing just on EMEs,
the incidence patterns are often higher and closer to those in the pre-2008 period, particularly during
2015. More specifically, in 2015 43% of EMEs experienced a sudden stop episode, less than the 79%
during the peak of the 2008-2009 crisis, but more than the pre-crisis peak of 31%. If we compare the
period from 2010-2018 with the 8 years before the crisis, we find no evidence of an increased incidence
of extreme capital flow events, and some evidence of a decrease. The waves of global capital flows,


9
 There are some minor differences in the dating of the earlier episodes, primarily reflecting updated data on
capital flows--and the transition to BPM6 standards--since the original analysis done in 2011. The main patterns
on the incidence of different episodes across the sample, however, as well as the main regression results in Forbes
and Warnock (2012, 2014), are robust to these updates.

                                                                                                                  5
which turned into a tsunami during 2008-9, have been more ripples since then. Also, as in Forbes and
Warnock (2014), the vast majority of all four types of episodes are "debt-led", with the episodes
corresponding to large changes in debt rather than equity flows.

     After examining changes in the patterns and types of capital flow episodes, the analysis shifts to
understanding if the drivers of these episodes have changed since the GFC. These empirical tests should
be interpreted cautiously as the window of only a decade is fairly short to assess financial cycles. With
this important caveat, the results suggest that the relationship between extreme capital flow episodes
and the global variables (particularly global risk measures) has weakened. 10 In fact, it appears to be
more difficult to explain extreme capital flow episodes over the last decade in general. Key results over
the full sample period (1985-2018) are similar to those from Forbes and Warnock (2012) for 1985-2009,
however, so that it is impossible to ascertain if the role of many factors has changed post-crisis or if the
post-crisis sample (of only 32 quarterly data points per country) is too small to precisely estimate
coefficients. Nonetheless, the results to date are supportive of arguments that capital flow volatility and
sensitivity to changes in the global environment might be muted post-GFC, even with extremely
accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies and sharp volatility in commodity prices.

     The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II discusses the updated data and reviews the
methodology to calculate the capital flow episodes. Section III reports the updated set of episodes and
then assesses if their incidence has changed in the era of unconventional monetary policy for the full
sample, different types of capital flows, and different groups of countries. It also assesses if the types of
capital flows driving these episodes has changed. Section IV estimates if the sensitivity of capital flows
to changes in global variables (such as monetary policy and risk measures), regional contagion and
domestic growth has changed since the crisis. Section V concludes.




     II.     Data, Methodology and Updated Episodes

     In order to update the episodes of extreme capital flow movements, we begin by updating the
underlying data in Forbes and Warnock (2012) on gross capital inflows and outflows, in aggregate and
for four types of disaggregated flows (foreign direct investment, portfolio equity, portfolio debt, and


10
  This agrees with new analysis in Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) and Burcu et al. (2020), which find a reduced
correlation between the VIX and the global financial cycle, as well as Avdjiev et al. (2019), which finds a reduced
correlation between the VIX and global bank flows since the GFC.

                                                                                                                 6
bank/other). Since the data was initially compiled in 2010, the IMF has transitioned from BPM5 to BPM6
standards. The dataset used for this paper is entirely based on BPM6 standards.

     For this analysis, we pulled quarterly BPM6 flow data on August 26, 2019 from Haver Analytics' IMF
International Financial Statistics (IFS) database for a wide range of countries (86 in all). Then we
excluded countries with large gaps or limited time series, leaving 58 countries. Where BPM5 data
existed but BPM6 data did not--typically very early in the sample--we used BPM5 to plug holes; this
occurred in about 500 instances (out of 10,000 observations), or roughly 10 times per country. Taiwan is
excluded from the IFS, so we collected Taiwan data from its central bank's web site. 11 Two countries,
Norway (1992-93) and Poland (1995-99), have gaps in quarterly data but complete annual data. For
these countries and just for those years, we converted annual data to a quarterly frequency simply by
placing one-fourth of the annual numbers in each quarter.

     We also filled in gaps or removed suspect data for a number of countries. For example, for
Slovenia's portfolio inflows in 1994, we used data from the Bank Slovenia website to replace NAs. We
dropped data for several countries prior to certain dates because of too many gaps: Greece (dropped
data prior to 1999), Bolivia (dropped data prior to 1988), Peru (dropped data prior to 1999), South Africa
(dropped data prior to 1985), Taiwan (dropped data prior to 1987Q4) and India (dropped outflow data
prior to 2000). Some countries had some NAs between strings of zeros; we filled those in with zeros.
These include: FDI outflows for Guatamala (1995-96) and Bangladesh (2001Q3 and Q4); portfolio
outflows for Thailand (1992) and Indonesia (1995Q2-Q4); and other outflows for Indonesia (1995Q2-
Q4). We dropped Nicaragua completely because of gaps early in the sample and then also from 2009 to
2013; the resulting series was too short to be useful. Finally, to have as complete a dataset as possible
through 2018Q4, in instances where recent data were not yet in IFS but were available from published
national sources, we supplemented IFS using national sources. In this draft, this pertains only to inflows
for Sri Lanka, which end in 2017 in the IFS data but are available for each quarter of 2018. 12

         Following this approach yields a quarterly sample of 58 countries covering the years from
1980q1-2018q4. Appendix Table 1 reports the sample and country coverage. This dataset has the same
number of countries as Forbes and Warnock (2012), but the current sample no longer includes



11
   See https://www.cbc.gov.tw/public/data/economic/statistics/bop/english/hist_eAQ.xls for quarterly historical
data and http://www.cbc.gov.tw/public/data/economic/statistics/bop/english/eAQ.xls for more recent data.
12
   Data accessed at https://www.cbsl.gov.lk/en/statistics/statistical-tables/external-sector. We could not find Sri
Lankan outflows data for 2018.

                                                                                                                      7
Nicaragua and has added Costa Rica. Relative to the original study, there is slightly better coverage of
historic data on capital flows for several countries, plus an additional 9 years of data (2010-2018) for
almost every country in the sample. 13 It is worth highlighting, however, that even though the sample
coverage is similar (plus the additional years of data), there have been a large number of revisions to
historic capital flow data. As will be discussed below, in some cases these revisions are large enough to
affect the dates of different types of episodes for individual countries, although they do not appear to
meaningfully affect any key results from the earlier analysis.

     Next, we use this data on gross capital inflows and outflows to calculate periods of "extreme" capital
flow movements. We follow the methodology developed in Forbes and Warnock (2012), which makes
three advances on the earlier literature: (1) uses data on actual flows instead of current-account-based
proxies for flows; (2) uses data on gross flows to identify episodes, rather than relying on proxies for net
flows; and (3) analyzes both large increases and large decreases of both inflows and outflows, instead of
just focusing on increases or decreases, in order to improve our understanding of all types of capital
flow episodes. More specifically, it uses quarterly gross flows data to identify four types of episodes:

     ·   "Surges": a sharp increase in gross capital inflows by foreigners;
     ·   "Stops": a sharp decrease in gross capital inflows by foreigners;
     ·   "Flight": a sharp increase in gross capital outflows by domestic investors; and
     ·   "Retrenchment": a sharp decrease in gross capital outflows by domestic investors.


     We calculate year-over-year changes in four-quarter gross capital inflows and outflows and define
episodes using three criteria: (1) current year-over-year changes in four-quarter gross capital inflows or
outflows is more than two standard deviations above or below the historic (5-year moving) average
during at least one quarter of the episode; (2) the episode lasts for all consecutive quarters for which
the year-over-year change in annual gross capital flows is more than one standard deviation above or
below the historical average; and (3) the length of the episode is greater than one quarter. 14




13
  The one exception is Venezuela, which does not have reported data for 2017 or 2018.
14
  Summing capital flows over four quarters is analogous to the traditional literature's focus on one year of flows
and also eliminates the impact of seasonal fluctuations. The historical average and standard deviation are
calculated over the last five years (20 quarters), which means that episodes are always defined relative to the
recent past.

                                                                                                                     8
     More specifically, consider the calculation of surge and stop episodes. Let Ct be the 4-quarter
moving sum of gross capital inflows (GINFLOW) and compute annual year-over-year changes in Ct:

             = 3
               =0 - ,                                         with t = 1, 2, ..., N and                    (1)

            Ct= Ct - Ct-4   ,                                 with t = 5, 6, ..., N .                      (2)

            Next, compute rolling means and standard deviations of Ct over the last 5 years. A "surge"
episode is defined as starting the first month t that Ct increases more than one standard deviation
above its rolling mean. The episode ends once Ct falls below one standard deviation above its mean. In
addition, in order for the entire period to qualify as a surge episode, there must be at least one quarter t
when Ct increases at least two standard deviations above its mean. A stop episode, defined using a
symmetric approach, is a period when gross inflows fall one standard deviation below its mean,
provided it reaches two standard deviations below at some point. The episode ends when gross inflows
are no longer at least one standard deviation below its mean. Episodes of flight and retrenchment are
defined similarly, but using gross private outflows rather than gross inflows.

            It worth highlighting that this methodology, used first for net flows by Calvo (1998), is one that
highlights the tails of Ct. Because the criteria used to identify an episode takes into account the
volatility of a particular country's Ct, it is not more volatile flows per se that would lead to more
episodes. Rather, for a country to have more episodes than usual (in either the time series or cross-
sectional sense), its Ct must have more outliers (e.g., fatter tails).

     This methodology yields a series of episodes of sudden surges, stops, flight and retrenchment,
reported in Appendix Table 2. 15 These are the basis of the following analysis.



     III.       Extreme Capital Flow Episodes: Before and After the Crisis

     This section examines if there has been a significant change in the incidence of surge, stop, flight or
retrenchment episodes over the last decade as compared to previous periods. A significant change in



15
  Most of the episodes for the pre-2010 period are similar to those calculated in Forbes and Warnock (2012). For
some countries, there are changes to the start and end dates of episodes, and in a few cases in the occurrence of
episodes. These changes primarily reflect revisions to the capital flow data, with a few changes reflecting
adjustments to the coding to calculate the episodes. In an earlier draft of this paper that used capital flow data
accessed only five months before this draft, data revisions led to a number of changes in episode definitions,
highlighting the role of revisions in the precise timing of episodes.

                                                                                                                     9
the incidence in episodes could be driven by a number of factors--such as changes in monetary policy,
changes in the types of capital flows, changes in macroprudential regulations, changes in relative growth
rates of borrowing and lending nations, or any of the other changes that have occurred in the global or
local economies since the crisis. This section will only document whether there have been changes in the
frequency of episodes (for the full sample and then just emerging markets), while the next section looks
more closely at whether the drivers of these episodes have changed. This section ends by extending the
analysis to examine if the episodes are more common for specific types of capital flows (debt, equity,
portfolio flow, or banking), which of these types of capital flows has tended to drive the episodes, and if
any of these relationships has changed over time.

       To begin, Figure 1a graphs the incidence of sudden surges, stops, flight and retrenchment over the
full sample period from 1985q1 to 2018q4 for the full sample of countries, based on the episode
definitions from Section II. It shows that capital flow episodes are not evenly distributed across time and
continue to be bunched together in what Forbes and Warnock (2012) called "waves". There does not,
however, appear to be any increase in the incidence of these extreme capital flow episodes since 2009.
Instead, there seems to be a lower incidence of extreme capital flow episodes over the last decade--so
that episodes occur more in "ripples" than "waves". The largest "ripples" of sudden stops and
retrenchment that have occurred since 2009 were in 2015, when the U.S. Federal Reserve raised the
Federal Funds rate for the first time in nearly a decade; the peak share of countries experiencing a
sudden stop was 24%, and experiencing a retrenchment was 22%, in any quarter. This is smaller than
the peaks during the pre-crisis period (of 32% and 33%, respectively) and far less than the peaks during
2008-2009 (of 79% and 64%, respectively). Figure 1a suggests that the incidence of extreme capital flow
episodes is more muted since the GFC.

       These graphs, however, include both advanced economies (AEs) as well as emerging market
economies (EMEs), and EMEs may have experienced sharper movements in capital flows since the GFC
as many AEs lowered interest rates to their effective lower bounds and adopted unconventional
monetary policy. Therefore, Figure 1b repeats the same analysis as in Figure 1a, except now excludes
AEs in order to show the share of EMEs in the sample that experienced sudden surges, stops, flight and
retrenchment episodes. 16 The general pattern of "waves" for EMEs mimics the general patterns for AEs,
except the share of countries experiencing episodes is often higher for the emerging economies and
there is less evidence that the "waves" have become more muted since the GFC. More specifically, in

16
     Emerging markets are defined using BIS definitions.

                                                                                                         10
2015 43% of EMEs experienced a sudden stop episode, far less than the 79% during the peak of the
2008-2009 crisis, but more than the pre-crisis peak of 31%. The occurrence of other episodes, however,
looks very similar to that of the pre-2008 window.

    To more formally examine if the incidence of different types of extreme capital flow episodes has
changed since the crisis, the top block of Table 1 shows the average incidence of each of the four
episodes, for the full sample and then just EMEs, over four windows: the full sample, from 1985-2009,
2000-2007, and 2010-2018. The last period captures patterns when many advanced economies lowered
interest rates to around zero (and in some cases below) and adopted "unconventional" monetary policy.
The table does not show any increase in the incidence of any of the four types of episodes in this later
window relative to the full sample or pre-crisis period. There is also no meaningful increase in episodes
relative to a roughly comparable 8-year window from 2000-2007, an era with large volumes of capital
flows. In fact, focusing just on EMEs, there is a much lower incidence of surge and flight episodes over
the post-crisis window than the 8 years before the crisis, and roughly the same incidence of stop and
retrenchment episodes. In other words, there is no evidence of increased incidence of extreme capital
flow events. The waves of global capital flows, which turned into a tsunami during 2008-9, have been
more ripples since then.

    Does this relatively calm period of capital flow waves reflect changes in the composition of capital
flows? For example, if certain types of capital flows (such as bank flows) have decreased (as shown in
Forbes et al., 2018), and these types of flows are an important driver of sharp movements in capital
flows (as shown in Forbes and Warnock, 2014), then this relatively calmer period for aggregate global
capital flows could still mask substantial volatility for certain types of flows. To test this and better
understand the role of different types of capital flows in overall capital flow volatility, we perform two
analyses: we evaluate if the types of capital flows driving these episodes of extreme capital flow
movements has changed, and then if there are more (or less) episodes of extreme capital flow
movements for specific types of flows since the crisis.

    To perform these tests, we use the set of extreme capital flow episodes calculated above combined
with the methodology in Forbes and Warnock (2014) to calculate if the episodes are "led" by certain
types of capital flows. We define an episode as being "led" by a type of capital flow if the change in the
given type of capital flow is larger in magnitude than the change in the other types of capital flows
(aggregated together). More specifically, consider a surge episode; if the increase in capital flows from
foreigners (the Ct in equation (2)) occurs primarily through debt flows (defined as portfolio bonds and

                                                                                                             11
banking flows), then the surge episode is defined as being "debt-led". In contrast, if the surge resulted
mainly from an increase in equity inflows (specifically, portfolio equity and FDI), then it would be
classified as an equity-led surge. We use the same approach to define equity- and debt-led stops,
retrenchment, and flight. Forbes and Warnock (2014) documented that a majority of episodes before
the GFC were debt-led (and not equity-led). To better understand what types of debt flows could be
most important, and whether these relationships have changed, we also test if episodes are led by
portfolio debt flows, banking flows, or total portfolio flows (equity and debt).

    Table 2 shows the percent of each type of episode driven by these different capital flows over the
same periods as Table 1: for the full period (1985-2018), for the period through the GFC (1985-2009), for
a relatively tranquil 8-year period before the GFC (2000-2007), and for the post-crisis window (2010-
2018). The table shows that the majority of all four types of episodes tend to be debt-led, as found in
Forbes and Warnock (2014), and that this pattern has continued since the crisis. In fact, the share of
surges and stops that are debt-led appear to have increased--for surges from 72% in the eight-year
period before the crisis to 88% for the post-crisis period, and for stops from 60% to 81% for the same
periods.

    Is this prominent role for debt flows in leading extreme capital flow episodes primarily driven by
portfolio debt or banking flows? To better understand the role of these two type of flows, the bottom of
Table 2 repeats the same exercise, except now calculates what percent of episodes are bank-flow-led or
portfolio-debt-led. The results suggest a substantially greater role for bank flows in driving extreme
capital flows. For example, just over 41% of surges were bank-flow-led over the period from 2000-2007,
and 44% from 2010-2018, as compared to only about 15% of surge episodes led by portfolio debt in the
comparable pre-crisis period, and only 23% since 2010. The role of banking flows in driving the different
episodes, however, shows little consistent pattern--with the role fairly steady for surge and stop
episodes since the crisis, but increasing for flight and retrenchment episodes. Despite the decline in
cross-border banking flows since 2008, these types of flows do not appear to have played a significantly
diminished role in causing sharp capital flow movements--at least for the remaining, more muted
episodes.

    As a final extension of this analysis, we examine the role of portfolio (equity and debt) flows in
driving episodes, as these two types of flows are often believed to be more volatile than other types of
flows. The right-top side Table 2 reports the share of episodes that are led by portfolio flows. A smaller
share of extreme capital flow episodes are driven by portfolio flows (relative to by debt flows)--roughly

                                                                                                            12
a third for most episodes over the earlier periods. The share of surge and stop episodes driven by
portfolio flows has increased since the GFC, however, reaching 45% of sudden stops and 39% of surges
driven since 2010. Foreign direct investment continues to drive a small share of episodes, as would be
expected given the more stable nature of this type of cross-border investment. This is far from
conclusive, but this series of results is consistent with other evidence that tighter prudential and
macroprudential regulations have caused some companies to shift away from bank financing and
towards other forms of debt and equity funding. 17

       As a final test, we return to our standard definitions of capital flow episodes (as discussed in Section
II), except now calculate if a surge, stop, flight or retrenchment occurred for the four types of
disaggregated capital flows for each country in each quarter. More specifically, we calculate if there was
an episode for foreign direct investment (FDI), portfolio equity, portfolio debt, or banking flows. It is
then possible to graph the incidence of each type of episode for the full sample or EMEs (as in Figure 1
for aggregate capital flows), and calculate the incidence of each type of episode for each type of capital
flow over different windows. These calculations are summarized in the middle and bottom of Table 1
and support the earlier conclusion that capital flows have been more "ripples" than "waves" since the
crisis. The incidence of within-component surges, stops, flight and retrenchment is lower since the crisis
for the full sample of countries compared to each of the earlier time periods for FDI, portfolio equity,
portfolio debt, and banking flows.

       The previous analysis, however, suggested that although capital flow waves have become more
muted across the full sample, there is less change for EMEs. The corresponding estimates in the table
show that the incidence of episodes for EMEs since the GFC is lower than or equal to the earlier periods
for almost all types of capital flows and episodes. The only cells where the incidence increased by 2
percentage points or more is for emerging market surges in portfolio debt (whose incidence increased
to 13% post-crisis, as compared to 11% from 2000-2007 and 12% over the full period) and stops in
banking flows (whose incidence increased to 9% in the post-crisis window, as compared to 7% from
2000-2007 and 11% over the full period). In most cases, however, the incidence of capital flow episodes
decreased in the post-crisis window, including for just EMEs as well as the full sample.




17
     For example, see Ahnert et al. (2018).

                                                                                                             13
    IV.       A Closer Look: Changing Role of Global, Contagion, and Domestic Variables

          To better understand the factors behind these different types of capital flow episodes, this
section tests if the relationship between key factors affecting capital flow episodes has changed since
the crisis. More specifically, we build on the results in Forbes and Warnock (2012) and Rey (2013) that
find a key role for global financial factors in driving global capital flows. Forbes and Warnock (2012) find
a predominant role for changes in global risk and global growth, while Rey (2013) focuses on the role of
global risk and changes in US monetary policy as drivers of the "global financial cycle".

          Specifically, to assess the role of global, contagion, and domestic variables on the conditional
probability of having a surge, stop, flight, or retrenchment episode each quarter, we follow Forbes and
Warnock (2012) and estimate the model:



                                                Contagion
                    Global
          ( = 1) =  -1     G + ,-1                          C + Domestic
                                                                ,-1      D ,                         (3)



where eit is an episode dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if country i is experiencing an episode
                                                     Global
(surge, stop, flight, or retrenchment) in quarter t; -1     is a vector of global factors lagged by one
            Contagion
quarter; ,-1            is a vector of contagion variables; and Domestic
                                                                ,-1      is a vector of domestic variables.
The appropriate methodology to estimate equation (3) is determined by the distribution of the
cumulative distribution function, F(). Because episodes occur irregularly (over 80 percent of the sample
is zeros), F() is asymmetric. Therefore we estimate equation (3) using the complementary logarithmic
(or cloglog) framework, which assumes that F() is the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the
extreme value distribution. In other words, this estimation strategy assumes that:

                           F(z) = 1- exp[-exp(z)] .                                                  (4)



    While we estimate each type of episode separately, we use a seemingly unrelated estimation
technique that allows for cross-episode correlation in the error terms. This captures the fact that the
covariance matrix across episodes is not zero, without assuming a structural model specifying a
relationship between episodes. We also cluster the standard errors by country.




                                                                                                             14
     IV.A Updated Forbes and Warnock (2012) Regressions

     To begin, we use the same period that was the focus of Forbes and Warnock (2012) and, to maintain
the largest sample possible, include five variables that are widely available: the same four global
variables and a regional contagion variable (excluding the larger set of original domestic variables and
other contagion variables). More specifically, we regress the incidence of capital flow episodes in each
quarter from 1980-2009 on global risk (measured using the VXO), global liquidity (measured as the year-
over-year percentage growth in the `global' broad money supply, where global is the sum for the euro
area, US, UK and Japan), global interest rates (measured as the average yield on long-term government
bonds in the US, Euro area and Japan), and global growth (measured as year-over-year global GDP
growth from the IMF's World Economic Outlook dataset). 18 To capture contagion effects, we also
include a measure of geographic proximity, with a dummy variable equal to one if a country in the same
region has the same type of episode. 19 All variables are lagged by one quarter, so the regressions assess
how quarter t-1 factors impact the probability of being in a particular type of episode (surge, stop, flight
or retrenchment) in period t. Results are reported in Table 3 for different sample periods.

     Beginning with the original period from Forbes and Warnock (2012), the key results (columns 1-4)
are in line with the original estimates, despite several changes (revised and more complete capital flow
data, corresponding changes in the episode definitions, and no controls for domestic variables or other
contagion measures). The results continue to suggest that global risk, global growth, and regional
contagion are significant drivers of all four types of episodes; lower risk and stronger growth are
significantly correlated with surges and flight, while higher risk and weaker growth are significantly
correlated with stops and retrenchment. A country is more likely to experience a specific type of episode
if another country in the region is also experiencing one. Also consistent with the earlier results, changes
in global liquidity and global interest rates are not significantly correlated with any of the four episodes
in the 1985-2009 window. 20

     Next, in order to assess if the role of these global variables is unchanged over the longer sample
period now available, columns 5-8 of Table 3 repeats the same analysis with the additional decade of
data, i.e., extending the end-date from 2009 to 2018. The key role for global risk and global growth in


18
   We thank Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti for providing the WEO data on a quarterly basis.
19
   The regions are: North America, Western Europe, Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Other (which is South
Africa and Israel).
20
   Using the US interest rate (instead of an average of long-term interest rates in the US, Euro area and Japan)
yields the same result.

                                                                                                              15
driving the four types of episodes remains unchanged--with both global variables continuing to be
significant (with the same sign and roughly similar magnitudes) for all four types of episodes. The most
striking changes, however, are the estimated coefficients on the global interest rate variable. Instead of
being insignificant for all types of episodes, and generally having negative coefficients for surges and
stops and positive coefficients for flights and retrenchment, the coefficients on global interest rates are
now positive and significant for all types of episodes. At first glance, this would be consistent with a
hypothesis that higher interest rates are correlated with a greater probability of a country experiencing
a sudden surge, stop, flight or retrenchment in capital flows--a counterintuitive result which is explored
in more detail below.

    To better assess these patterns--and especially if the estimated positive coefficients on global
interest rates reflect changes across periods--columns 9-12 of Table 3 repeat the same estimates for
the post-crisis window from 2010-2018. In this shorter window, coefficient estimates are strikingly
different from the original (1980-2009) and longest samples. Global risk is only significant for stop and
retrenchment episodes, global growth is no longer significantly correlated with any type of episode, and
contagion is significantly associated with only surges at the 5 percent level (but not the other types of
episodes). The coefficient on long-term interest rates remains positive, but is now insignificant, for
surges and flight, and is now negative and significant for stops and retrenchments. In other words,
higher global interest rates are now significantly correlated with fewer stop and retrenchment episodes,
and have no significant effect on surge or flight episodes.

    At face value, these results do not support concerns that higher interest rates in advanced
economies generate sudden stop episodes, or that lower interest rates in advanced economies generate
large surges of capital inflows. There are, however, other possible explanations for these patterns.
Moreover, these results ignore a number of changes in the global economy that have occurred over the
last decade, such as the greater use of "unconventional" tools for monetary policy (which would not be
fully captured in this measure of monetary policy which focuses on interest rates) and the increased
volatility in commodity prices (which tends to be correlated with capital flows, particularly for many
emerging markets). Ignoring these developments and interactions could lead to omitted variable bias
and generate some of the counterintuitive results found above.




                                                                                                            16
       IV.B A New Baseline

       To better understand these patterns and adjust for these developments, Table 4 builds on the
specification in Forbes and Warnock (2012) to create an updated "base case" that should better capture
changes in how monetary policy has been conducted over the past decade, as well as the unusual
volatility in commodity prices. More specifically, instead of measuring global monetary policy using
interest rates, we use shadow short rates from Leo Krippner's RNBZ web site. These shadow rates
should capture not only conventional monetary policy through changes in the central bank's main policy
rate, but also changes in monetary policy through quantitative easing, forward guidance, or any other
programs. We use the average shadow short rate in the US, Euro area, Japan and UK. Also, consistent
with recent work highlighting the role of global oil prices (and commodity prices in general) in driving
capital flows and prices, we add a variable measuring the year-over-year change in oil prices. 21

       When this updated specification is used for the full period (columns 1-4) or pre-crisis window
(columns 5-8), most of the key results agree with the baseline specification from Table 3 over the
comparable window. Risk, global growth and regional contagion continue to influence all types of
episodes. Lower risk and stronger growth are significantly correlated with surges and flight, while higher
risk and weaker growth are significantly correlated with stops and retrenchment. Global liquidity
continues to be insignificant in each specification, and monetary policy has the unexpected positive
correlation with all types of episodes. In contrast to the earlier results, however, tighter monetary policy
is significantly correlated with stop and retrenchment episodes in the pre-crisis window. This supports
the evidence in other papers (such as Rey, 2013) that tighter US monetary policy often corresponds to
sudden stops in global capital flows. The results also provide support for a role for oil prices, with oil
prices negatively and significantly correlated with stop episodes in both windows, and positively
correlated with surges over the full period.

       These results change notably, however, in the shorter post-crisis sample of 2010-2018 (columns 9-
12). There is now no significant relationship between global risk or global growth and any of the four
episodes. This reduced role for global risk agrees with results in several papers looking at the
relationship between different financial variables (including capital flows) and risk, such as Goldberg and
Krogstrup (2019), Avdjiev et al. (2019) and Barrot and Servén (2017). Global monetary policy also has no
significant relationship with any of the four episodes, and global liquidity usually has no significant


21
     See Dreschsel, McLeay and Tenreryo (2019) and Forbes (2019).

                                                                                                             17
relationship, with an occasional significant estimate not robust across specifications. Regional contagion
also appears to be weaker--with only half of the coefficients significant at just the 10 percent level. The
variable which is most often significant across specifications is oil prices ­ with higher oil prices
significantly negatively correlated with stops and retrenchments--albeit oil prices are no longer
significantly correlated with surges.

     These key results continue to be robust across a range of sensitivity tests--including different
measures of risk, 22 measuring global monetary policy using an average of US, Euro area, Japan and UK
rates) instead of the shadow rate, using changes in shadow rates (instead of levels), dropping growth in
the global money supply (which should be captured in the shadow rates), using changes in global
commodity prices instead of oil prices, including long-term interest rates as well as the shadow rates, or
starting the sample in 2011 instead of 2010. Although some coefficients are occasionally significant in
certain specifications, in most of the variants there appears to be no significant relationship between
global risk and global growth and any of the four types of extreme capital flow episodes in the post-crisis
window. This is a sharp change from a very robust relationship in the pre-crisis (and crisis) window.

     IV.C Adding Local Variables

     The set of results in Tables 3 and 4 suggests that the role of global variables in explaining extreme
capital flow movements has diminished over the last decade. If so, are there other variables that
determine the incidence of extreme capital flow episodes? Have country-specific characteristics become
more important?

     Testing for the role of domestic variables is challenging as many of the key country-specific variables
that could affect the timing of sharp capital flow movements are not widely available across countries
and/or not on a quarterly basis. Therefore, Table 5 provides an initial test with one measure that has
fairly good coverage--year-over-year economic growth. 23 Nonetheless, the sample size still shrinks
meaningfully, with the number of observations about 20% smaller in Table 4 than in Table 5.

     With this caveat, the regression results in Table 5 suggest that domestic variables can matter. More
specifically, in the full and pre-crisis samples (columns 1-4 and 5-8), countries with a pickup in economic


22
   For example, we used changes in the VXO instead of the level, or used the Variance Risk Premium from Zhou
(2018) instead of the VXO.
23
   Interpolating annual values to our quarterly frequency will not suffice in this setting, as our regressions are
designed to capture, within a particular country, the conditions in quarter t-1 on the probability of an episode in
quarter t. Interpolated data cannot help explain that quarter-to-quarter variation.

                                                                                                                      18
growth are more likely to have a surge episode, and less likely to have a stop. In the post-crisis sample
(columns 9-12), the only significant coefficient on domestic growth is for surge episodes (with faster
growth correlated with more surges).

    Moreover, including the variable for domestic growth has little impact on the other coefficient
estimates. In the full and pre-crisis samples, the prominent role for risk and global growth (and to a
lesser extent monetary policy) in the different episodes is still largely intact (although growth is more
often significant at the 10% instead of 5% level and occasionally loses its significance). Very few
variables, however, continue to be significant in the post-crisis period; only oil prices are significantly
correlated with stops at the 5 percent level, and domestic growth significantly correlated with surges.
The "ripples" in capital flows since the GFC are difficult to explain with this set of global, contagion, and
local variables.




    V.       Summary and Conclusions

    This paper extends the popular dataset on capital flow episodes from Forbes and Warnock (2012,
2014), along with the underlying flow data, to examine if the characteristics and drivers of these
episodes have changed over the last decade. There are a number of reasons why the nature of
international spillovers may have changed as monetary policy, financial regulation, global capital flows,
and commodity price volatility have evolved over the last decade. Given that many of these changes
may persist for an extended period and become "conventional", it has become increasingly important to
understand if these changes are aggravating--or mitigating--the sharp movements in capital flows that
can create substantial macroeconomic challenges.

    This paper finds that the incidence of extreme capital flow episodes has not increased in the post-
GFC period, and instead has decreased for most measures. Episodes are generally less frequent than
they were pre-GFC for the full sample of countries, and there are only a small number of examples when
there were more episodes for EMEs (such as of sudden stops in 2015). Moreover, the drivers of capital
flow episodes appear to have changed, with global risk and global growth no longer significantly
correlated with any types of extreme capital flow episodes in post-crisis samples.

    These results over the last decade should be interpreted cautiously, however, as they are based on a
short sample period (with only 32 post-GFC data points per country). Nonetheless, the results do
provide initial evidence on how changes in the global financial system may be affecting international

                                                                                                              19
spillovers and the global financial cycle. The era of extremely accommodative monetary policy combined
with unconventional tools does not appear to be driving increased volatility in cross-border capital
flows, perhaps because tighter prudential and macroprudential regulations have reduced the volume of
cross-border bank flows. Moreover, since cross-border bank flows tend to be highly correlated with
changes in global risk measures (Shin, 2012), this could also explain the weaker relationship between
extreme capital flow episodes and global risk measures. If these changes persist over time, economies
may be less buffeted by the global financial cycle through its impact on global capital flows, albeit they
should not expect calm waters.




                                                                                                         20
REFERENCES

Ahnert, Tony, Kristin Forbes, Christian Friedrich, and Dennis Reinhardt, 2018. "Macroprudential FX
Regulations: Shifting the Snowbanks of FX Vulnerability?" NBER Working Paper 25083.

Aiyar, Shekhar, Charles Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek, 2014. "Does MacroPrudential Regulation
Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46(s1): 181­214.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Leonardo Gambacorta, Linda Goldberg and Steffano Schiaffi, 2019. "The Shifting Drivers
of Global Liquidity." Paper presented at AEA Annual meetings in San Diego, Jan. 2020.

Bandaogo, Maham Samir and Yu-Chin Chen, forthcoming. "Duration of Sudden Stop Spells: A Hazard
Model Approach." Review of International Economics.

Barrot, Luis-Diego and Luis Servén, 2017. "Gross Capital Flows, Common Factors, and the Global
Financial Cycle." Unpublished mimeo.

Benigno, Gianluca, Nathan Converse, and Luca Fornaro, 2015. "Large Capital Inflows, Sectoral
Allocation, and Economic Performance." Journal of International Money and Finance 55: 60-87.

Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique G. Mendoza, 2018. "Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy."
Journal of Political Economy 126(2): 588-634.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Shin, 2015. "Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity." The Review of
Economic Studies 82(2, April): 535-564.

Cavallo, Eduardo, Andrew Powell, Mathieu Pedemonte, Pilar Tavella, 2015. "A New Taxonomy of
Sudden Stops: Which Sudden Stops should Countries be Most Concerned About?" Journal of
International Money and Finance 51: 47-70.

Calvo, Guillermo, 1998. "Capital Flows and Capital-market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
Stops." Journal of Applied Economics 35­54 (Nov).

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens and Andrew Rose, (forthcoming). "How Important is the Global
Financial Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows." IMF Economic Review.

Dreschsel, Thomas, Michael McLeay, and Silvana Tenreryo, 2019. "Monetary Policy for Commodity
Booms and Busts." Paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Jackson Hole
Symposium, August.

Burcu Erik, Marco Lombardi, Dubravko Mihaljek and Hyun Song Shin, 2020. "The Dollar and Real
Economic Activity: An Evolving Relationship." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
forthcoming (April).

Forbes, Kristin, 2020. "Inflation Dynamics: Dead, Dormant, or Determined Abroad." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Fall Meetings 2019. Forthcoming.

Forbes, Kristin, and Francis Warnock, 2012. "Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and
Retrenchment." Journal of International Economics 88(2): 235-251.




                                                                                                     21
Forbes, Kristin, and Francis Warnock, 2014. "Debt- and Equity-Led Capital Flow Episodes." in Capital
Mobility and Monetary Policy, edited by Miguel Fuentes, Claudio Raddatz and Carmen M. Reinhart.
Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.

Forbes, Kristin, Dennis Reinhardt, and Tomasz Wieladek, 2017. "The Spillovers, Interactions, and
(Un)intended Consequences of Monetary and Regulatory Policies." Journal of Monetary Economics
85(C): 1-22.

Goldberg, Linda and Signe Krogstrup, 2019. "International Capital Flow Pressures." NBER Working Paper
24286.

Henry, Peter Blair, 2007. "Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation." Journal of
Economic Literature 45(4): 887-935.

Hoggarth, Glenn, Carsten Jung, and Dennis Reinhardt, 2016. "Capital Inflows-the Good, the Bad, and the
Ugly." Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No. 40, Oct.

Koepke, Robin, 2019. "What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: A Survey of the Empirical
Literature." Journal of Economic Surveys 33 (2): 516-540.

Li, Suxiao, Jakob de Haan, and Bert Scholtens, 2019. "Sudden Stops of International Fund Flows:
Occurrence and Magnitude." Review of International Economics 27(1): 468-497.

Malmendier, Ulrike, Demian Pouzo and Victoria Vanesco, forthcoming. "Investor Experiences and
International Capital Flows." Journal of International Economics.

Mercado, Rogelio, 2019. "Capital Flow Transitions: Domestic Factors and Episodes of Gross Capital
Inflows." Emerging Markets Review 38: 251-264.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Hélène Rey, 2020. "The Global Financial Cycle after Lehman." American
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming (April).

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003. "Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence." International Monetary Fund
Occasional Paper 220.

Rey, Hélène, 2013. "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
Independence." In Proceedings of the 2013 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium at
Jackson Hole, 285333.
Scheubel, Beatrice, Livio Stracca, and CédricTille, 2019. "Taming the Global Financial Cycle: What Role
for the Global Financial Safety Net? Journal of International Money and Finance 94: 160-182

Shin, Hyun Song, 2012. "Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium." IMF Economic Review 60(2): 155-
192
Warnock, Francis E. 2015. "A User's Guide to the BOP and IIP: The Transition from BPM5 to BPM6."
UVA-GEM-0135, Darden Business Publishing.

Zhou, Hao, 2018. "Variance Risk Premia, Asset Predictability Puzzles, and Macroeconomic Uncertainty."
Annual Review of Financial Economics 10: 481-497.


                                                                                                          22
Figure 1a: Incidence of Surges, Stops, Flight and Retrenchment: Full Sample

50%                                                                90%
                  Incidence of Surge Episodes                      80%
                                                                                    Incidence of Stop Episodes
40%                                                                70%

                                                                   60%
30%
                                                                   50%

                                                                   40%
20%
                                                                   30%

10%                                                                20%

                                                                   10%

 0%                                                                 0%
   1985   1990        1995      2000     2005    2010   2015          1985   1990       1995     2000      2005    2010   2015


 40%                                                               70%
                  Incidence of Flight Episodes                                      Incidence of Retrenchment Episodes
                                                                   60%
 30%
                                                                   50%

                                                                   40%
 20%
                                                                   30%

                                                                   20%
 10%

                                                                   10%

 0%                                                                0%
   1985    1990        1995     2000      2005   2010   2015         1985    1990       1995     2000      2005   2010    2015


Notes: Share of all countries in sample experiencing each type of capital flow episode each quarter from 1985Q1-2018Q4.
Sample includes at most 58 countries. See Appendix Table 1 for details on dates for capital flow data by country.




                                                                                                                                 23
Figure 1b: Incidence of Surges, Stops, Flight and Retrenchment: Emerging Markets



50%                                                                 90%
              Incidence of Surge Episodes--Emerging Markets         80%
                                                                                      Incidence of Stop Episodes--Emerging Markets
40%                                                                 70%

                                                                    60%
30%
                                                                    50%

                                                                    40%
20%
                                                                    30%

10%                                                                 20%

                                                                    10%

 0%                                                                  0%
   1985    1990    1995     2000     2005     2010      2015           1985    1990       1995     2000     2005     2010     2015


50%                                                                 50%
                                                                          Incidence of Retrenchment Episodes--Emerging Markets
              Incidence of Flight Episodes--Emerging Markets
40%                                                                 40%


30%                                                                 30%


20%                                                                 20%


10%                                                                 10%


 0%                                                                  0%
   1985    1990    1995     2000     2005     2010      2015           1985    1990       1995     2000     2005     2010     2015


Notes: Share of emerging markets experiencing each type of capital flow episode each quarter from 1985Q1-2018Q4. See
Appendix Table 1 for details on dates for capital flow data by country. Emerging markets defined based on BIS definitions.




                                                                                                                                     24
Table 1. Share of Countries with Extreme Capital Flow Episodes
                                   Full Sample                                                Emerging Markets
                 Full Period    1985-2009 2000-2007        2010-2018         Full Period     1985-2009 2000-2007        2010-2018
All Flows
Surges              14%            16%           21%          7%                 13%            14%          18%            9%
Stops               12%            14%            9%          8%                 12%            13%          10%           11%
Flight              14%            17%           22%          6%                 14%            17%          22%            7%
Retrenchment        12%            13%           10%          7%                 10%            11%           9%            9%

FDI
Surges              18%            22%           21%          10%                18%            21%          21%           11%
Stops               11%            12%           12%           9%                10%            11%          10%            9%
Flight              18%            21%           25%          11%                15%            16%          25%           12%
Retrenchment        12%            12%           11%          10%                11%            10%          11%           11%

Portfolio Debt
Surges              13%            14%           13%          10%                12%            12%          11%           13%
Stops               11%            12%           10%           9%                10%            10%           9%           10%
Flight              14%            16%           16%           8%                11%            12%          16%            8%
Retrenchment        12%            13%           12%           8%                9%             10%          11%            9%

Portfolio Equity
Surges              13%            15%           13%           9%                12%            13%          13%           10%
Stops               10%            12%           12%           7%                8%              9%           8%            6%
Flight              14%            15%           16%          10%                10%            10%          17%           10%
Retrenchment        10%            11%           10%           7%                7%              7%           8%            7%

Bank/Other
Surges              12%            14%           17%          7%                 11%            12%          14%           10%
Stops               11%            13%            8%          7%                 11%            11%           7%            9%
Flight              12%            14%           16%          8%                 11%            12%          14%            8%
Retrenchment        12%            13%           11%          7%                 11%            12%          13%            9%

Notes: Share of countries that have each type of extreme capital flow episode in each quarter over the given time period.
Capital flow episodes calculated based on criteria for that flow as discussed in Section II. For example, the capital flow episodes
for FDI are periods when FDI inflows or outflows are abnormally high (or low) and may not correspond to episodes for total
capital flows.




                                                                                                                                 25
Table 2. Components of Flows Driving Extreme Capital Flow Episodes
Episodes Driven by:
              Debt Flows (Portfolio Debt & Bank)                            Portfolio Flows (Portfolio Debt & Equity)
          Full Period 1985-09    2000-07    2010-18                        Full Period 1985-09     2000-07    2010-18
Surge        80%        79%        72%        88%                             27%         25%        26%        39%
Stop         79%        78%        60%        81%                             38%         36%        36%        45%
Flight       72%        72%        62%        70%                             32%         32%        32%        29%
Retrench     72%        73%        64%        69%                             34%         34%        46%        37%


                    Portfolio Debt Flows                                                  Bank Flows
         Full Period 1985-09    2000-07                   2010-18          Full Period 1985-09   2000-07                2010-18
Surge       17%        16%        15%                       23%               51%        52%       41%                    44%
Stop        22%        20%        25%                       31%               48%        51%       32%                    32%
Flight      22%        22%        23%                       22%               46%        45%       36%                    52%
Retrench    22%        22%        34%                       20%               49%        50%       33%                    45%

Notes: Share of each type of capital flow episode (defined in Section II) "led" by different types of capital flows. An episode is
"led" by a type of capital flow if the change in the given type of capital flow is larger in magnitude than the change in the other
types of capital flows (aggregated together). See Section III for details. Debt flows are defined as both portfolio debt and bank
flows; portfolio flows are defined as portfolio debt and portfolio equity flows.




                                                                                                                                 26
Table 3. Regression Results with Global and Contagion Variables, comparison to Forbes and Warnock (2012) results

                         Original Period (1980-2009)                               Full Period (1980-2018)                                Post-Crisis (2010-2018)
                  Surge        Stop       Flight  Retrench               Surge         Stop        Flight  Retrench             Surge         Stop       Flight   Retrench
Global Vars         (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)                  (5)          (6)          (7)       (8)                (9)          (10)       (11)        (12)
Risk             -0.043**     0.028**   -0.034**    0.026**             -0.033**      0.033**    -0.021**    0.028**            -0.031       0.060**    -0.046      0.047**
                  (0.008)     (0.004)    (0.008)    (0.004)              (0.008)      (0.005)     (0.008)    (0.004)            (0.025)      (0.022)    (0.028)     (0.021)
Liquidity         -0.005      -0.004      0.007      0.014               -0.012       -0.003       0.001     0.019**            -0.018       -0.014      0.000       0.035
                  (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.012)    (0.011)              (0.013)      (0.010)     (0.012)    (0.010)            (0.043)      (0.040)    (0.036)     (0.034)
Interest          -0.007       0.011     -0.016      0.031               0.136**      0.061**     0.137**    0.056**             0.278      -0.669**     0.307     -0.625**
  Rates           (0.038)     (0.040)    (0.039)    (0.033)              (0.024)      (0.028)     (0.022)    (0.025)            (0.247)      (0.266)    (0.211)     (0.306)
Growth            0.230**    -0.206**    0.126**   -0.184**              0.253**     -0.217**     0.146**   -0.187**            -0.041        0.224      0.244       0.065
                  (0.048)     (0.036)    (0.049)    (0.033)              (0.053)      (0.034)     (0.055)    (0.034)            (0.170)      (0.171)    (0.208)     (0.219)

Regional         0.548**      0.871**      0.280**       0.388**         0.702**      0.797**      0.373**      0.439**         0.681**       0.571*       -0.152        0.411
Contagion        (0.200)      (0.171)      (0.129)       (0.160)         (0.166)      (0.141)      (0.121)      (0.126)         (0.339)       (0.333)      (0.271)      (0.294)

Obs.              4,224        4,224        4,224        4,224           6,304        6,304         6,304        6,304           2,080        2,080        2,080        2,080

Notes: The dependent variable is a 0­1 variable indicating if there is a capital flow episode (surge, stop, flight or retrenchment). Estimates are obtained using the complementary
logarithmic (or cloglog) framework which assumes that F(·) is the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the extreme value distribution. To capture the covariance across
episodes, the set of four episodes is estimated using seemingly unrelated estimation with robust standard errors clustered by country. Risk is the year-over-year change in the
VIX. Liquidity is the year-over-year percentage change in the broad money supply of the US, UK, euro area and Japan. Long-term interest rates are the average for the US, UK,
euro area and Japan. Growth is the year-over-year change in global growth from the IMF WEO database. Regional contagion is a dummy variable equal to one if a country in the
same region has an episode.

Original Period is the same period as used in Forbes and Warnock (2012). Data for all columns is the updated capital flow database (as of August 2019), which incorporates data
revisions and has more extensive coverage than the data used in Forbes and Warnock (2012). ** is significant at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                27
Table 4. Regression Results with Global and Contagion Variables, new Baseline

                            Full Sample (1980-2018)                                  Pre-Crisis (1980-2007)                                  Post-Crisis (2010-2018)
                  Surge         Stop       Flight   Retrench              Surge         Stop        Flight  Retrench              Surge          Stop       Flight   Retrench
Global Vars         (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)                 (5)          (6)          (7)       (8)                 (9)           (10)       (11)        (12)
Risk             -0.040**      0.028**   -0.026**     0.025**            -0.040**      0.021**    -0.034**    0.034**             -0.026         0.002     -0.030      -0.020
                  (0.009)      (0.005)    (0.009)     (0.004)             (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.008)    (0.008)             (0.029)       (0.025)    (0.033)     (0.018)
Liquidity         -0.016       -0.005     -0.003      0.016*              -0.008       -0.025*      0.008      0.008              -0.032         0.037     -0.016      0.082**
                  (0.013)      (0.010)    (0.012)     (0.010)             (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.013)             (0.046)       (0.051)    (0.037)     (0.040)
Monetary          0.126**      0.074**    0.125**     0.064**              0.019       0.100**     -0.012     0.075**              0.133        0.265*      0.084       0.233
    Policy        (0.018)      (0.018)    (0.015)     (0.016)             (0.040)      (0.039)     (0.039)    (0.036)             (0.138)       (0.148)    (0.160)     (0.163)
Growth            0.177**     -0.205**    0.116**    -0.184**             0.182**     -0.210**     0.143**   -0.273**             -0.019        -0.087      0.259      -0.208
                  (0.054)      (0.037)    (0.058)     (0.038)             (0.071)      (0.085)     (0.059)    (0.087)             (0.157)       (0.171)    (0.178)     (0.196)
Oil Prices        0.005**     -0.006**     0.001      -0.003*              0.003      -0.006**     -0.003     -0.005*              0.008       -0.018**     0.008     -0.011**
                  (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)             (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.003)             (0.005)       (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)

Regional         0.598**       0.742**      0.307**       0.424**         0.583**      0.689**       0.251*       0.291*          0.640*         0.377       -0.168        0.477*
Contagion        (0.171)       (0.140)      (0.122)       (0.128)         (0.207)      (0.175)       (0.138)      (0.157)         (0.336)       (0.316)      (0.284)       (0.280)

Obs.              6,304        6,304         6,304        6,304            3,760        3,760        3,760         3,760           2,080        2,080         2,080        2,080

Notes: The dependent variable is a 0­1 variable indicating if there is a capital flow episode (surge, stop, flight or retrenchment). See notes to Table 3 for details on estimation.
Variables are defined as in Table 3 with two changes: monetary policy is now defined as the year-over-year change in the average shadow short rate (from Leo Krippner's RNBZ
web site) for the US, UK, euro area and Japan (in order to better capture changes in unconventional monetary policy) and oil prices are added and measured as the year-over-
year percentage change in oil prices. ** is significant at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                   28
Table 5. Regression Results with Global, Contagion and Local Variables


                         Full Sample (1980-2018)                         Pre-Crisis (1980-2007)                          Post-Crisis (2010-2018)
               Surge          Stop      Flight   Retrench      Surge        Stop        Flight  Retrench       Surge         Stop       Flight   Retrench
Global Vars      (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)           (9)          (10)       (11)        (12)
Risk          -0.039**      0.034**   -0.033**    0.027**     -0.040**     0.029**    -0.041**   0.035**       -0.017        0.012     -0.037      -0.030
               (0.010)      (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.005)      (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.008)   (0.013)       (0.032)      (0.029)    (0.038)    (0.024)
Liquidity      -0.019        -0.002     0.002      0.014       -0.006      -0.019       0.016     0.006        -0.028       -0.011      0.046       0.058
               (0.018)      (0.010)    (0.014)    (0.012)      (0.019)     (0.014)     (0.014)   (0.019)       (0.055)      (0.049)    (0.046)    (0.043)
Monetary       0.132**      0.104**    0.144**    0.085**      -0.001      0.114**     -0.036     0.082         0.054        0.249     -0.013       0.349
    Policy     (0.020)      (0.020)    (0.018)    (0.021)      (0.054)     (0.042)     (0.048)   (0.050)       (0.161)      (0.176)    (0.210)    (0.214)
Growth         0.219**      -0.095*    0.126*    -0.142**      0.225**     -0.085      0.157**   -0.250*       -0.074        0.004      0.244       0.095
               (0.068)      (0.049)    (0.068)    (0.069)      (0.076)     (0.114)     (0.072)   (0.128)       (0.187)      (0.211)    (0.235)    (0.286)
Oil Prices     0.004*      -0.006**    -0.000     -0.003        0.000     -0.007**    -0.005**   -0.007*        0.009      -0.016**     0.005     -0.012*
               (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)   (0.004)       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.007)

Regional       0.632**     0.718**    0.420**    0.498**       0.565**    0.662**      0.211     0.399**       0.700*       0.441      0.420      0.387
Contagion      (0.201)     (0.173)    (0.118)    (0.147)       (0.235)    (0.217)     (0.138)    (0.172)       (0.398)     (0.393)    (0.310)    (0.351)

Domestic Var
GDP          0.024**       -0.084**    0.005     -0.030        0.020**    -0.114**    -0.000      0.003        0.093**     -0.029     -0.081     -0.079
 Growth      (0.007)        (0.015)   (0.008)    (0.030)       (0.005)     (0.019)    (0.008)    (0.025)       (0.033)     (0.048)    (0.053)    (0.059)

Obs.           4,779        4,779      4,779      4,779        2,763       2,763      2,763       2,763         1,632       1,632     1,632       1,632

Notes: See notes to Tables 3 and 4 for details on estimation and variable definitions. Table replicates analysis in Table 4 except adds a local variable: domestic
economic growth (year-over-year percent change, calculated on a quarterly basis). Sample sizes are smaller than in Table 4 because of the limited availability of
this variable. ** is significant at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                                                                               29
Appendix Table 1: Sample Coverage

Country               Start Year           End Year                Country     Start Year                End Year
Argentina               1980                 2018                  Korea            1980                     2018
Australia               1980                 2018                  Latvia           1993                     2018
Austria                 1980                 2018                  Lithuania        1993                     2018
Bangladesh              1980                 2018                  Malaysia         1999                     2018
BelLux                  1980                 2018                  Mexico           1980                     2018
Bolivia                 1988                 2018                  Netherlands      1980                     2018
Brazil                  1980                 2018                  NewZealand       1980                     2018
Canada                  1980                 2018                  Norway           1980                     2018
Chile                   1991                 2018                  Panama           1998                     2018
Colombia                1996                 2018                  Peru             1991                     2018
CostaRica               1999                 2018                  Philippines      1980                     2018
Croatia                 1993                 2018                  Poland           1985                     2018
CzechRepublic           1993                 2018                  Portugal         1980                     2018
Denmark                 1980                 2018                  Romania          1991                     2018
Estonia                 1992                 2018                  Russia           1994                     2018
Finland                 1980                 2018                  Singapore        1995                     2018
France                  1980                 2018                  SlovakRep        1993                     2018
Germany                 1980                 2018                  Slovenia         1992                     2018
Greece                  1999                 2018                  SouthAfrica      1985                     2018
Guatamala               1980                 2018                  Spain            1980                     2018
HongKong                1999                 2018                  SriLanka         1980                     2018
Hungary                 1989                 2018                  Sweden           1980                     2018
Iceland                 1980                 2018                  Switzerland      1999                     2018
India                   1980                 2018                  Taiwan           1987                     2018
Indonesia               1981                 2018                  Thailand         1980                     2018
Ireland                 1981                 2018                  Turkey           1984                     2018
Israel                  1980                 2018                  UK               1980                     2018
Italy                   1980                 2018                  US               1980                     2018
Japan                   1980                 2018                  Venezuela        1994                     2016
Notes: Reports start and end dates for the capital flow data used to calculated the four types of episodes. To qualify as an
episode, a country must have 24 quarters of flow data, so that the earliest possible episode for any country is five years after
the start date of the flow data.




                                                                                                                                   30
Appendix Table 2: Capital Flow Episodes (for total capital flows)
Note. Underlying flow data were pulled from IFS on August 26, 2019. 
                           Surge                       Stop                   Flight          Retrenchment
                     Start       End             Start      End         Start        End     Start     End
Argentina           1990q4     1992q3           1989q2     1990q3      1989q3      1990q1   1988q3    1989q1
                    2015q1     2015q3           1998q4     1999q3      1991q2      1992q3   1992q4    1993q2
                    2016q4     2018q2           2000q4     2002q2      2002q4      2003q1   1998q3    1999q2
                                                2008q2     2009q4      2006q3      2008q3   2009q2    2010q2
                                                                       2017q4      2018q4
Australia           1988q4       1989q1         1989q4       1991q3    1987q4      1988q3   1989q3   1991q2
                    1995q3       1996q3         1997q3       1998q1    1992q2      1992q3   2003q1   2003q3
                    1999q3       1999q4         2005q1       2005q4    1995q4      1996q3   2005q1   2005q4
                    2002q3       2002q4         2012q2       2012q3    2004q1      2004q3   2012q2   2012q3
                    2003q4       2004q3         2016q3       2016q4    2006q2      2007q1   2016q1   2016q4
                    2006q2       2007q1
Austria             1992q2       1993q1         1996q4       1997q1    1992q2    1993q1     1986q1   1986q2
                    1999q2       2000q1         2001q1       2002q1    1997q2    1998q1     1993q3   1993q4
                    2005q1       2005q4         2006q1       2006q4    1999q2    2000q1     2001q2   2002q1
                    2017q1       2018q1         2008q3       2009q3    2005q1    2005q4     2008q3   2009q3
                                                                       2017q1    2018q1
Bangladesh          1989q1       1989q4         1991q3       1992q1    1987q1    1987q3     1992q2   1993q1
                    1998q1       1998q3         2006q1       2006q2    1988q2    1989q3     2001q1   2001q4
                    2003q4       2004q1         2009q2       2009q4    1995q3    1997q1     2012q3   2013q2
                    2005q1       2005q2         2011q1       2011q4    2011q3    2012q2
                    2006q4       2007q1                                2017q4    2018q4
                    2008q2       2008q4
                    2010q1       2010q2
                    2017q1       2018q3
BelLux              1987q1       1987q4         1988q2       1989q1    1987q1    1987q4     1988q2   1989q1
                    1999q3       2000q3         1994q1       1995q1    1999q3    2000q3     1994q1   1995q1
                    2005q2       2006q1         2001q4       2002q3    2005q2    2006q1     2001q4   2002q3
                    2015q3       2015q4         2008q2       2009q3    2015q3    2015q4     2008q2   2009q3
                                                2016q1       2016q4                         2016q1   2016q4
                                                2018q2       2018q4                         2018q2   2018q4
Bolivia             1996q1       1996q3         1999q2       2001q2    1994q1    1994q4     2004q3   2005q1
                    1997q4       1998q4         2006q3       2007q2    2001q1    2001q2     2006q2   2006q3
                    2007q3       2008q4         2014q3       2015q3    2003q3    2004q1     2010q2   2010q4
                    2013q3       2013q4                                2008q4    2009q3     2014q3   2015q3
                                                                       2012q1    2013q1
Brazil              1990q2       1991q1         1993q1       1993q3    1987q4    1988q3     1992q1   1992q4
                    1992q2       1992q3         1995q1       1995q2    1994q2    1994q4     1997q4   1998q2
                    1994q1       1994q3         1999q1       1999q2    1998q3    1999q2     2008q1   2008q3
                    1995q4       1996q2         2008q2       2009q3    2006q4    2007q3
                    2006q3       2007q4         2015q3       2016q2
Canada              1996q4       1997q3         1991q2       1991q3    1986q2    1986q4     1993q2   1993q3
                    2000q1       2001q1         1995q2       1996q1    1994q2    1994q4     1998q1   1998q3
                    2006q2       2007q1         2008q4       2009q2    1996q4    1997q3     2008q4   2009q3
                                                                       2000q1    2001q1
                                                                       2006q2    2007q1
Chile               2005q4       2006q3         2000q2       2001q1    1998q2    1999q4     2000q2   2000q4
                    2007q4       2008q3         2009q1       2009q4    2006q1    2006q4     2008q3   2009q3
                    2017q4       2018q2         2013q3       2014q1    2007q3    2008q1
                                                                       2010q1    2010q3
Colombia            2005q4       2006q3         2015q2       2016q3    2006q2    2006q3     2002q2   2003q1
                    2010q4       2011q2                                2013q4    2014q2     2007q2   2007q3
                    2013q4       2014q2                                                     2012q4   2013q2
CostaRica           2005q4       2006q3         2008q4       2009q4    2006q1    2006q3     2014q4   2015q3
                                                2014q2       2015q3    2012q1    2012q4
                                                                       2013q4    2014q1
Croatia             2002q4       2004q1         1998q4       1999q2    2002q4    2003q4     2001q3   2002q1
                    2006q3       2007q3         2004q4       2005q3    2006q4    2007q3     2004q4   2005q4
                    2013q1       2014q3         2010q2       2011q1    2014q2    2014q4
                                                2015q3       2016q2
CzechRepublic       2002q3       2003q1         2003q2       2004q1    2003q3    2005q1     2000q1   2000q4
                    2004q2       2005q3         2006q2       2006q4    2007q2    2008q3     2002q1   2002q3
                    2016q1       2016q2         2008q4       2009q3    2017q3    2018q2     2008q4   2009q4
                    2016q4       2017q4         2018q1       2018q4
Denmark             1995q3       1996q2         1986q4       1987q2    1993q3    1994q2     1986q4   1987q2
                    2005q1       2005q4         1989q2       1989q4    1999q4    2001q1     1992q2   1993q2
                                                1991q4       1993q2    2005q2    2005q4     1994q3   1995q1
                                                1994q3       1995q1                         2001q2   2002q2
                                                2001q2       2002q1                         2008q3   2009q4
                                                2008q4       2009q4
                   Surge               Stop                Flight          Retrenchment
             Start       End     Start      End      Start        End     Start     End
Estonia     1997q4     1998q1   1998q3     1999q3   1997q4      1998q1   1998q4    1999q1
            2003q1     2005q1   2008q2     2009q3   2001q1      2001q2   2000q1    2000q2
            2006q4     2007q4   2015q1     2015q4   2003q3      2005q3   2008q2    2009q3
                                                    2007q2      2008q1
Finland     1987q1    1987q4    1985q4    1986q2    1986q3      1987q1   1985q4   1986q2
            1990q1    1990q4    1991q1    1992q2    1988q3      1989q1   1987q3   1987q4
            1998q4    1999q1    2001q1    2002q1    1993q1      1993q3   1992q1   1992q3
            2004q3    2004q4    2009q2    2009q3    1998q4      1999q1   2001q1   2002q2
            2008q2    2008q3    2012q3    2013q3    2000q1      2000q4   2009q2   2009q3
            2011q3    2011q4                        2008q2      2008q3   2012q3   2013q3
                                                    2010q2      2011q1
France      1986q3    1987q4    1991q1    1992q1    1986q4      1987q4   1991q2   1992q1
            1989q1    1989q4    2002q1    2002q3    1992q3      1992q4   2001q4   2002q3
            1997q4    1998q3    2008q1    2009q3    1997q4      1998q3   2008q1   2009q3
            2001q1    2001q2                        2001q1      2001q2
            2005q3    2006q3                        2005q3      2006q1
Germany     1986q1    1986q4    1987q4    1988q3    1986q1      1986q4   1987q3   1988q2
            1989q2    1990q1    1994q1    1994q4    1988q4      1989q4   1990q4   1992q2
            1992q3    1993q3    2001q1    2002q2    1993q1      1993q4   2000q4   2002q2
            2000q1    2000q3    2008q3    2009q3    2005q1      2005q4   2008q2   2009q3
            2005q2    2005q4
            2007q2    2008q1
Greece      2005q1    2005q4    2006q1    2006q4    2005q1    2005q3     2006q1   2006q4
            2007q2    2007q4    2010q2    2011q2    2007q2    2007q4     2010q3   2011q2
                                                    2012q1    2012q4
Guatamala   1987q4    1988q1    1994q4    1995q3    1990q3    1991q2     1988q3   1988q4
            1991q1    1991q4    1999q4    2001q3    1997q1    1998q3     1989q2   1990q1
            2003q3    2004q2    2008q4    2009q3    2003q1    2004q3     2000q1   2001q1
                                                    2011q2    2012q1     2008q4   2009q2
                                                                         2018q1   2018q2
HongKong    2007q3    2008q1    2008q3    2009q3    2007q2    2008q1     2008q3   2009q3
Hungary     2003q1    2003q4    1996q4    1997q1    1995q3    1995q4     2009q1   2010q2
            2005q1    2005q3    2002q2    2002q3    2001q2    2002q3     2017q4   2018q4
            2006q1    2006q4    2009q1    2010q2    2003q4    2004q2
            2007q2    2008q1    2017q4    2018q3    2005q4    2008q1
            2016q4    2017q3                        2016q4    2017q3
Iceland     1987q1    1987q4    1989q2    1990q1    1986q3    1987q2     1991q4   1992q3
            1995q4    1996q4    1993q3    1993q4    1993q2    1993q3     2000q2   2000q3
            1999q1    1999q4    2001q2    2002q1    1997q3    1998q2     2001q4   2002q2
            2003q4    2006q1    2008q2    2009q4    1999q2    1999q4     2008q1   2009q2
            2015q4    2016q3    2016q4    2017q3    2003q1    2006q1
                                                    2018q3    2018q4
India       1987q1    1987q3    1989q4    1990q4    1990q3    1991q2     1992q1   1992q4
            1993q4    1994q4    1991q3    1992q1    1995q4    1996q4     1999q2   2000q2
            1996q2    1997q1    2008q3    2009q3    2000q4    2001q3     2002q1   2002q4
            2003q3    2004q2    2015q3    2016q4    2004q1    2004q3     2007q4   2008q2
            2004q4    2005q3                        2008q4    2009q1
            2006q4    2008q1                        2013q3    2014q3
Indonesia   1990q3    1991q2    1997q4    1998q3    1993q3    1994q3     1997q2   1998q3
            1995q2    1996q3    2006q4    2007q1    2002q3    2003q2     2003q3   2003q4
            2005q4    2006q1    2009q1    2009q3    2004q1    2005q1     2006q3   2007q1
            2010q1    2010q4    2011q4    2012q2    2005q3    2006q2     2016q2   2017q2
            2017q4    2018q1    2015q3    2016q2    2017q4    2018q3
Ireland     1986q4    1987q3    1991q3    1992q2    1987q2    1988q1     1991q4   1992q2
            1989q3    1990q2    2008q2    2009q3    1989q3    1990q1     2008q2   2009q3
            1992q4    1993q4    2016q4    2017q1    1992q3    1993q1     2016q4   2017q1
            1995q3    1996q3    2018q2    2018q3    1995q4    1996q3
            1997q4    1999q1                        1997q4    1998q4
            2003q3    2004q2                        2003q3    2004q2
            2005q2    2006q1                        2005q3    2006q1
            2007q1    2007q3                        2007q1    2007q3
            2014q3    2015q2                        2014q3    2015q1
Israel      1989q4    1990q3    1988q3    1989q2    1986q2    1987q1     1991q1   1991q3
            1995q3    1996q1    1998q2    1999q1    1990q1    1990q2     1995q2   1995q3
            1999q3    2000q1    2001q1    2002q2    1992q1    1992q3     2001q2   2002q2
            2006q3    2006q4    2007q4    2009q2    1998q1    1998q4     2007q3   2009q3
            2013q1    2013q3    2011q4    2012q3    2006q1    2006q4
Italy       1990q4    1991q1    1991q4    1992q2    1991q1    1991q2     1986q1   1986q2
            1996q1    1997q1    1992q4    1993q3    2003q1    2003q4     1993q1   1993q3
            2003q1    2003q4    2000q4    2002q3    2005q1    2006q1     2000q4   2002q3
            2005q2    2006q1    2007q4    2008q4    2011q2    2011q4     2007q3   2009q2
            2011q1    2011q3                                             2015q4   2016q2
                     Surge               Stop                Flight          Retrenchment
               Start       End     Start      End      Start        End     Start     End
Japan         1986q2     1987q3   1990q4     1991q4   1986q1      1987q2   1987q4    1988q3
              1993q4     1995q1   1992q2     1993q1   1993q4      1994q4   1990q3    1991q3
              2000q2     2001q1   1998q1     1999q1   2000q2      2001q1   1998q2    1999q4
              2010q1     2011q1   2008q3     2009q3   2004q4      2005q2   2008q3    2009q3
                                                      2010q2      2011q1   2017q2    2017q4
Korea         1988q3    1989q1    1986q3    1987q4    1986q4      1987q2   1989q3    1989q4
              1994q3    1995q4    1997q2    1998q4    1988q3      1989q1   1997q3    1999q1
              2009q4    2010q2    2008q2    2009q3    1990q2      1990q3   2008q2    2009q3
              2016q4    2017q3    2015q3    2016q2    1994q2      1995q4   2015q2    2016q3
                                                      2002q4      2004q3
                                                      2006q1      2007q4
                                                      2016q4      2017q2
Latvia        2003q2    2005q1    1998q4    1999q2    2006q2      2007q4   1998q4   1999q2
              2006q2    2007q4    2008q3    2009q3    2014q1      2014q4   2005q3   2006q1
                                  2015q2    2016q1                         2008q3   2009q2
                                  2018q3    2018q4                         2015q2   2015q4
Lithuania     2004q2    2004q3    1999q2    2000q1    1999q4    2000q3     2001q2   2001q3
              2005q4    2008q1    2000q4    2001q3    2004q1    2004q4     2008q3   2009q3
                                  2008q3    2009q4    2005q2    2006q1     2017q4   2018q3
                                                      2007q3    2008q2
                                                      2015q1    2015q4
Malaysia      2007q1    2008q1    2005q4    2006q3    2006q2    2007q4     2008q3   2009q2
              2009q4    2010q3    2008q3    2009q2    2009q4    2010q3     2015q1   2016q1
              2016q3    2016q4
Mexico        1989q2    1991q2    1994q4    1995q4    1987q3    1988q2     1991q3   1991q4
              2005q1    2005q2    2006q4    2007q2    1990q1    1990q4     1992q2   1993q1
              2007q4    2008q3    2008q4    2009q3    2001q3    2002q2     1997q3   1997q4
                                  2014q4    2016q1    2004q3    2005q2     2006q4   2007q2
                                                      2007q4    2008q2     2008q4   2009q3
                                                                           2017q4   2018q2
Netherlands   1985q4    1987q1    1990q4    1991q4    1986q2    1987q1     1990q4   1992q1
              1997q4    1998q4    2002q1    2002q4    1989q1    1989q2     2002q1   2002q4
              2004q3    2007q1    2008q2    2009q3    1989q4    1990q2     2008q1   2009q3
                                                      1997q4    1998q4
                                                      2003q4    2005q3
                                                      2006q1    2007q1
NewZealand    1986q3    1987q2    1987q4    1988q3    1986q4    1987q2     1986q1   1986q2
              2001q1    2002q2    1998q3    1999q2    1989q2    1990q2     1988q1   1989q1
              2004q3    2004q4    2005q3    2006q2    1993q3    1994q2     2000q2   2000q4
              2006q3    2007q3    2008q2    2009q2    2001q3    2002q2     2002q4   2003q4
                                                      2006q3    2007q4     2005q3   2006q1
                                                      2011q1    2011q2     2012q1   2012q3
Norway        1992q4    1993q2    1988q3    1989q2    1986q3    1987q3     1987q4   1988q4
              1996q2    1997q1    1991q3    1992q2    1994q3    1995q3     1992q2   1994q1
              2000q3    2001q1    1997q4    1998q1    2000q2    2001q2     1999q2   1999q3
              2002q4    2003q2    2001q3    2002q1    2005q4    2007q1     2001q4   2002q3
              2005q4    2007q1    2007q4    2009q4    2010q4    2011q1     2007q4   2008q2
              2010q3    2011q1                                             2009q2   2010q1
Panama        2014q4    2015q2    2008q4    2009q4                         2008q4   2009q3
                                                                           2015q4   2016q4
Peru          2006q4    2008q2    1998q4    1999q3    2001q1    2001q2     2007q4   2008q3
                                  2005q4    2006q1    2003q2    2004q1     2015q4   2016q3
                                  2008q4    2009q3    2005q4    2006q3
                                  2013q4    2014q3    2009q2    2009q4
                                                      2014q4    2015q2
Philippines   1994q2    1994q3    1992q1    1992q2    1991q4    1994q2     1997q3   1998q2
              1996q1    1997q1    1997q3    1998q4    1999q1    1999q2     2006q1   2006q2
              2007q1    2007q3    2008q1    2009q1    2007q1    2007q2     2008q1   2008q4
              2017q4    2018q3                                             2015q4   2016q3
Poland        1997q3    1998q2    1996q3    1997q1    1990q4    1991q1     1991q3   1991q4
              2003q4    2004q4    2001q4    2002q1    1997q2    1998q2     1993q2   1993q3
              2007q1    2008q2    2008q4    2009q3    2004q2    2005q1     2002q3   2002q4
                                  2017q3    2017q4                         2008q3   2009q3
Portugal      1988q4    1990q2    1992q3    1993q2    1990q2    1991q2     1987q4   1988q1
              1994q3    1995q3    1999q3    1999q4    1993q1    1993q4     1989q4   1990q1
              2003q4    2004q2    2002q4    2003q1    2003q3    2004q1     1992q1   1992q2
              2010q1    2010q2    2004q4    2005q2    2009q4    2010q2     1996q1   1996q3
                                  2010q4    2011q4                         1999q3   1999q4
                                                                           2004q3   2005q2
                                                                           2010q4   2011q3
Romania       1996q4    1997q3    2008q3    2010q1    2003q4    2004q1     2010q3   2011q1
              2000q4    2001q2                        2004q4    2005q3     2017q1   2017q3
              2004q1    2005q3                        2007q1    2007q2
              2006q4    2007q4                        2018q1    2018q3
              2016q1    2016q3
Russia        2003q2    2004q2    2008q4    2009q3    2003q2    2004q2     2001q3   2002q2
              2007q1    2008q1    2014q1    2015q2    2007q2    2009q1     2009q3   2010q3
                     Surge               Stop                Flight          Retrenchment
               Start       End     Start      End      Start        End     Start     End
Singapore     2007q1     2008q1   2008q3     2009q3   2007q1      2008q1   2008q3    2009q3
                                  2015q4     2016q1                        2015q4    2016q1
SlovakRep     2004q3    2005q2    1998q4     1999q4   2013q2    2013q4     1999q1    1999q2
              2013q2    2014q1    2012q2     2012q4                        2006q3    2006q4
                                                                           2010q2    2010q3
                                                                           2015q3    2015q4
Slovenia      2002q3    2003q2    1997q4    1998q2    1998q3    1999q2     2008q1    2009q3
              2007q1    2007q4    2008q3    2009q3    2002q4    2003q3     2015q4    2016q1
              2014q2    2014q4                        2005q3    2006q2
                                                      2007q1    2007q4
                                                      2014q3    2014q4
SouthAfrica   1994q3    1995q4    1998q3    1999q2    1991q2    1993q1     1999q1   1999q2
              1997q2    1998q1    2000q3    2001q1    1995q3    1996q2     2000q3   2001q1
              2003q4    2004q4    2008q3    2009q2    1997q2    1998q2     2015q3   2016q2
              2005q2    2006q2    2015q3    2016q2    2003q4    2004q3
                                                      2006q1    2006q4
                                                      2017q1    2018q1
Spain         1987q1    1988q2    1985q4    1986q2    1988q2    1989q1     1987q1   1987q3
              1990q4    1991q3    1994q2    1995q1    1990q1    1991q2     1994q2   1995q1
              1993q2    1993q4    2001q3    2002q2    1992q3    1993q4     2001q3   2002q2
              2000q3    2001q2    2008q1    2009q4    2011q2    2012q2     2007q3   2009q3
              2014q2    2015q1                        2014q2    2015q1
SriLanka      1989q4    1990q3    1994q2    1994q3    1990q3    1991q2     1990q1   1990q2
              2011q2    2012q4    1995q4    1996q1    1995q1    1995q3     1993q2   1994q3
                                  1998q3    1999q1    2007q3    2008q1     1998q4   1999q1
                                  2001q2    2002q1    2009q1    2009q3     2001q4   2002q3
                                  2008q1    2008q2                         2010q1   2010q4
                                  2010q3    2010q4
                                  2015q1    2015q4
Sweden        1985q4    1987q3    1991q2    1992q2    1986q3    1988q1     1991q1   1992q1
              1989q2    1990q4    1997q1    1997q3    1988q4    1990q3     2001q1   2001q2
              1998q1    1998q4    2008q4    2009q3    1995q3    1996q3     2008q1   2009q3
              2004q4    2005q2    2014q4    2015q2    2006q4    2007q4     2014q4   2015q2
              2006q4    2007q4                        2017q1    2017q4
              2013q4    2014q2
Switzerland   2005q3    2006q2    2008q1    2009q1    2005q3    2006q2     2008q1   2009q1
              2007q3    2007q4                                             2017q3   2018q2
Taiwan        1999q2    2000q2    1997q4    1998q3    1996q1    1996q3     1997q1   1997q4
              2003q3    2004q2    2001q1    2001q2    2000q1    2000q4     2002q2   2002q3
              2009q4    2010q3    2005q1    2005q2    2003q3    2004q1     2008q2   2009q2
                                  2008q4    2009q2                         2014q4   2015q4
                                  2014q4    2015q4
Thailand      1987q4    1990q3    1986q3    1986q4    1985q4    1986q1     1986q4   1988q4
              1995q2    1996q1    1992q1    1992q4    1989q3    1990q2     1991q2   1991q4
              2004q3    2006q1    1996q3    1998q2    1993q2    1994q2     1996q3   1997q2
              2009q4    2010q4    2007q1    2007q2    2005q1    2006q2     2008q1   2008q4
                                  2008q2    2009q1    2009q4    2010q1     2015q2   2016q1
                                  2011q4    2012q3
Turkey        1990q1    1990q4    1991q3    1991q4    1991q1    1991q2     1989q4   1990q1
              1992q3    1993q4    1994q2    1995q1    1995q4    1996q3     1994q3   1995q3
              2000q1    2000q3    2001q1    2001q4    2006q4    2007q3     2009q2   2010q1
                                  2007q4    2008q2                         2016q2   2017q1
                                  2008q4    2009q4
UK            1985q4    1987q2    1991q3    1992q1    1985q4    1987q2     1991q3   1992q2
              1992q3    1993q2    1994q2    1994q4    1992q4    1993q2     1998q1   1998q4
              2000q3    2000q4    2001q3    2002q3    2000q3    2000q4     2001q3   2002q3
              2007q2    2007q4    2008q2    2009q2                         2008q1   2009q2
US            1986q1    1987q1    1989q4    1990q4    1993q3    1994q2     1998q1   1998q4
              1993q3    1994q3    1998q1    1999q1    1995q3    1996q1     2001q3   2002q2
              1997q1    1997q3    2001q3    2002q2    1997q1    1997q3     2008q1   2009q2
              1999q4    2000q4    2008q1    2009q2    2004q1    2004q4
              2004q2    2004q4                        2006q4    2007q3
              2006q4    2007q2
Venezuela     2005q2    2005q4    2006q2    2006q4    2002q2    2002q4     2008q4   2009q3
              2007q2    2008q1    2012q2    2012q3    2005q2    2006q3
                                                      2007q4    2008q1
