                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                REDRAWING THE MAP OF GLOBAL CAPITAL FLOWS:
             THE ROLE OF CROSS-BORDER FINANCING AND TAX HAVENS

                                          Antonio Coppola
                                          Matteo Maggiori
                                           Brent Neiman
                                           Jesse Schreger

                                        Working Paper 26855
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26855


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2020, Revised December 2020




We thank the Becker-Friedman Institute, the Guggenheim Foundation, the NSF (1653917), the
Sloan Foundation, the Weatherhead Center, William Ladany Faculty Research Fund, and the
Jerome A. Chazen Institute for Global Business for financial support. We thank Javier Cravino,
Riccardo Colacito, Max Croce, Stephanie Curcuru, Darrel Duffie, Kristin Forbes, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Gordon Hanson, Zhiguo He, Wei Jiang, Keyu Jin, Ken Rogoff, Michael Song, Hyun
Song Shin, Cristoph Trebesch, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Adrien Verdelhan, Frank Warnock,
Shang-Jin Wei, and Gabriel Zucman for helpful comments and discussion. We thank Amanda
Dos Santos, Andrea Hamaui, Angus Lewis, Ricardo Ruiz, George Vojta, and Menglu Xu for
outstanding research assistance. We offer particular thanks to Steve Kaplan for his generous help
with the project. Our analysis makes use of data that are proprietary to Morningstar and/or its
content providers. Neither Morningstar nor its content providers are responsible for any of the
views expressed in this article, nor do the views herein necessarily reflect those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Antonio Coppola, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Redrawing the Map of Global Capital Flows: The Role of Cross-Border Financing and Tax
Havens
Antonio Coppola, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger
NBER Working Paper No. 26855
March 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. E0,F0,G0

                                          ABSTRACT

Global firms finance themselves through foreign subsidiaries, often shell companies in tax
havens, which obscures their true economic location in official statistics. We associate the
universe of traded securities issued by firms in tax havens with their issuer's ultimate parent and
restate bilateral investment positions to better reflect the financial linkages connecting countries
around the world. Portfolio investment from developed countries to firms in large emerging
markets is dramatically larger than previously thought. The national accounts of the United
States, for example, understate the U.S. position in Chinese firms by nearly 600 billion dollars,
while China's official net creditor position to the rest of the world is overstated by about 50
percent. Further, we demonstrate how offshore issuance in tax havens affects our understanding
of the currency composition of external portfolio liabilities and the nature of foreign direct
investment. Finally, we provide additional restatements of bilateral investment positions,
including one based the geographic distribution of sales.

Antonio Coppola                                  Brent Neiman
Harvard University                               University of Chicago
acoppola@g.harvard.edu                           Booth School of Business
                                                 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Matteo Maggiori                                  Chicago, IL 60637
Stanford University                              and NBER
Graduate School of Business                      brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305                               Jesse Schreger
and NBER                                         Columbia Business School
maggiori@stanford.edu                            3022 Broadway
                                                 Uris Hall 821
                                                 New York, NY 10027
                                                 and NBER
                                                 jesse.schreger@columbia.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26855
A Website with data and code is available at https://www.globalcapitalallocation.com/
       Global firms often access capital markets by issuing securities through cross-border affil-
iates. For example, due to the incentive to minimize taxes and withholding, to avoid capital
controls and other regulations, and to access different investors, the corporate sector glob-
ally raises 7 percent of its equity and 9 percent of its bond financing via foreign subsidiaries
located in tax havens. Standard economic data associate such offshore securities with the
location of the issuing affiliates, rather than the country of their ultimate parents, so they
offer a highly distorted view of global portfolios. Financial globalization has left bilateral
investment statistics that do not adjust for offshore security issuance ill-suited for many
questions of economic and policy interest.
       In this paper, we match foreign subsidiaries located in tax havens to their parents with
a security-level dataset on global fund holdings and restate bilateral investment positions to
reflect the true financial linkages across countries. We find that the scale of portfolio invest-
ment from developed countries to emerging market companies is vastly understated when
offshore issuance is not taken into account. Further, we demonstrate how the pervasive use
of corporate affiliates to raise money overseas is important for assessing the scale of global
imbalances, the currency composition of emerging markets' external portfolio liabilities, and
the nature of foreign direct investment (FDI). Finally, we offer additional restatements of
bilateral investment positions useful for understanding other aspects of our increasingly glob-
alized world, including one restatement that links investment in a firm with the geographic
distribution of its sales and another that links all foreign affiliates, even those not in tax
havens, with the location of their ultimate parents.
       We start in Section 1 by developing an algorithm that combines information from seven
commercial sources to associate subsidiaries that issue securities in tax havens with their
ultimate parent firm and with their ultimate parent firm's country.1 Our dataset covers the
universe of traded securities ­ bonds and equities ­ globally. We merge this subsidiary-parent
mapping with a dataset of global mutual fund and exchange traded fund (ETF) holdings
provided by Morningstar and assembled in Maggiori et al. (2020, henceforth MNS). For each
position in the data associated with an issuer in a tax haven, we establish the residency
(the country of incorporation) of the security's immediate issuer and, using our mapping,
can also link the security to its ultimate parent issuer. For example, in the Morningstar
data, we observe billions of dollars of Eurozone holdings of securities issued by Petrobras
   1
    Our algorithm and all key results from the paper are available online for download and use at global-
capitalallocation.com.



                                                   1
International Finance Company (PIFCO), a Cayman Islands-based subsidiary of Brazil's
largest energy company. Most international financial statistics are reported on a "residency"
basis, associating securities with the location of their immediate issuer, so they record these
positions as Eurozone investments in the financial sector of the Cayman Islands. Merging
our mapping with the Morningstar holdings data, we can instead classify these positions as
Eurozone investments in Brazil's energy sector, a treatment consistent with a "nationality"
basis, which registers the country of the issuer's ultimate parent. Aggregating over all
investments by each country in each asset class, we build a set of "reallocation matrices"
that characterize how to convert a dataset of bilateral investment positions from a residency
to a nationality basis.
       In Section 2, we apply these reallocation matrices to two widely-used, publicly available,
and residency-based datasets ­ the U.S. Treasury's International Capital (TIC) data and
the IMF's Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) data ­ to transform them into
nationality-based bilateral positions.2 For example, one entry in our reallocation matrix for
U.S. corporate bond positions specifies that 20 percent of all U.S. holdings in the Cayman
Islands on a residency basis should be considered U.S. holdings in Brazil on a nationality
basis.3 We multiply the value in TIC of overall U.S. holdings of Cayman Islands corporate
bonds by this 20 percent to calculate the value of those bonds that should under nationality
be considered to be Brazilian. We apply this procedure and report nationality-based bilateral
investment positions for nine developed economies with high-quality data on fund holdings:
the United States, the European Monetary Union (EMU), the United Kingdom (U.K.),
Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway.
       TIC and CPIS cover the universe of security positions held by each country's investors,
a superset of those in the Morningstar data. Therefore, our key assumption is that our
reallocation matrices, which are constructed entirely from investments made by funds in
the Morningstar data, are representative of the overall set of security investments, including
those not made by funds or made by funds excluded from the Morningstar data. We directly
corroborate this assumption by showing the close similarity of restated positions computed
using our fund holdings data with restatements that instead are based on the holdings of
insurance companies in the case of the United States and the sovereign wealth fund (SWF)
   2
     TIC covers all foreign portfolio investments in securities made by U.S. residents and is used by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis to calculate the U.S. external accounts. The CPIS dataset covers the foreign
bilateral portfolio investments of a large number of other countries.
   3
     The value of U.S. holdings of PIFCO bonds ­ analogous to the example discussed above for Eurozone
investors ­ contributes to our calculation of this 20 percent.

                                                   2
in the case of Norway.
       The resulting nationality-based statistics paint a vastly different picture of global cap-
ital allocation than the original residency-based data. We organize our discussion of this
redrawn map around two important patterns. First, the revised positions involve signifi-
cantly larger portfolio debt investments from developed markets to large emerging markets
including Brazil, China, India, Russia and South Africa (the "BRICS" countries). Firms
in those countries disproportionately issue bonds through affiliates that are resident in tax
havens in part to minimize the burden of withholding taxes that apply to interest payments
on foreign-held bonds. As a result, our revised positions reveal that U.S. investments in
Brazilian corporate bonds, for example, equal $50 billion, much larger than the $8 billion
position listed in TIC. EMU holdings of Russian debt triples from $36 billion in CPIS to $107
billion in our restated tables. Similar patterns are found for the investments in emerging
market debt securities of the rest of the nine developed economies in our study. The value
of developed country debt holdings in Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Ireland, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, and Panama plunge. Further, corporates often issue in foreign currency
via their tax haven affiliates whereas sovereigns issue externally under their own names. Our
restatements therefore highlight that standard residency-based datasets overstate the impor-
tance of sovereign relative to corporate bonds and understate the foreign currency share in
the external portfolio liabilities of large emerging markets.
       Second, the revised positions involve a massive increase in the advanced economy holdings
of Chinese equities. These positions predominantly reflect investment in Variable Interest
Entities (VIEs), opaque corporate structures designed to circumvent China's capital controls
that restrict foreign ownership in key industries.4 For example, whereas the national statistics
for 2017 list the United States as holding $154 billion in Chinese common equities, we find
the position to be worth about $700 billion. We estimate that the EMU's exposure to
Chinese equities exceeds $320 billion, more than triple the value listed in official statistics.
Further, we demonstrate that, due to this reliance on equity issuance through affiliates in
tax havens, China's reported net foreign asset (NFA) position is roughly twice as large as
its true value. The reason for this mismeasurement stems from the fact that when foreign
equity investors buy shares in tax haven affiliates that themselves have a majority stake in
Chinese companies, it is only the affiliates' holdings that constitute external liabilities in
   4
    The Chinese internet giants Alibaba, Baidu, JD.com, and Tencent, for example, are all VIEs that raise
capital through shell companies located in the Cayman Islands, the British Virgin Islands, or Hong Kong.



                                                   3
China's international accounts. These holdings reflect a complex series of corporate linkages
embodied in the VIE structure that are likely recorded as foreign direct investment (FDI)
rather than portfolio investment, and their value does not closely co-move with the stock
market price of the listed affiliate.5 For example, we show that when China's offshore listed
companies increased in market value by nearly $1 trillion during 2016-2018, China's external
liabilities moved by dramatically less. Adjusting the value of China's external accounts to
reflect the equity market values of the VIEs, we find that China's officially reported net
creditor position of $2.1 trillion ­ one of the world's largest ­ is overstated by $1.1 trillion.
       In Section 3, we discuss the role played by security-level micro data in our analyses. We
start by explaining why our restatements cannot be performed using existing publicly avail-
able aggregate datasets. Next, we calculate nationality-based bilateral investment statistics
for all investor countries in CPIS ­ not just the nine for which we have holdings data ­ using
micro data on the total amount of each security outstanding globally. While we view these
expanded results as useful for broader cross-country analyses, we demonstrate that, when
possible, country-specific holdings data should be used as the basis for such restatements.
One reason that holdings data are preferable is that they capture the pattern that investors
skew their tax-haven portfolios toward affiliates of parent companies located in their home
country, a phenomenon we dub "home bias in tax havens."
       We conclude our analysis with Section 4, which emphasizes that answering different
economic questions may require different types of restatements of standard residency-based
statistics. Our baseline treatment, for example, only reallocates positions away from tax
havens like the British Virgin Islands or Guernsey as nearly all economic analyses are better
informed by associating the issuances of tax haven affiliates with their ultimate parents.6 Our
algorithm easily allows users, however, to additionally reallocate the issuances of subsidiaries
that are not in tax havens. Analyses focused on corporate control or worldwide group
financing, for example, might wish to bundle securities issued by Toyota Motors North
America, a U.S.-resident company, with those issued by its Japanese parent company, a
treatment we refer to as "full nationality." We also move beyond classifying companies as
   5
      This pattern of portfolio investment being masked as FDI due to offshore issuance likely holds around
the world, not just in China, a possibility suggested in Blanchard and Acalin (2016). The potential misclas-
sification of portfolio and FDI positions carries important policy implications as countries often differentially
regulate these types of investments based on the presumption that they exhibit different dynamic behavior.
    6
      Appendix Section A details the primary motivations for offshore issuance and offers examples for each
corresponding case. See also Fuertes and Serena (2016), who investigate how firms choose in which interna-
tional market to borrow.



                                                       4
belonging to a single country and instead reallocate them to multiple countries in proportion
to where they earn their revenue, a treatment that may be most useful for calibrating the
geographic exposures of investors' wealth to demand shocks in multi-country trade and macro
models. Relative to our other measures, this sales-based reallocation reduces investors'
exposures to economic activity in their own countries and reveals an even larger rise in the
importance of China in advanced economy portfolios.


Related Literature. Our paper contributes to a growing literature on the economic im-
pact of tax havens, including Hines and Rice (1994), Desai et al. (2004), Gravelle (2009),
Zucman (2013), Guvenen et al. (2018), and Tørsløv et al. (2018). Much of the literature
has focused on the use of tax havens by wealthy households to shield assets from taxation
and by developed market firms to minimize corporate tax exposures. Our results shed light
on a different role of tax havens as conduits for emerging market firms to access developed
market capital.
      The shortcoming of residency-based statistics has long been recognized and initiatives
have been recently introduced at the Bank for International Statistics (BIS), the U.S. Fed-
eral Reserve, and the IMF to restate various investment flows on a nationality basis. Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2018), Avdjiev et al. (2016), and Warnock and Cleaver (2003), for exam-
ple, highlight the growing importance of financial centers and tax havens in intermediating
global capital flows, which renders standard datasets increasingly inadequate. The BIS has
spearheaded the production of statistics for international debt securities outstanding by
country under both residency and nationality. Bertaut et al. (2019) offer a rich comparison
of U.S. TIC data under residency and nationality and explore implications for home bias and
the sustainability of the U.S. current account deficit. Damgaard et al. (2019) estimate FDI
flows in the Coordinated Direct Investment Dataset (CDIS) after accounting for positions in
tax havens. Our contribution is to offer a global analysis of portfolio investment for many
countries and under different conceptual treatments. Our approach stresses open availability
of code and data and aims to contribute a novel set of tools and analysis for others in the
field to build on.7
      The implications of our restated bilateral investment positions touch a wide range of
literatures and have clear relevance for any analyses using TIC or CPIS data. For example,
  7
    All data sources we use are available for other researchers to purchase commercially from the data
providers. Our code is available online and runs even if provided with only a subset of the commercial
datasets we draw from.


                                                  5
a voluminous literature uses gravity models to study these data including Portes and Rey
(2005), Coeurdacier and Martin (2009), and Okawa and Van Wincoop (2012). Forbes (2010)
studies the determinants of global investment into U.S. securities. Most recently, Koijen and
Yogo (2019) and Jiang et al. (2020) use CPIS data to estimate a demand system for financial
assets.
    Finally, our result that offshore issuance leads to a massive overstatement of China's NFA
is important for work on global imbalances, such as Bernanke (2005), Gourinchas and Rey
(2007), Caballero et al. (2008), Gourinchas et al. (2011), Maggiori (2017), and Farhi and
Maggiori (2018). While much of the focus in the literature has been on the impact on U.S.
interest rates of large Chinese holdings of U.S. Treasuries, we focus on the distribution of
China's external corporate financing. This complements recent efforts to better document
the global distribution of China's official foreign lending by Horn et al. (2019).



1     Residency, Nationality, and our Methodology
Official data on international portfolios are typically compiled on a residency basis, which
means that they associate a security with the immediate location of the issuer of that se-
curity. This residency concept, for example, guides countries' production of their balance
of payments (BoP) and the international transactions appearing in their national accounts.
While residency-based data can be particularly helpful in certain cases, nationality-based
data that associates securities with the location of the issuer's ultimate parent is often more
useful, particularly when tax havens are involved. In this section, we discuss these con-
cepts and describe our procedure for restating residency-based data on bilateral investment
positions on a nationality basis.


1.1       Residency-Based Statistics
Residency-based statistics on bilateral investment positions have some clear advantages.
Associating an investment with the issuer's registered location offers administrative ease and
avoids conceptual ambiguity. Further, when firms issue through operating affiliates located
in countries that are not tax havens, the residency concept may in some cases best represent
the location where capital is deployed.8 However, the amount invested by foreigners in
   8
     Further, if capital raised from investors never passes through the parent company, tracing out the full
use of that capital might be best accomplished with residency-based investment positions plus data on


                                                     6
securities issued by firms resident in tax havens vastly exceeds the scale of these economies,
making it implausible that the residency-based treatment reflects true economic activity. For
example, total foreign portfolio investment in the Cayman Islands reported in CPIS in 2017
is $3.9 trillion, while the Cayman Islands' GDP is only $5 billion, a thousand-fold difference.
We therefore describe below our methodology that associates bilateral investment positions
that are linked to tax havens on a residency basis with their geography when treated on a
nationality basis.


1.2     Nationality-Based Statistics
Our baseline results only apply a nationality-based restatement to investments in tax havens
as this type of relationship most clearly lacks economic content and is not relevant for most
economic analyses.9 In principle, however, one might wish to associate all security issuances
with the location of their ultimate parent company, whether tax havens are involved or
otherwise. For example, if an economic question focuses on issues of corporate control or
group-level financing, one may wish to associate investment in Toyota Motors North America,
a U.S.-resident company, with its Japanese parent. More broadly, the most appropriate
concept in accounting for these positions will depend on the question at hand. Some analyses,
for example, may wish to associate given investments with multiple countries based on the
distribution of sales or other variables. We will turn to such restatements in Section 4
below. Appendix Table A.1 lists the countries that our analysis treats as tax havens.10
Securities issued by affiliates of foreign companies in these tax havens account in 2017 for
7 and 9 percent respectively of the total value of equities and corporate bonds outstanding
worldwide.
intercompany lending.
   9
     One prominent exception, of course, is the analysis of taxes paid or collected (either withholding for
investors or corporate taxes for the firm) by locating activity in tax havens. Even then our analysis that
associates affiliates in tax havens with companies located in non-tax-havens is an important input.
  10
     As detailed in Appendix Section C, our list of tax havens is based on Hines (2010), which itself is an
update on the list in Hines and Rice (1994) and is commonly used in the tax haven literature, including in
Dharmapala et al. (2011) and Desai et al. (2006). Like Tørsløv et al. (2018), we add the Netherlands to
this list, and also add Cura¸ cao, since both are large securities issuance centers for multinational companies.
We remove Switzerland from the list because our focus is on security issuance rather than taxation or illicit
bank accounts, and Switzerland is not a large center for offshore security issuance.




                                                       7
1.3       Mapping Subsidiaries to Parents
Our first step is to connect security issuers, defined by their 6-digit CUSIP identifier (the
"CUSIP6"), to their parents. To do this, we combine information from seven commercially
available data sources including CUSIP Global Services (CGS) and map each issuer of the 26
million stocks and bonds in CGS's master file to a single ultimate parent company.11 Each
source uses its own methodology to form these mappings and we establish majority and
priority rules to resolve disagreements across sources. Appendix Section C offers a detailed
description of our methodology.
       Our algorithm reassigns the vast majority of securities issued in tax havens. For instance,
it reallocates more than 90 percent of corporate bonds and equities issued by firms resident in
each of Bermuda, Curacao, the Cayman Islands, the Channel Islands, Luxembourg, Macau,
Panama, and the British Virgin Islands. Hong Kong, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Singapore
are four exceptions with lower reallocation rates that range from 33 percent to 72 percent
since these countries are destinations for offshore issuance but also have significant domestic
issuance by companies actually operating there. Appendix Table A.2 lists the issuer-parent
mappings that constitute the largest reallocations away from key tax havens when we change
from a residency to a nationality basis.


1.4       Reallocation Matrices
The next step in restating bilateral investment positions to account for offshore issuance is
to develop investor-specific "reallocation matrices" that list the share of investment in any
given country on a residency basis that should instead be considered investment in any other
country on a nationality basis. We merge our mapping of affiliates to parents with security-
level data on the worldwide holdings of mutual funds and ETFs, obtained from Morningstar
and introduced in MNS. As of December 2017, these data include the positions of 61,000
funds reporting over 11 million individual positions worth $32 trillion.
       For our purposes, the Morningstar dataset provides sufficient coverage of mutual fund and
ETF assets under management (AUM) in the United States, the EMU, the United Kingdom,
  11
    The seven sources are: (i) the CGS Associated Issuer (AI) database, (ii) the Refinitiv SDC Platinum New
Issues database (SDC), (iii) the S&P Capital IQ platform (CIQ), (iv) the Dealogic Debt Capital Markets
(DCM) feed, (v) Bureau van Dijk's Orbis database, (vi) the Factset Data Management Solutions database,
and (vii) Morningstar data on the holdings of open-end mutual funds and ETFs. While our core procedure
is CUSIP-based, we also aggregate securities that have an ISIN identifier but no corresponding CUSIP.




                                                    8
Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway.12 Following the approach
in MNS, we treat the domicile of each fund as reflecting the nationality of its investors
with the exception of EMU countries, which we pool together because they heavily invest in
funds domiciled in Luxembourg and Ireland.13 After merging our affiliate-to-parent mapping
with these position-level data on fund holdings, we calculate each fund's holdings both under
residency and under nationality. We then aggregate across all funds' positions and construct,
for each investor country, asset class, and year reallocation matrices that determine the share
of investment in each country on a residency basis that would be reallocated to all other
countries on a nationality basis.
       For example, let xR
                         i,j denote the dollar value of holdings in the Morningstar data of

investor country j in securities issued by country i on a residency basis. Let xR   N
                                                                                i,k,j denote

the dollar value of these same holdings that, under nationality rather than residency, would
be associated with issuer country k rather than i, such that xR
                                                              i,j =                 k   xR   N
                                                                                         i,k,j . We can then

define an entry i,k,j in our reallocation matrix for country j as:

                                                       xR   N
                                                        i,k,j
                                              i,k,j   = R .                                               (1)
                                                        xi,j

Collecting i,k,j over all rows i and columns k , we have country j 's reallocation matrix j :
                                                                          
                                       1,1,j 1,2,j 1,3,j            ...
                                                                          
                                       2,1,j 2,2,j 2,3,j            . . .
                                   j =                                    ,                               (2)
                                                                          
                                       3,1,j 3,2,j 3,3,j            . . .
                                        .     .     .
                                                                          
                                        .     .     .               ..
                                        .     .     .                   .
  12
     Relative to MNS, we exclude New Zealand because the value of its key bilateral holdings, particularly its
holdings of U.S. and German bonds, are redacted in CPIS. MNS confirmed the accuracy of these holdings data
by cross-checking against funds' regulatory filings, funds' own websites, and other commercial data sources.
Chen, Cohen and Gurun (2019) also confirm the accuracy of Morningstar's security-level holdings data,
though they criticize the accuracy of the summary descriptions of fund portfolios reported to Morningstar.
These latter summary descriptions are not used in MNS nor in this paper. See Maggiori, Neiman and
Schreger (2019) and Lilley, Maggiori, Neiman and Schreger (2019) for additional applications using these
data.
  13
     MNS uses TIC data to demonstrate the relatively small scale of U.S. investment in foreign mutual funds
and of foreign investment in U.S. mutual funds. By contrast, MNS uses CPIS data to document that 72
percent of investment in Luxembourg mutual funds comes from other EMU countries. The central bank of
Luxembourg estimates that the percentage might be lower at around 54 percent. Similarly, Irish mutual
funds may also invest on behalf of non-EMU countries. In order to be consistent with CPIS and EMU
national statistics, we count all investment by mutual funds in Ireland and Luxembourg as originating from
EMU residents.




                                                       9
where each row of j sums to one.
       As an illustration, Table 1 shows selected entries from the reallocation matrix for U.S.
investments in corporate bonds. The fifth row corresponds to the Cayman Islands (CYM)
and each column shows the share of U.S. corporate bond holdings that under residency are in
the Cayman Islands and that under nationality would be allocated to the country listed atop
that column. For example, 20.1 percent of U.S. corporate bond investments in the Cayman
Islands are reallocated to Brazil, 33 percent to China, and 13.3 percent to the United States
itself.14 The diagonal elements show the fraction of investments in each destination that are
not reallocated elsewhere. Each row's values sum to 100 percent (for ease of reading, we
only list non-zero entries). Table 1 and the full reallocation matrices available online include
rows that correspond to countries that are not tax havens and that contain multiple positive
values. When computing our baseline results that only reallocate away from tax havens, we
replace those rows with a value of 100 on the diagonal and with zeros otherwise.15
       We compute a separate matrix for each investor country, asset class, and year.16 For
example, the Brazilian energy giant Petrobras established in 2012 a financing subsidiary in
the Netherlands called Petrobras Global Finance BV, and U.S. investors bought substantial
amounts of the bonds issued by this company. As a result, as plotted in Appendix Figure
A.3, the cell corresponding to Brazil in our reallocation matrix for U.S. corporate bond
investment in the Netherlands increases from 0 percent in 2011 to over 10 percent by 2014.
We are able, therefore, to recover historical series that reflect changes over time in how firms
use tax havens to raise financing.
       Equipped with these reallocation matrices, we can transform bilateral positions in any
                                                      R    R       R
dataset from a residency to a nationality basis. Let qj = q1 ,j , q2,j , . . .         denote the vector
of positions of country j in issuer country i, observed in a residency-based dataset, and let
superscript denote the transpose operator. We can then transform these data to a nation-
ality basis by pre-multiplying the residency-based vector by the transpose of the reallocation
  14
      We note that this 13.3 percent are foreign investment positions in residency-based data that should,
under nationality, not be considered foreign investment at all. As discussed in Appendix Section I, we find
that 9 percent of all U.S. holdings of foreign common equities and 11 percent of all foreign bond holdings
in official statistics are better thought of as domestic investments. These investments largely reflect the
issuance in the Cayman Islands of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) backed by U.S. assets as well as
tax inversions into Ireland by U.S. firms.
   15
      We use the unedited matrix when calculating the "full nationality" version of our results in Section 4.
   16
      Our analyses of TIC separately study common equities, corporate bonds, government bonds, and struc-
tured finance securities. CPIS reporting of separate investment positions in sovereign and corporate bonds
is limited, so for CPIS we pool all debt securities and compute the reallocation matrices accordingly.



                                                     10
matrix:
                                               N      R
                                              qj = j qj ,                                            (3)

       N    N       N
where qj = q1 ,j , q2,j , . . .   is the resulting estimate of nationality-based positions for that
dataset.



2        A New Map of Global Capital Allocations
In this section, we discuss how the global map of capital allocation changes when we apply
our reallocation matrices to residency-based data on the bilateral investment positions of nine
investor countries to restate them on a nationality basis. Tables 2 to 3 report key entries in
our restatements of TIC for U.S. positions in corporate bonds and common equity for 2017,
and Tables 4 to 5 report the same for CPIS data on EMU positions in total bonds and total
equities (which includes fund shares).17 We report equivalent tables for Canada and the
United Kingdom in the appendix and have posted online these tables in their entirety for
all nine investor countries, asset classes, and years. The first three columns in these tables
list the investment destination country, its ISO code, and the value of the corresponding
position when stated under residency in TIC and CPIS. Columns four and five report our
calculation of the corresponding nationality-based positions and the implied change relative
to the residency-based positions.
       Compared to the residency-based statistics, we find that advanced economies have sig-
nificantly larger bond positions in large emerging markets such as the BRICS and a much
greater equity exposure to China. We organize our discussion below around these two key
patterns, highlighting the key tax havens and firms underlying these changes. Further, we
emphasize several implications including the increase in the foreign currency share of these
countries' external portfolio liabilities and our finding that China's net foreign asset position
is overstated by more than $1 trillion.
  17
    We obtain corporate bond positions in TIC by starting from private debt and then removing asset-
backed securities. While TIC breaks out common equities, CPIS combines common shares, fund shares,
and holdings in other types of equity assets such as investment trusts. We only apply our reallocation to
common equity positions, so for countries other than the United States, we estimate their magnitude using
a methodology detailed in Appendix Section D.




                                                   11
2.1     Much Larger Bond Positions in the BRICS
It has long been puzzling to economists that developed countries like the United States invest
so little in large and rapidly growing emerging markets such as the BRICS. For example, the
corresponding rows in Table 2 show that U.S. investments in corporate bonds under residency
total a mere $8 billion in Brazil, $3 billion in China, $6 billion in India, and close to zero
in Russia and South Africa. These positions are tiny compared to the $390 billion invested
in Canada, the $308 billion in the United Kingdom, and even the $144 billion allocated
to Australia. Overall, the BRICS account for only 1 percent of all foreign corporate debt
investments made by the United States in 2017 on a residency basis. Eurozone holdings of
foreign bonds issued by the BRICS are also surprisingly small and account for only 2 percent
of all foreign bond holdings.
   Table 2 shows that our reallocation has a notable impact on these low allocations to
emerging economies and increases the level of investment from the United States to the
BRICS in corporate bonds from $19 to $126 billion, a 560 percent increase. The increase in
the BRICS is most pronounced in Brazil, China, and Russia. Other large emerging markets
also receive capital in the reallocation. For example, U.S. corporate bond investment in
Indonesia moves from $5 to $9 billion. The positions in tax havens correspondingly drop by
hundreds of billions of dollars.
   As shown in Table 4, we also find that bond investment from the EMU to the BRICS
countries increases dramatically, from $152 billion under residency to $389 billion under
nationality. In fact, major reallocations toward these large emerging markets occur for
almost all of our nine investor countries. Figure 1 plots the share of the BRICS in each
investor's external bond portfolio using red bars when measured on a residency basis and
using blue bars when measured a nationality basis. In all cases other than Norway, the blue
bars significantly exceed the red ones, reflecting the large and widespread reallocation of
corporate bond positions away from tax havens and toward the BRICS countries.


2.1.1   Key Tax Havens and Firms with Bonds Reallocated to the BRICS

We next turn to examining the sources of the reallocations to the BRICS. Figure 2 demon-
strates that for U.S. corporate bond investments, most of the reallocation to Brazil, China,
India, Russia, and South Africa can be attributed to investment in affiliates located in the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Ireland, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. For


                                             12
example, the thick blue lines emanating from the British Virgin Islands and the Cayman
Islands illustrate how $12 billion and $27 billion of U.S. corporate bond positions associated
with those countries under residency in 2017 are restated as investments in China under
nationality. The thick red lines emanating from the Cayman Islands and the Netherlands
identify them as sources of $16 billion and $22 billion of U.S. corporate bond positions that
are reallocated to Brazil. The purple lines show how Russian firms commonly use their af-
filiates in Luxembourg and Ireland to access U.S. fixed income investors, and the green and
orange lines show that bond issuance by tax haven affiliates of Indian and South African
firms occurs almost exclusively in the Netherlands.
       Figure 3 offers an equivalent visualization of the key flows underlying the transformation
of EMU investment positions from a residency to a nationality basis. The patterns are
broadly similar, but key differences exist. European investment in Brazilian and Chinese
firms, for example, is far less concentrated in their Cayman Islands affiliates than is the case
for U.S. investment. Whereas U.S. investors have a nearly $12 billion exposure to Russian
firms through bonds issued by their affiliates in Luxembourg and Ireland, our restatement
uncovers nearly a $90 billion exposure of European investors to Russian firms.
       The network of cross-border financing illustrated in Figures 2 and 3 does not just vary
across issuing and investing countries.18 As can be seen in the online reallocation matrices
for earlier years, the tax havens used to connect issuers to investors also shift significantly
over time. Further, Figure 4 plots the share of the total tax haven bond holdings of our nine
investor countries that is reallocated under nationality to each BRICS country. Combined,
the BRICS only accounted for 5 percent of these tax haven bond positions in 2007, with
more than half of that attributable to Russian firms and virtually none of it attributable
to Indian or South African companies. Largely due to the rapid growth since then in bond
issuances by tax haven affiliates of Brazilian and Chinese companies, BRICS issuers in 2017
account for 16 percent of these tax haven bond positions.
       Underlying the reallocations from the British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Ireland,
Luxembourg, and Netherlands to the BRICS are bonds issued by a relatively small number
of very large firms. To show this, Table 6 lists the corporate affiliates whose bonds contribute
most to the reallocations away from tax havens and toward each BRICS country. For exam-
ple, the top row for Brazil captures the fact that Petrobras Global Finance BV, an affiliate
  18
   For more detailed and interactive versions of these charts covering all nine of our investor countries, for
bonds and equities, see: www.globalcapitalallocation.com/reallocation-charts.



                                                     13
of Petrobras that is resident in the Netherlands, issues $28 billion of bonds that we associate
under nationality with Brazil. The list of affiliates accounting for the largest reallocations to-
ward Brazil also includes Petrobras International Finance Company, Vale Overseas Limited,
and Odebrecht Finance Limited, companies located in the Netherlands and the Cayman Is-
lands. These five issuers represent $61 billion in corporate bonds outstanding, or 80 percent
of the total value of corporate debt that is reallocated to Brazil from tax havens. A small
number of large firms are key to understanding the nationality-based investment positions
in the other BRICS countries as well. The share of the total reallocated corporate debt that
is accounted for by the five affiliates listed in Table 6 equals 59 percent for the case of China,
75 percent for India, 68 percent for Russia, and 70 percent for South Africa. Policymakers
and analysts should pay attention to these large firms as even their idiosyncratic behavior
can drive sudden stops or rapid changes in total portfolio investment at the country level.
       As discussed in Appendix Section A, these firms issue through affiliates for a variety of
reasons including minimizing corporate taxes and regulations. Further, by issuing bonds via
affiliates in tax havens, firms minimize the burden to their foreign bondholders of withhold-
ing taxes on interest payments.19 For example, when a nonresident investor holds a bond
issued domestically by a Brazilian firm, that investor generally is subject to a 15 percent
withholding tax rate unless it is reduced under a bilateral tax treaty. The equivalent rate for
interest payments to nonresident investors in Russian firms equals 20 percent. By contrast,
withholding rates on interest income in the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Lux-
embourg, and the Netherlands all equal zero.20 While foreign investors can claim back part
of the taxes withheld as a domestic tax credit, the process is often cumbersome.


2.1.2      Changes in the Level and Composition of Portfolio Investment

Economists and policymakers view portfolio flows as more volatile than FDI investments.
After all, it is much easier for foreigners to sell stocks and bonds than it is for them to sell
a wholly-owned industrial plant or retail outlet. For this reason, portfolio flows are often
the focus of reporting and analysis of the external liabilities of emerging markets. Our work
highlights that portfolio investments are larger, more tilted toward the corporate sector, and
have a larger share of foreign currency bonds than the official residency-based statistics on
  19
     See Papke (2000) for a detailed examination of how American firms issued bonds through the Netherlands
Antilles to avoid withholding taxes prior to the tax's repeal in 1984.
  20
     See, for example, https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Tax/dttl-tax-
withholding-tax-rates.pdf.


                                                    14
portfolio investment reveal.
       Imagine an emerging market firm's tax haven affiliate issues a bond and then transfers the
funds to the parent. This latter transfer would typically appear in the emerging market's
external accounts as an intercompany loan, a type of FDI. By contrast, our nationality-
based restatements would add the value of the bond to the emerging market country's
portfolio liabilities. Our restatements need not have any implication for a country's total
liabilities because the increase in portfolio investment may implicitly come from a decrease
in other investment categories. In this sense, our work highlights how the share of portfolio
investment in the total external liabilities of large emerging markets may be underappreciated
in standard residency-based data because corporate bond financing is often routed through
tax havens.
       In addition to increasing the relative importance of portfolio liabilities for large emerging
markets, our restatement of investment statistics on a nationality basis increases the impor-
tance of corporate bonds compared to government bonds in these liabilities. While Table 6
details examples of large reallocations of corporate bond positions to the BRICS, Appendix
Table A.7 shows that reallocations are minimal for government bonds. Governments, after
all, almost always issue under their own name and not via affiliates. Even when sovereigns
issue international bonds in foreign markets, such as when the Brazilian government issues
a bond on international capital markets, the immediate issuer is still that same sovereign
and the residency and nationality approaches coincide. As a result, whereas corporate bonds
account for only 25 percent of all U.S. holdings of Brazilian bonds under residency, we find
that they account for 66 percent of these holdings under nationality.
       Finally, our restatements also increase the foreign currency share of external portfolio
liabilities because the vast majority of bonds issued by BRICS firms in tax havens are
denominated in dollars or euros.21 For example, under residency, the local currency share of
foreign-held bonds in the portfolios of the nine investor countries in our analysis equals 63
percent, 66 percent, and 70 percent for Brazil, India, and Russia. Under nationality, these
shares fall to 33 percent, 52 percent, and 40 percent. The local currency shares of foreign-
held bonds issued by China and South Africa similarly decline by 5 and 11 percentage points
  21
     The currency composition of externally-held portfolio debt is a commonly referenced statistic in part
as it dictates how a country's exchange rate movements generate wealth transfers to foreign creditors. See
Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999), Lane and Shambaugh (2010), Du and Schreger (2015), B´       en´
                                                                                               etrix et al.
(2015), Bruno and Shin (2017), and Bruno and Shin (2020) for discussions of the currency composition of
debt liabilities across countries.




                                                    15
when switching from a residency to a nationality basis.22


2.2       Much Larger Equity Positions in China
Table 3 shows that under residency, the United States holds $547 billion of common equities
in the Cayman Islands, an amount similar to U.S. holdings of equities in Canada and bigger
than those in Germany and France. U.S. investment in equities of Bermudian-resident com-
panies equals $195 billion, larger than the positions in Indian companies. Our methodology
reallocates the bulk of these tax haven equity investments to China.23
       In fact, the reallocation of holdings of Cayman Islands equities to China constitutes
the single largest adjustment made to emerging markets in our restated estimates. Under
residency, as reported in TIC, U.S. investors have about $150 billion in equity exposure to
China. Under nationality, that value more than quadruples to almost $700 billion. The
EMU's equity exposure to China grows from less than $100 billion under residency to more
than $300 billion under nationality. Figure 5 shows the share of external equity portfolios
invested in China for all nine investor countries in our data. The blue bars, which show
China's share under nationality, greatly exceed the red bars, which capture the same share
under residency.


2.2.1      Variable Interest Entities Drive the Equity Reallocation to China

For all nine of the investor countries in our data, the large majority of equity positions that
are reallocated to China come from positions that under residency are associated with the
Cayman Islands. For instance, of the $542 billion increase in U.S. equity investment in China
seen when moving from a residency to nationality basis, $477 billion comes from the Cayman
Islands, with the next largest amount ($48 billion) coming from Hong Kong. Similarly, of
the $227 billion increase in EMU holdings of Chinese equities, $187 billion comes from the
Cayman Islands, with $30 billion coming from Hong Kong and only about $10 billion from
all other countries.
  22
      These estimates are discussed in Appendix Section F. As discussed above, our restatements may imply
larger portfolio liabilities without any change in the size of a country's overall external liabilities. Similarly, to
the extent an offshore affiliate raises financing and then transfers those exact funds (equal in the amount and
currency of denomination) to its parent, our restatements may raise the foreign currency share of portfolio
liabilities but need not change the currency composition of overall external liabilities.
   23
      As discussed in Appendix Section E, a large share of these U.S. foreign investments are spurious in that
they are reallocated back to the United States.




                                                         16
       Chinese firms issue equity through affiliates in the Cayman Islands to circumvent Chinese
government restrictions on foreign equity investments in a number of strategically important
industries. As described in Whitehill (2017), these offshore affiliates are part of what is called
a Variable Interest Entity (VIE) structure that is designed to allow for control of a company
"by means other than a majority of voting rights." Figure 6 illustrates the relationships
involved in a typical VIE structure. The Operating Company is the firm based in China and
is, for all intents and purposes, what investors (and economists) would think of as the "real"
company. Since this firm operates in an industry in which foreign ownership is restricted or
prohibited, its equity is fully owned by Chinese citizens, as indicated by the arrow labeled
G in the figure. The Listed Company, by contrast, is the entity listed on a global stock
exchange and is generally located in the Cayman Islands. As we elaborate in Appendix
Section G, the VIE structure then involves a chain of subsidiaries and a set of bilateral
contracts such that, for the purposes of international accounting and reporting, the Listed
Company can represent to foreign investors that it owns the Operating Company, while at
the same time the Operating Company can represent to Chinese regulators that it is wholly
owned by Chinese citizens.24
       To demonstrate how critical these VIEs are for our restated equity positions, Table 7
lists the 25 firms that are Chinese on a nationality basis and that receive the most equity
investment in our positions-level data. Of these 25 firms, only nine are resident in China,
four are resident in Hong Kong, and the remaining twelve are VIEs resident in the Cayman
Islands. For example, the top row shows that "Tencent Holdings Limited" is an affiliate
based in the Cayman Islands of the Chinese firm Tencent. Whereas our restatement considers
shares in Tencent to be investments in China, residency-based statistics would treat holders
of its nearly $500 billion in outstanding equities as investing in the Cayman Islands.
       Chinese restrictions on foreign ownership cover many internet and telecommunications
sectors, and as shown in the rightmost column, most prominent VIEs are in this sector,
including Alibaba, Baidu, JD.com, and Tencent. Together, these large firms account for a
substantial share of the increase in equity positions associated with China on a nationality
  24
     For example, investors that purchase shares of Alibaba (BABA ticker on the NYSE) are actually pur-
chasing shares of Alibaba Group Holding Limited, a holding company based in the Cayman Islands. The
group needs to be able to report its operations on a consolidated basis under which the Operating Company
is consolidated on the balance sheet of the Listed Company. Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
Interpretation No. 46R provides that: "An enterprise that consolidates a VIE is the primary beneficiary of
the VIE. The primary beneficiary of a VIE is the party that absorbs a majority of the entity's expected
losses, receives a majority of its expected residual returns, or both, as a result of holding variable interests,
which are the ownership, contractual, or other pecuniary interests".


                                                       17
basis. The stark differences in the industrial composition of the VIEs compared to the
companies resident in China that directly raise financing from foreign investors corroborates
that circumventing ownership restrictions is a key driver of China's use of tax havens to raise
equity financing.
       VIEs pose risks to investors that may be underappreciated, particularly by retail investors
that own VIEs through mutual funds or their pensions. For example, Chinese regulators, who
have thus far tolerated these complex offshore structures, might change the tax treatment
of VIEs or even recognize them as illegal.25 While the legal risks associated with VIEs have
been documented, our work demonstrates that the scale of exposure to these risks has been
underappreciated due to residency-based reporting and represents a concern for financial
stability.26


2.2.2      Offshore Issuance Causes Overstatement of China's NFA Position

Given the common use by Chinese firms of the VIE structure to issue equity through affiliates
in tax havens, our nationality-based restatements show that our nine investor countries have
far greater bilateral equity exposures to China than what is reported on a residency basis.
Beyond this, the use of the VIE structure also impacts China's official multilateral external
position, its NFA. Due to offshore issuance, China's reported official NFA position of $2.1
trillion is $1.1 trillion larger than its true value.
       To illustrate the implications of the VIE structure for China's NFA, we return to Figure
6. The only positions in the figure that directly affect China's external liabilities are the
investments in the WFOE (arrows C and D). Since these investments are made by entities
that fully own the WFOE, they are likely classified as FDI or other intercompany positions
in China's external liabilities. By contrast, if the VIE structure were not in place, foreign
retail investors or mutual funds might directly hold shares issued by the Operating Company,
and those holdings would instead be classified as portfolio equity investments. In theory,
it should not matter whether foreign investments are booked as portfolio or FDI positions
  25
     Alibaba's prospectus for its IPO on NYSE (SEC Form F-1) notes that: "If the [Chinese] government
deems that the contractual arrangements in relation to our variable interest entities do not comply with
[Chinese] governmental restrictions on foreign investment, or if these regulations or the interpretation of
existing regulations changes in the future, we could be subject to penalties or be forced to relinquish our
interests in those operations."
  26
     Discussions of tensions between China and the United States and their possible financial repercussions
often ignore these exposures or underestimate their size. See, for example, The Economist (2020) and Lardy
and Huang (2020).



                                                    18
since all balance of payments components are supposed to be recorded at market values.
In practice, portfolio investment is predominantly in traded securities for which market
prices are readily available, while FDI tends to be more concentrated in assets for which
traded market prices are unavailable and therefore have to be valued in other ways.27 The
VIE structure transforms what would otherwise be portfolio investment into a set of FDI
investments for which traded market prices are not available. We have corresponded with
China's statisticians and have no reason to believe their treatment of these FDI positions is
inconsistent with official guidelines.28 Nonetheless, we present evidence that, however it is
done, the value of these foreign positions in China's external liabilities is not connected to
the market value of the corresponding publicly listed firms.
       The long-dashed red line in Figure 7a plots the evolution of the market value of all VIEs.29
Worth only a few billion dollars in 2005, they were worth almost $2 trillion by mid-2019.
Most strikingly, the VIEs gained more than $1 trillion in market value during the six quarters
from 2016Q4 to 2018Q1. The short-dashed green line in Figure 7a uses CDIS to plot China's
reported stock of inward FDI positions from Hong Kong, the British Virgin Islands, and
the Cayman Islands, the three tax havens where the Listed Companies and special purpose
vehicles (SPVs) of VIEs are most commonly located. The positions captured in the green
line include all VIE-related investment plus additional FDI unrelated to VIEs, so should be
a superset of those captured in the red line. The green line's evolution, however, displays
none of the recent surge in the VIEs' market value and toward the end of our sample even
lies below the market value of VIEs.30 It is clear that the VIEs are not captured at their
foreign stock market value in China's external FDI liabilities.31
  27
     In the IMF Balance of Payments and International Position Manual Sixth Edition (BPM6), the IMF
suggests six alternative methods to approximate the market value of FDI and then notes: "In cases in which
none of the above methods are feasible, less suitable data may need to be used as data inputs. For example,
cumulated flows or a previous balance sheet adjusted by subsequent flows may be the only sources available."
Further, since Chinese law does not recognize the listed shares as equity claims on the Chinese Operating
Company, China's statisticians may reject the notion that the value of owning the WFOE equals the market
value of the Listed Company. Finally, as elaborated in Appendix Section G, it would be difficult in practice
for China's national statistical office to link the value of FDI positions with the listed share prices in New
York or Hong Kong.
  28
     Given that the underlying BoP transactions are confidential, we do not know exactly how foreign own-
ership positions in the VIEs are booked in China's accounts.
  29
     Our analysis defines Chinese companies resident in the Cayman Islands as VIEs. These companies
account for more than 99 percent of the market value of the list of VIEs found in Whitehill (2017).
  30
     CDIS also reports an additional $230 billion in FDI to China from unspecified sources in 2018. Even
including this amount, the FDI series would fail to track the recent time-series behavior and would barely
match the level of VIE market capitalization.
  31
     By contrast, the evolution in VIE market value is easy to see in the external accounts of other countries.
For example, Appendix Figure A.4a shows that the value in TIC of U.S. common equity investment in the


                                                      19
    Further, Figure 7b casts doubt on the possibility that the VIE-associated positions track
equity market prices but are included in a category of China's external liabilities other than
FDI. While the VIEs increased in market value by $1.1 trillion between 2016Q4 and 2018Q1,
total recorded external liabilities of China (excluding official reserves and trade credits) only
increased by $390 billion over the same period. Most of the increase in total liabilities came
from a $180 billion increase in portfolio debt liabilities. This component is highly unlikely
to include the VIE equity investments.
    We compare China's official NFA with estimates that adjust for the fact that the value
of VIEs as recorded in China's external assets and liabilities does not track their market
values. To generate this adjustment to China's external liabilities, we assume that the value
of each foreign-held VIE position equals the cumulative value of all equity offerings made
by that VIE. This would be the case, for example, if the proceeds of each equity offering
were immediately transferred as an intercompany loan from the Cayman Islands issuer to
the China-resident WFOE, and no other adjustments based on prices in public markets were
made. To generate the adjustment to China's external assets, we use data from Bloomberg
to estimate the value of the VIEs held by Chinese residents that, as shown in Figure 6, can
own shares directly (arrow I) or indirectly via foreign-based investment vehicles (arrows H
and L). Appendix Section G details these and other assumptions underlying our calculation
of China's NFA.32
    Figure 8 compares our estimates of China's NFA, plotted with a solid red line, with
China's official NFA position, plotted with the dashed black line. China reports a net
credit position equalling $2.1 trillion in 2018 (15 percent of China's GDP), making it one
of the world's largest, alongside Germany's similarly sized position and Japan's $3.1 trillion
position. We estimate that the overstatement of China's NFA is close to zero in 2008 and
grows rapidly over time, reaching $1.1 trillion by the end of 2018. Accounting for missing
valuation adjustments due to offshore issuance, we conclude that China is today only half
as large a creditor to the rest of the world as official statistics say it is.33
Cayman Islands co-moves almost perfectly with the VIEs' market capitalization. Similarly, Appendix Figure
A.4b shows the tight co-movement between South Africa's FDI investment in China and Tencent's market
capitalization, since Naspers, a South African company, has owned 31 percent of Tencent since 2009.
  32
     As an alternative to using the Bloomberg data, we also estimate Chinese residents' holdings of VIE
equities using our nationality-based estimates. The results closely align.
  33
     Similar dynamics may cause mismeasurement in other parts of China's external accounts. For instance,
Li et al. (2020) document significant Chinese investment in the U.S. real estate market. If the value of
these holdings, which constitute foreign assets in China's external accounts, are not properly measured, this
would also lead to additional mismeasurement in China's NFA. Our focus is solely on the adjustment due to



                                                     20
    The overstatement of China's NFA is largely insensitive to the key assumptions that we
make. For example, as discussed in Appendix Section G, the Bloomberg data do not identify
16 percent of the ownership of the VIEs. If we assume those unidentified owners are all
Chinese, this would reduce the overstatement of China's NFA because it would imply a larger
revaluation of China's external asset position. Nonetheless, as shown in the short-dashed
gray line in Figure 8, this alternative assumption only modestly reduces the overstatement
of China's NFA in 2018 from $1.1 trillion to $0.9 trillion. If instead we assume that the value
of all of China's holdings of the VIEs is linked to their listed market prices, an assumption
that China's external assets are not overstated at all, we increase the scale of the NFA
mismeasurement to $1.4 trillion, as shown in the long-dashed gray line.
    Although China has run large current account surpluses since the early 2000s, China is
a much smaller net creditor today than statisticians, economists, and policymakers believe
because its NFA does not reflect massive valuation changes. In fact, China's net credit
position is closer to that of Norway or Switzerland than it is to Japan's. While the common
narrative is that of a one-way flow of investments from China to the safe assets of the
developed world (U.S. Treasuries), we show that in the last decade there has been important
investments made by developed markets into China, and due to offshore issuance, these
positions are understated in official statistics. While much attention has been paid to the
$1.1 trillion of U.S. Treasuries held by China, almost no attention has been paid to the $700
billion of U.S. holdings in Chinese equities.
    Our restatement of China's NFA has far-reaching consequences. For policymakers, China's
large creditor position has long given rise to major concerns about a disruptive resolution of
global imbalances. Our estimates suggest that much of this external adjustment has already
happened during 2008-2018 but went unnoticed as it was obscured in the statistics due to
offshore issuance. Since foreigners realized very large capital gains on Chinese equities during
this period, they retain substantial claims on China. Therefore, significantly less external
adjustment will be required in the future than was previously thought. For economic theory,
these investments by developed countries in Chinese VIEs, coupled with China's investment
in U.S. Treasuries, reinforce the world banker view of global imbalances.
offshore VIEs.




                                                21
3        The Role of Micro Data
Micro data on the security-level positions held by mutual funds and ETFs around the world,
coupled with a mapping of tax haven affiliates to their corporate parents, form the backbone
of our transformation of bilateral investment positions from a residency basis to a nationality
basis. In this section, we explain why these micro data are both important and sufficiently
representative for our purposes. We start by detailing why existing public data reported on
both residency and nationality bases cannot be used for our analyses. Next, we demonstrate
the similarity of our baseline results to those that we obtain using alternative positions-level
data from U.S. insurance companies and Norway's sovereign wealth fund (SWF). Finally,
for countries for which security-level holdings data are unavailable, we use micro data on the
total amount of securities outstanding to estimate nationality-based investment positions for
the full set of countries available in CPIS. These issuance-based estimates differ from our
preferred baseline restatements in part because countries tilt their investments in tax havens
toward affiliates of domestic firms, a phenomenon we call "home bias in tax havens."


3.1        Relationship to BIS Nationality-Based Statistics
The BIS has been a leader in emphasizing the difference between residency and nationality-
based international security issuance. Their International Debt Securities (IDS) statistics
include the total value of bonds outstanding for each country of issuance, both on a residency
basis and on a nationality basis. The IDS data, while very valuable for both research
and policy, cannot be used to generate nationality-based statistics on bilateral investment
positions for three reasons.
       First, these data only offer the total multilateral value of each issuing country's securities
outstanding and do not specify the bilateral composition underlying the differences between
residency and nationality. As a result, the data are insufficient to generate nationality-based
bilateral investment positions since many possible bilateral configurations are consistent
with any given multilateral statistic.34 Second, the BIS IDS data do not cover equities, a
  34
    Nevertheless, if one wanted to try to use the IDS data to transform residency-based positions to
nationality-based positions, one simple approach might be to scale all bilateral investments in a country
under residency by the ratio of bonds outstanding under nationality to bond outstanding under residency.
For example, if one knew from the IDS data that the value of international debt securities issued by Brazil
under nationality was twice the value issued under residency, one might simply double U.S. holdings of Brazil-
ian bonds under residency in TIC to estimate the value of U.S. holdings of Brazilian bonds under nationality.
We demonstrate in Appendix Section H that results from this approach have significant shortcomings.



                                                     22
major part of our results, and only include debt securities that are issued on international
markets.35 Third, our approach is flexible and open-source, making it easy to vary key
assumptions used in generating our nationality-based investment positions. For example,
our baseline results presented above only reallocate the issuances of affiliates in tax havens
whereas in Section 4 below we present an alternative restatement that includes all foreign
issuances made anywhere in the world. Building our analyses from the ground up allows
us, and users of our algorithm and data, to explore whichever notion of nationality is best
tailored to the economic question at hand.


3.2        Alternative Positions-Level Micro Data
Our benchmark algorithm uses reallocation matrices that are built from micro data on the
portfolio holdings of mutual funds and ETFs. A reasonable question is whether our results
would look different if we instead based them on holdings of other investors that are not
mutual funds or ETFs. To answer this question, we obtain comprehensive security-level
data covering the holdings of insurance companies in the United States and the SWF in
Norway and demonstrate the similarity of our baseline results with analogous restatements
based on these other positions-level data. We conclude that our fund data are sufficiently
representative of the broader set of a country's portfolio investments for our exercise.
       The details of the portfolios of U.S. insurers are publicly available as insurers are required
to disclose their security holdings each quarter to the National Association of Insurance Com-
missioners. We obtain the universe of these holdings from S&P Global Market Intelligence.
At the end of 2017 our micro data from insurance companies account for 20 percent of total
U.S. foreign bond investments and 3 percent of total U.S. foreign equity investments as re-
ported in TIC, while our micro data on mutual fund and ETF holdings account for 31 and 47
percent of these totals, respectively. Similarly to the case of U.S. insurers, we obtained details
on the portfolio holdings of Norway's SWF, officially known as the "Government Pension
Fund Global of Norway", from its public investment disclosure reports.36 Our micro data on
  35
      A bond is considered an international debt security and included in the BIS IDS data if the registration
domain, listing place, or governing law differs from the issuer's residence. As a vivid example of how these
data include only a subset of the bonds we study, we note that the local currency share of foreign-held bonds
issued by Brazil in IDS data is less than 10 percent under both residency and nationality, whereas our data
shows these values for Brazil to equal about 70 and 34 percent, respectively. The difference in this case
largely owes to foreign holdings of Brazilian government securities that are local currency denominated and
excluded from the IDS.
   36
      The public reports of the Norwegian SWF do not contain CUSIP6 issuer codes, but rather only issuer
names, issuer sectors, and the fund's own classification for the residency and country of risk exposure


                                                     23
the SWF's holdings account for 71 percent of the total Norwegian foreign bond investments
and 88 percent of total Norwegian foreign equity investments as reported in CPIS, while our
micro data on mutual fund and ETF holdings account for 4 and 6 percent of these totals,
respectively.37
    We use the U.S. insurers' and Norwegian SWF's holdings to construct alternative re-
allocation matrices that are otherwise entirely analogous to our baseline matrices for the
United States and Norway, respectively. Using these alternative reallocation matrices, we
generate estimates of the bilateral investment positions of the United States and Norway
on a nationality basis that can be compared to our baseline estimates that use mutual fund
data. The blue circles in each subplot of Figure 9 capture the changes in holdings relative to
residency-based statistics for each investment destination. The horizontal axes correspond
to our baseline nationality restatement, while the changes implied when we apply the matrix
based on insurer or SWF holdings are plotted on the vertical axis.
    For both the United States and Norway, and for both bonds and equities, the blue
circles cluster along the gray dashed 45-degree lines. The best-fit line through the origin of
Figure 9a that covers U.S. corporate bond investment has a slope equal to 0.98 and an R2
of 0.95. The equivalent values in Figure 9b covering U.S. equity investment are 0.99 and
0.97, respectively. Norway's foreign bond investment reallocations are plotted in Figure 9c
and have a best-fit line with a slope of 0.91 and an R2 of 0.95. The equivalent values for
Norway's foreign equity reallocations, plotted in Figure 9d, are 1.00 and 0.98, respectively.
This analysis corroborates that the data from Morningstar on American and Norwegian fund
portfolios are, for our purposes, representative of the portfolios of other investors in these
two countries. Changing to nationality using our fund data or using the insurance and SWF
data generate what are substantially the same restatements of the two countries' bilateral
investment positions.
associated with each issuer ­ the latter corresponding most closely to our notion of nationality. We matched
the fund's self-reported fixed income positions to CUSIP codes using name, sector, and residency information.
Factset includes an analogous mapping for the equity portion of the Norwegian SWF's portfolio.
  37
     In the process of conducting this research, we discovered a mistake in Norway's CPIS reporting of the
bilateral composition of the SWF's positions. We contacted Statistics Norway and they rectified this mistake
for the most recent data. We are in ongoing communication with them as they also update the 2017 data
used in this section, and the earlier data. In the meantime, for all calculations reported in this section
and throughout the paper, we use an internally constructed amended version of Norway's CPIS tables that
replaces the SWF's holdings using the fund's own self-disclosed positions.




                                                     24
3.3    Using Micro Data on Total Securities Outstanding
Our baseline methodology combines a parent-affiliate mapping with micro data on portfolio
holdings that are specific to nine investor countries, but for many analyses it is helpful to
include the portfolios of a broader set of investor countries. To expand our nationality-
based restatement beyond these nine countries, one option is to ignore heterogeneity in how
different countries invest in a given destination and instead generate a single global matrix
using data on the total securities outstanding that are issued by each country.
   In particular, rather than using an investor-specific reallocation matrix j , this option
involves constructing what we call the "issuance distribution matrix" b. The entries bi,k in
the issuance distribution matrix capture the share of the outstanding value of total securities
issued by i under residency that would instead be considered issued by k under nationality:
                                                              
                                    b1,1 b1,2 b1,3      ...
                                                              
                                    b2,1 b2,2 b2,3      . . .
                                  b=                          .                              (4)
                                                              
                                    b3,1 b3,2 b3,3      . . .
                                     .    .    .
                                                              
                                     .    .    .        ..
                                     .    .    .            .

The issuance distribution matrix b can then be used to transform a vector with the value
of outstanding securities issued by each country under residency, B R = B1
                                                                         R    R
                                                                           , B2 , . . . , into
a vector with the value of outstanding securities issued by each country under nationality,
B N = B1
       N    N
         , B2 , . . . , as b B R = B N . The issuance distribution matrix can also can be used
to transform any country j 's bilateral investment from a residency to a nationality basis:
   R    N ,I                                                                               N ,I
b qj = qj    . We add the super-script I to distinguish the nationality-based restatement qj    ,
                                                                      N
which is constructed with the issuance distribution matrix (b), from qj , which is constructed
using a reallocation matrix specific to j (j ).
   We use data on the value of global securities outstanding from Dealogic, Factset, and
Refinitiv's Worldscope, together with our parent-affiliate mapping to construct issuance dis-
tribution matrices for debt and equity, to restate the investment positions in CPIS on a
nationality basis for all countries. We post on our web page the distribution matrices b and
                                   N ,I
these issuance-based restatements qj    for all countries in CPIS and for each year of our data.
For most economic analyses, these issuance-based restatements paint a more useful picture
of linkages from bilateral portfolio investment than the residency-based positions found in
CPIS. Investors often differ in how they invest in tax havens, however, so we believe our


                                               25
baseline results that are based on country-specific holding data, when available, are more
reliable.


3.4     Home Bias in Tax Havens
Countries disproportionately buy securities issued by the tax-haven affiliates of domestic
firms, a phenomenon we refer to as "home bias in tax havens." For example, British investors
allocate more of their Cayman Islands bond portfolio to issuances by the subsidiaries of the
U.K. regional water suppliers Thames Water, Southern Water, and Yorkshire Water than
do other foreign investors. Similarly, due to this home bias, our baseline restatement of U.S.
corporate bond positions reallocates $50 billion more back to the United States than does
the restatement using the global issuance distribution matrix.
    Figure 10 plots the share of each country's investment in tax havens that is reallocated
back to that investor country under nationality, separately for bonds and for equities. The
blue bars plot this share for our baseline restatement that uses investor-specific reallocation
matrices (j ) and the red bars plot this share when the restatement uses the global issuance
distribution matrix (b). For many of our investor countries, the blue bars significantly
exceed the red ones, revealing the quantitative importance of home bias in tax havens for
our results.38 Appendix Section I uses regression analyses to demonstrate the statistical
significance and robustness of home bias in tax havens.
    In summary, our parent-affiliate mapping and micro data on investor portfolio holdings
are required inputs to our baseline analyses and allow us to go well beyond what one could
do using publicly available alternatives. As a second-best option, we replace the investor-
specific reallocation matrices with a single global issuance distribution matrix, which allows
us to calculate nationality-based bilateral investment for a much larger set of countries. The
presence of a strong home bias in tax havens, however, suggests the importance of using
country-specific positions data where available.



4     Beyond Tax Havens
The nationality-based restatement of bilateral investment positions presented above asso-
ciates holdings of securities issued by affiliates in tax havens with the country of their ul-
   38
      The values are unusually high for the EMU because, due to Ireland, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands,
it is the only investor country in our data that is (partly) considered a tax haven.


                                                   26
timate parent company. This treatment was used for our baseline results because for most
economic questions, the resulting estimates clearly paint a picture of cross-border linkages
that is more relevant than existing residency-based data. Some analyses, however, may be
better informed by different restatements. In this section, we present the results from several
alternative methodologies.
       We start by reporting results from two treatments that, like our baseline approach, asso-
ciate any given security with a single country. The first of these restatements, which we call
"full nationality," reallocates all investment positions to the country of the issuer's parent,
regardless of whether the issuer is resident in a tax haven or not. The second of these restate-
ments, which we call "guarantor," associates debt securities with the firm that guarantees
the bond. Finally, we present a "sales-based" methodology that associates positions in a
security with the full geographic distribution of the issuer's sales, potentially associating a
single security with multiple countries.


4.1       A Full Nationality or Guarantor View of Portfolio Investment
Our baseline analysis does not reallocate any holdings of securities that are issued by com-
panies that do not reside in tax havens. For example, European holdings of bonds issued by
Toyota Motors North America are considered to be European investments in U.S. corporate
bonds, both in the raw CPIS data and in our restatements. For some questions, however, one
might wish to instead associate those positions with Japan. After all, the parent company
that controls how the raised capital is deployed, Toyota, is Japanese. In addition to our
baseline treatment, we also offer bilateral investment positions restated under full nation-
ality, a treatment that associates all securities with the issuer's ultimate parent, regardless
of whether the issuer is resident in a tax haven.39 For other questions, researchers might
wish to focus only on tax haven affiliates but associate their fixed income securities with
the country of their credit guarantor, even if the guarantor isn't the ultimate parent.40 For
instance, if considering the vulnerability of a country's fixed income portfolio to destination-
country shocks or studying how waves of corporate defaults are transmitted across borders,
  39
     As discussed in Appendix Section J, the full nationality case includes reallocated domestic positions as
well as foreign positions. We are able to do this because the Morningstar data, unlike TIC and CPIS, reports
domestic positions.
  40
     Often issuing vehicles in tax havens have little or no assets and creditors therefore ask for explicit
guarantees by group affiliates. In order to implement a guarantor-based restatement, we use data on credit
guarantees from Factset to aggregate securities to the ultimate guarantor rather than the ultimate parent.



                                                     27
bilateral investment statistics on a guarantor basis might be most useful. As an example,
the South African conglomerate Naspers issued $1.2 billion in bonds via its Dutch-resident
subsidiary Prosus NV, which specializes in international technology investing. In our base-
line restatements, investments in these bonds are assigned to South Africa. However, Prosus
NV explicitly guarantees these bonds with its own capital, so that in our guarantor-based
restatements these positions remain associated with the Netherlands.
       Tables 8 and 9 present the restated investment positions for the United States and the
EMU using the full nationality and the guarantor methodologies (the complete results for all
nine investor countries are available online). The large increase in corporate bond holdings
in emerging markets is even stronger in our full nationality treatment. This occurs because
emerging market companies also own subsidiaries in developed countries that issue bonds.
This dynamic is particularly important for India and South Korea, who receive more funds
from U.S. and EMU investors under full nationality than under our baseline treatment. Bi-
lateral investment in Brazil also increases, primarily reflecting large issuances by subsidiaries
operating in the United States, such as JBS USA.41
       Our guarantor-based restatement of bilateral bond investments shows only muted differ-
ences relative to our baseline restatement, confirming that corporate control and financial
backing typically coincide. Some of the differences shown for our guarantor-based restate-
ments in Tables 8 and 9 reflect the fact that a slightly smaller share of tax haven positions
are removed, with $5 billion of U.S. positions in the Cayman Islands and $6 billion of EMU
holdings in Bermuda remaining, for example.


4.2       A Sales-Based View of Portfolio Investment
Conventional residency-based statistics, as well as our baseline, full nationality, and guaran-
tor restatements all associate investments in a single firm with a single country. However,
particularly given the importance of multinational firms in global trade and finance, another
useful description of exposures and global linkages comes from associating some firms with
multiple geographies. Our sales-based restatement associates investments in a company with
multiple countries based on the share of the firm's revenues that each country accounts for.
       As detailed in Appendix Section K, we use Factset GeoRev data to measure revenue
  41
    JBS S.A. earns a majority of its revenue in the United States, with "Beef USA" its most important
business segment. It raises significant funds via its operating affiliate JBS USA. While our baseline estimates
treat these bonds as issued by a U.S. firm, our full nationality estimates associate them with Brazil.



                                                      28
exposures for each company across countries.42 Appendix Table A.14 illustrates the resulting
differences between standard residency data, our baseline nationality methodology, and this
sales-based approach for a number of prominent firms. For example, lines 1-2 show that
Tencent and Alibaba are Cayman Islands firms by residency, Chinese firms by nationality,
and have 97 percent and 89 percent of their respective values associated with China in our
sales-based methodology. Medtronic is considered Irish under residency, but is a prominent
case of a tax inversion by a U.S. firm. It is therefore American under nationality and has
56 percent associated with the United States under the sales-based treatment. In all these
cases, listed in Panel A, the nationality notion coincides with the country where the firm
earns most of its sales. Panel B of Appendix Table A.14 includes a number of cases in which
the country accounting for the largest share of sales coincides with the residency rather than
nationality basis. T-Mobile US Inc., an operating subsidiary of Deutsche Telecom, is German
by nationality, but American by residency and earns 99 percent of its sales in the United
States. Compared to residency-based or nationality-based data, our sales-based restatement
may better connect wealth effects in one country to demand shocks around the world and
can be usefully incorporated in multi-country general equilibrium models.43
       The results of our sales-based restatement of TIC and CPIS for the United States and the
EMU are included in Tables 8 and 9 and show significantly larger exposures to China. For
example, the TIC data show that China accounts on a residency basis for 2 percent of the
U.S. external stock portfolio, and our baseline results show that under nationality the share
increases to 10 percent, largely because they include the VIEs based in the Cayman Islands.
Our sales-based measure captures most of the VIE reallocations but additionally associates
with China substantial shares of investment in countries that are not tax havens. Some
share of U.S. investment in Japan, for example, is reallocated to China using this method
because Japanese firms earn some of their revenues from selling to China. As a result, using
this sales-based measure, we find that China accounts for 15 percent of the U.S. portfolio of
foreign equities and 10 percent of the Eurozone portfolio.
  42
     As part of both GAAP and IFSR accounting, firms are required to report the geographic segments where
they earn their revenues, though these segments are not standardized and typically do not separately list
exports and affiliates' sales. If the sales shares of an issuing firm is unavailable from Factset, we use the sales
data for the ultimate parent firm. If data is unavailable for both the issuer and ultimate parent, we leave
unchanged the association of a security with the country of its issuer's residency. We treat governments as
earning all of their revenues domestically.
  43
     For example, a growing literature in international trade offers quantitative dynamic general equilibrium
models where countries' foreign asset positions are key state variables. See, for example, Eaton et al. (2016),
Reyes-Heroles (2016), and Ravikumar et al. (2019).



                                                        29
    These three different methodologies not only tell a different story about the level of equity
exposure to China, but they also imply three different time trends in this exposure. The
solid red line in Figure 11a shows that, by residency, there's been essentially no growth
from 2007 to 2017 in China's share of the U.S. external equity portfolio. The long-dashed
blue line shows how, by nationality, that share has grown by about 5 percentage points (i.e.
almost doubling) over the same period, largely reflecting the increasing value of investment in
China's VIEs. Finally, the short-dashed green line shows an even greater growth in China's
sales-based share of the U.S. external stock portfolio of almost 10 percentage points. Figure
11b plots China's share in the EMU's external stock portfolio and reveals a similar pattern.
    These results demonstrate how, depending on the economic question at hand, researchers
and policymakers may wish to consider different restatements of bilateral investment statis-
tics. Our paper offers a baseline treatment emphasizing tax havens, a broader full-nationality
approach useful for thinking about corporate control, results focused on financial guaran-
tors, and a sales-based methodology. Our approach allows users to choose among any of
these options, or in fact develop their own, using the set of results and tools we provide.
Ultimately, a deeper understanding of how capital is allocated globally can only be achieved
by considering alternative measures and understanding the underlying economics that they
reveal. An approach solely based on residency, like the one most commonly used so far by
academics and policymakers, is far more limited.



5     Conclusion
We redraw the map of global capital flows by unwinding corporate ownership chains and
accounting for offshore issuance in tax havens around the world. This new map reveals that
official statistics significantly understate the magnitude of financing provided by developed
market investors to firms in large emerging markets. The offshore structures that we uncover
often mask investment in securities under the cover of foreign direct investment, which causes
an understatement of the share of corporate and foreign currency bonds in the portfolio
liabilities of these countries and can also lead to the omission of valuation effects in external
accounts. As a result, we estimate that China's net creditor position to the rest of the world
is roughly half of what the official statistics report. In addition to our main results, we offer
a restatement of bilateral investment positions that associates all subsidiaries ­ even those
not in tax havens ­ with their ultimate parents, another restatement that associates bond


                                               30
issuers with their guarantor firms, and a final restatement that associates investment in a firm
with multiple countries based on the geographic distribution of the firm's sales. We think
that our results and procedure improve the characterization of global capital allocation and
allow researchers and policymakers to use the data best suited to answer the international
macroeconomic question at hand.




                                              31
References
Avdjiev, Stefan, Robert N McCauley, and Hyun Song Shin, "Breaking free of the triple
 coincidence in international finance," Economic Policy, 2016, 31 (87), 409­451.

B´
 en´
   etrix, Agust´  in S, Philip R Lane, and Jay C Shambaugh, "International currency
 exposures, valuation effects and the global financial crisis," Journal of International Economics,
 2015, 96 (1), S98­S109.

Bernanke, Ben, "The global saving glut and the U.S. current account deficit," Sandridge Lecture,
 2005.

Bertaut, Carol, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, "Globalization and the geography
 of capital flows," Working Paper, 2019.

Blanchard, Olivier and Julien Acalin, "What does measured FDI actually measure?," Policy
  Report, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2016.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, "Global dollar credit and carry trades: a firm-level
  analysis," The Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (3), 703­749.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, "Currency depreciation and emerging market corpo-
  rate distress," Management Science, 2020, 66 (5), 1935­1961.

Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, "An equilibrium
 model of "global imbalances" and low interest rates," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (1),
 358­393.

Chen, Huaizhi, Lauren Cohen, and Umit Gurun, "Don't take their word for it: The mis-
 classification of bond mutual funds," Working Paper, 2019.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Philippe Martin, "The geography of asset trade and the euro:
 Insiders and outsiders," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 2009, 23 (2),
 90­113.

Damgaard, Jannick, Thomas Elkjaer, and Niels Johannesen, "What is real and what is
 not in the global FDI network?," IMF Working Paper, 2019.

Desai, Mihir A, C Fritz Foley, and James R Hines, "The demand for tax haven operations,"
 Journal of Public Economics, 2006, 90 (3), 513­531.

Desai, Mihir A, C Fritz Foley, and James R Hines Jr, "A multinational perspective on
 capital structure choice and internal capital markets," The Journal of Finance, 2004, 59 (6),
 2451­2487.

Dharmapala, Dhammika, C Fritz Foley, and Kristin J Forbes, "Watch what I do, not what
 I say: The unintended consequences of the Homeland Investment Act," The Journal of Finance,
 2011, 66 (3), 753­787.

Du, Wenxin and Jesse Schreger, "Sovereign risk, currency risk, and corporate balance sheets,"
 Working Paper, 2015.

                                                32
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, "Trade and the
  global recession," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (11), 3401­38.

Eichengreen, Barry J and Ricardo Hausmann, "Exchange rates and financial fragility,"
  Proceedings of the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, 1999.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Matteo Maggiori, "A model of the international monetary system,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (1), 295­355.

Forbes, Kristin J, "Why do foreigners invest in the United States?," Journal of International
  Economics, 2010, 80 (1), 3­21.

Fuertes, Alberto and Jos´    e Mar´ia Serena, "How firms borrow in international bond markets:
  securities regulation and market segmentation," Bank of Spain Working Paper, 2016.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey, "From world banker to world venture capitalist:
 US external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege," in "G7 Current Account Imbalances:
 Sustainability and Adjustment" 2007.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Nicolas Govillot, and H´   el`
                                                         ene Rey, "Exorbitant privilege and
 exorbitant duty," Unpublished Manuscript, UC Berkeley and LBS, 2011.

Gravelle, Jane G, "Tax havens: International tax avoidance and evasion," National Tax Journal,
 2009, pp. 727­753.

Guvenen, Fatih, Raymond J Mataloni Jr, Dylan G Rassier, and Kim J Ruhl, "Offshore
 profit shifting and domestic productivity measurement," Working Paper, 2018.

Hines, James R, "Treasure islands," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (4), 103­26.

Hines, James R and Eric M Rice, "Fiscal paradise: Foreign tax havens and American business,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (1), 149­182.

Horn, Sebastian, Carmen M Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch, "China's overseas lend-
 ing," Working Paper, 2019.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Robert Richmond, and Tony Zhang, "A portfolio approach to global
  imbalances," Working Paper, 2020.

Koijen, Ralph SJ and Motohiro Yogo, "Exchange rates and asset prices in a global demand
 system," Working Paper, 2019.

Lane, Philip R and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, "International financial integration in the
  aftermath of the global financial crisis," IMF Economic Review, 2018, 66 (1), 189­222.

Lane, Philip R and Jay C Shambaugh, "Financial exchange rates and international currency
  exposures," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (1), 518­540.

Lardy, NR and T Huang, "Despite the rhetoric, US-China financial decoupling is not happen-
  ing," China Economic Watch, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2020.



                                             33
Li, Zhimin, Leslie Sheng Shen, and Calvin Zhang, "Capital flows, asset prices, and the real
  economy: A "China shock" in the US real estate market," Working Paper, 2020.

Lilley, Andrew, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "Exchange rate
  reconnect," Forthcoming at the Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019.

Maggiori, Matteo, "Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve currencies,"
 American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (10), 3038­3071.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "The rise of the dollar and fall of
 the Euro as international currencies," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2019, 109, 521­26.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "International currencies and capital
 allocation," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (6), 2019­2066.

Okawa, Yohei and Eric Van Wincoop, "Gravity in international finance," Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics, 2012, 87 (2), 205­215.

Papke, Leslie E, "One-way treaty with the world: the US withholding tax and the Netherlands
  Antilles," International Tax and Public Finance, 2000, 7 (3), 295­313.

Portes, Richard and Helene Rey, "The determinants of cross-border equity flows," Journal of
  International Economics, 2005, 65 (2), 269­296.

Ravikumar, B, Ana Maria Santacreu, and Michael Sposi, "Capital accumulation and dy-
 namic gains from trade," Journal of International Economics, 2019, 119, 93­110.

Reyes-Heroles, Ricardo, "The role of trade costs in the surge of trade imbalances," Princeton
 University, Mimeo, 2016.

The Economist, "America files a new financial salvo at Beijing," The Economist, May 2020, U.S.
 Edition, 2020.

Tørsløv, Thomas R, Ludvig S Wier, and Gabriel Zucman, "The missing profits of nations,"
 NBER Working Paper No. 24701, 2018.

Warnock, Francis E and Chad Cleaver, "Financial centres and the geography of capital flows,"
 International Finance, 2003, 6 (1), 27­59.

Whitehill, Brandon, "Buyer beware: Chinese companies and the VIE structure," Council of
 Institutional Investors, 2017.

Zucman, Gabriel, "The missing wealth of nations: Are Europe and the US net debtors or net
  creditors?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (3), 1321­1364.




                                               34
                                                                    Share Reallocated To:

      Destination   BMU     BRA     CAN    CHN     CYM     DEU     GBR     HKG    IND     IRL     JPN     LUX   PAN   RUS     USA    RoW

         BMU         1.2     0.5     1.0     1.1             0.4    10.2    1.3             1.7    1.2                        64.0   17.4
         BRA                100.0
         CAN                 0.1    95.2     0.3             0.1    0.3                            0.2                        2.9     1.0
         CHN                                99.2                    0.8
         CYM                 20.1    0.1    33.0     1.4     0.1    3.8     5.6             4.2    0.9                        13.3   17.4
         DEU                                                93.4    6.2                                                       0.3     0.2
         GBR                 0.2     0.1                            86.5           1.4             0.2                        4.0     7.7
35




         HKG                                55.0             3.7    5.8    28.1    0.2                                                7.2
         IND                                                                      100.0
          IRL                                0.1             0.4    1.8                   29.8    21.9                 4.7    39.4    1.9
         JPN                                                                                      100.0
         LUX                 4.4     1.2     0.1             3.0    1.5                     0.4           4.4         10.9    45.2   29.0
         PAN                 2.3                                                                                5.4           82.2   10.1
         RUS                                                                                                          100.0
         USA                 0.3     0.7     0.1             0.8    1.3            0.1      0.3    1.7                        92.3    2.3

     Table 1: Reallocation matrix, U.S. corporate debt investments, 2017. This table shows the share of U.S. investment
     into selected destination countries (rows ) that are distributed to each other country (columns ) on a nationality basis. Values are
     expressed in percentage points. The last column, Rest of World (RoW ), shows the sum of the shares allocated to all remaining
     countries.
                                                               With Reallocation
       Destination            ISO Code                TIC      Position        
       A. Selected Non-Tax Haven Countries
       Argentina                 ARG                     5             5           0
       Australia                 AUS                   144           144           0
       Brazil                    BRA                     8            50          42
       Canada                    CAN                   390           393           4
       China                     CHN                     3            48          45
       France                    FRA                   118           120           2
       Germany                   DEU                    60            80          20
       India                     IND                     6            10           4
       Indonesia                 IDN                     5             9           4
       Italy                     ITA                    16            29          13
       Japan                     JPN                    80            95          15
       Mexico                    MEX                    58            58           0
       Russia                    RUS                     0            12          12
       Saudi Arabia              SAU                     1             1           0
       Spain                     ESP                    16            19           2
       South Africa              ZAF                     1             6           5
       South Korea               KOR                    11            11           0
       Turkey                    TUR                     4             4           0
       United Kingdom            GBR                   308           326          18

       B. Selected Tax Havens
       Bermuda                     BMU                  30             0         -30
       Cayman Islands              CYM                  80             1         -79
       Cura¸cao                    CUW                   3             0          -3
       Guernsey                    GGY                  13             0         -13
       Hong Kong                   HKG                   8             7          -1
       Ireland                      IRL                 63            25         -39
       Jersey                      JEY                  14             0         -14
       Luxembourg                  LUX                  72             3         -69
       Netherlands                 NLD                 179            95         -84
       Panama                      PAN                   3             0          -3
       British Virgin Islands      VGB                  14             0         -14

       C. Total Foreign Corporate Bond Holdings
       Total Foreign Holdings      --                2,058         1,949        -109

       D. Domestic Reallocation
       United States               USA              5,247          5,356         109
Table 2: Estimated nationality-based outward U.S. corporate debt portfolios,
2017. This table presents estimates of restated outward U.S. corporate debt portfolio po-
sitions on a nationality basis, which we compare to TIC data. We present our baseline
estimates, which only reallocate holdings away from tax havens. Positions in the TIC col-
umn with an asterisk ( ) are our estimates. Corporate debt is defined in TIC as private debt
holdings minus holdings of asset-backed securities.

                                            36
                                                                 With Reallocation
      Destination            ISO Code                  TIC       Position        
      A. Selected Non-Tax Haven Countries
      Argentina                 ARG                       9             11          1
      Australia                 AUS                     181            182          1
      Brazil                    BRA                     119            120          1
      Canada                    CAN                     493            501          8
      China                     CHN                     154            696        542
      France                    FRA                     434            447         14
      Germany                   DEU                     375            385         10
      India                     IND                     179            183          4
      Indonesia                 IDN                      40             40          0
      Italy                     ITA                      96            105         10
      Japan                     JPN                     895            911         17
      Mexico                    MEX                      64             64          0
      Russia                    RUS                      55             59          4
      Saudi Arabia              SAU                       0              0          0
      Spain                     ESP                     123            123          0
      South Africa              ZAF                     100            100          0
      South Korea               KOR                     226            226          0
      Turkey                    TUR                      22             22          0
      United Kingdom            GBR                   1,019          1,146        126

      B. Selected Tax Havens
      Bermuda                      BMU                  195             1         -194
      Cayman Islands               CYM                  547             0         -547
      Cura¸cao                     CUW                   68             0          -68
      Guernsey                     GGY                   14             0          -14
      Hong Kong                    HKG                  147           140           -6
      Ireland                       IRL                 385            71         -315
      Jersey                       JEY                   94             0          -94
      Luxembourg                   LUX                   33             4          -29
      Netherlands                  NLD                  339           276          -63
      Panama                       PAN                   26             0          -26
      British Virgin Islands       VGB                   15             0          -15

      C. Total Foreign Common Equity Holdings
      Total Foreign Holdings    --                    7,852          7,152        -700

      D. Domestic Reallocation
      United States                USA              19,530          20,230        700
Table 3: Estimated nationality-based outward U.S. equity portfolios, 2017. This
table presents estimates of restated outward U.S. equity portfolio positions on a nationality
basis, which we compare to TIC data. We present our baseline estimates, which only real-
locate holdings away from tax havens. Positions in the TIC column with an asterisk ( ) are
our estimates.

                                             37
                                                            With Reallocation
      Destination                ISO Code        CPIS       Position        
      A. Selected Non-Tax Haven Countries
      Argentina                    ARG               37           37          0
      Australia                    AUS              173          178          5
      Brazil                       BRA               50          120         70
      Canada                       CAN              191          197          6
      China                        CHN               19           97         78
      India                         IND              19           29         10
      Indonesia                     IDN              44           55         11
      Japan                        JPN              209          219         11
      Mexico                       MEX               98           99          2
      Russia                       RUS               36          107         72
      Saudi Arabia                 SAU                3            5          2
      South Africa                 ZAF               28           36          8
      South Korea                  KOR               25           26          1
      Turkey                       TUR               39           39          0
      United Kingdom               GBR            1,279        1,420        140
      United States                USA            1,904        2,111        207

      B. Selected Tax Havens
      Bermuda                        BMU             23            2         -21
      Cayman Islands                 CYM             95            7         -89
      Cura¸cao                       CUW              5            0          -5
      Guernsey                       GGY             17            0         -17
      Hong Kong                      HKG             21           13          -7
      Ireland                         IRL          293           136        -156
      Jersey                         JEY             47            0         -47
      Luxembourg                     LUX           535            23        -512
      Netherlands                    NLD           984           522        -462
      Panama                         PAN              8            5          -4
      British Virgin Islands         VGB             32            1         -31

      C. Total Foreign Bond Holdings
      Total Foreign Holdings         --           5,758        6,356        598

      D. Domestic Reallocation
      European Monetary Union        EMU         8,855         8,257        -598

Table 4: Estimated nationality-based outward EMU total debt portfolios, 2017.
This table presents estimates of restated outward EMU total debt portfolio positions on
a nationality basis, which we compare to CPIS data. We present our baseline estimates,
which only reallocate holdings away from tax havens. Positions in the CPIS column with
an asterisk ( ) are our estimates.



                                          38
                                                               With Reallocation
       Destination                ISO Code          CPIS       Position        
       A. Selected Non-Tax Haven Countries
       Argentina                    ARG                  4             4           0
       Australia                    AUS                 61            62           1
       Brazil                       BRA                 53            54           0
       Canada                       CAN                 92            96           5
       China                        CHN                 96           323         227
       India                         IND                86            94           9
       Indonesia                     IDN                18            19           0
       Japan                        JPN                314           328          14
       Mexico                       MEX                 19            19           0
       Russia                       RUS                 46            51           4
       Saudi Arabia                 SAU                  2             2           0
       South Africa                 ZAF                 33            33           0
       South Korea                  KOR                 95            95           0
       Turkey                       TUR                 11            11           0
       United Kingdom               GBR                582           624          42
       United States                USA              1,666         1,731          65

       B. Selected Tax Havens
       Bermuda                         BMU              38             1         -37
       Cayman Islands                  CYM             223            11        -212
       Cura¸cao                        CUW               7             1          -6
       Guernsey                        GGY              20            19          -2
       Hong Kong                       HKG              64            51         -14
       Ireland                          IRL           707            678         -30
       Jersey                          JEY              50             0         -50
       Netherlands                     NLD            333            321         -12
       Panama                          PAN               3             0          -3
       British Virgin Islands          VGB              10             7          -3

       C. Total Foreign Equity Holdings
       Total Foreign Holdings           --           4,246         4,300          54

       D. Domestic Reallocation
       European Monetary Union         EMU          4,791          4,737         -54

Table 5: Estimated nationality-based outward EMU equity portfolios, 2017. This
table presents estimates of restated outward EMU equity portfolio positions on a nationality
basis, which we compare to CPIS data. We present our baseline estimates, which only
reallocate holdings away from tax havens. Positions in the CPIS column with an asterisk
( ) are our estimates. We drop holdings of the EMU in Luxembourg since the ultimate
investments are accounted for by the foreign investments of Luxembourg.


                                             39
           Name                                   Issuer CUSIP   Residency   Amount   Parent
           A. Brazil
           Petrobras Global Fin. BV                 71647N         NLD        27.5    Petroleo Brasileiro SA
           Petrobras Intl. Fin. Co.                 71645W         CYM        10.8    Petroleo Brasileiro SA
           Petrobras Global Fin. BV                 N6945A         NLD         9.5    Petroleo Brasileiro SA
           Vale Overseas Ltd                        91911T         CYM        9.3     Vale SA
           Odebrecht Fin. Ltd                       G6710E         CYM         3.7    Odebrecht Fin. Ltd

           B. China
           Alibaba Group Holding Ltd                01609W         CYM        14.9    Alibaba Group Holding Ltd
           Huarong Fin. II Co. Ltd                  G463PC         VGB        11.0    China Huarong Asset Management
           ICBCIL Fin. Co. Ltd                      Y3R559         HKG         8.8    Industrial & Commercial Bank of China
           Huarong Fin. 2017 Co. Ltd                G463PS         VGB         8.7    China Huarong Asset Management
           Sinopec Group Overseas Dev. 2015 Ltd     G8201J         VGB         8.4    China Petroleum & Chemical Corporation

           C. India
           Bharti Airtel Intl. Netherlands BV       N1383S         NLD         3.1    Bharti Airtel Ltd
           Bharti Airtel Intl. Netherlands BV       N1384F         NLD         2.0    Bharti Airtel Ltd
           Abja Invt. Co. Pte. Ltd                  Y202ER         SGP         1.7    Tata Steel Ltd
40




           Bank India                               G0715R         JEY         0.8    Bank India
           AE-Rotor Holding BV                      N01006         NLD         0.6    Suzlon Energy Ltd

           D. Russia
           Gaz Capital SA Luxembourg                 L4191B        LUX        28.6    Gazprom PJSC
           Lukoil Intl. Fin. BV                      549876        NLD        7.0     Lukoil PJSC
           Gaz Capital SA Luxembourg                 368266        LUX         7.0    Gazprom PJSC
           SB Capital SA Luxembourg                  L8084D        LUX         6.8    Sberbank Russia
           VTB Capital SA Ln. Partn.                 91833E        LUX         6.7    VTB Capital

           E. South Africa
           Myriad Intl. Holdings BV                 N5946F         NLD         3.7    Naspers Ltd
           MTN Mauritius Invts. Ltd                 V6143X         MUS         1.8    MTN Group Ltd
           Anglogold Ashanti Holdings Plc           03512T         IMN         1.8    Western Deep Levels Ltd
           MTN Mauritius Invts. Ltd                 55377X         MUS         1.8    MTN Group Ltd
           Myriad Intl. Holdings BV                 62856R         NLD         1.2    Naspers Ltd

     Table 6: Largest tax haven bond bond financing subsidiaries in Brazil, China, India, Russia, and South Africa,
     2017. We show the largest bond financing subsidiaries that are based in tax havens for the BRICS countries. Outstanding
     bond amounts are in USD billions.
          Rank     Name                                     Residency      Market Cap       Industry
             1     Tencent Holdings Ltd                         CYM             493.6       Internet Software/Services
             2     Alibaba Group Holding Ltd                    CYM             435.2       Internet Retail
             3     Baidu Inc                                    CYM              64.7       Internet Software/Services
             4     China Construction Bank Co.                  CHN             221.5       Major Banks
             5     Ping An Insurance Group                      CHN              77.5       Multi-Line Insurance
             6     China Mobile Ltd                             HKG             207.6       Wireless Telecommunications
             7     Industrial & Commercial Bk. of China         CHN              69.8       Major Banks
             8     Netease Inc                                  CYM              45.3       Internet Software/Services
             9     JD.com Inc                                   CYM              49.7       Internet Retail
             10    Bank of China Ltd                            CHN              41.1       Major Banks
             11    China National Offshore Oil                  HKG              64.1       Oil & Gas Production
             12    New Oriental Ed. & Tech. Group               CYM              14.8       Other Consumer Services
             13    AAC Technologies Holdings Inc                CYM              21.8       Electronic Components
41




             14    China Petroleum & Chemical Co.               CHN              18.7       Integrated Oil
             15    China Pacific Insurance Group                CHN              13.3       Multi-Line Insurance
             16    TAL Education Group                          CYM              8.3        Other Consumer Services
             17    China State Constr. Engrg. Co. Ltd           HKG              35.3       Real Estate Development
             18    Kweichow Moutai Co. Ltd                      CHN             134.6       Beverages: Alcoholic
             19    China Merchants Bank Co. Ltd                 CHN              18.3       Regional Banks
             20    WH Group Ltd                                 CYM              16.6       Food: Meat/Fish/Dairy
             21    Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Tech.             CHN              55.3       Telecommunications Equipment
             22    Bank of China (Hong Kong) Ltd                HKG              53.6       Major Banks
             23    Geely Automobile Holdings Ltd                CYM              31.1       Motor Vehicles
             24    Shenzhou Intl. Group Holdings                CYM              14.3       Apparel/Footwear
             25    Sinopharm Group Co. Ltd                      CYM              5.2        Pharmaceuticals

     Table 7: Largest Chinese firms in equity holdings, 2017. We show the largest firms that are Chinese by nationality,
     sorted by the value of the equity holdings in each firm in the Morningstar fund data. For each firm, we also show the place of
     residency, its market capitalization, and its primary industry of operations.
                                                               Corporate Bonds                Common Equity
               Destination            ISO Code        TIC    Full Nat. Sales Guarantor      TIC Full Nat. Sales
               A. Selected Non-Tax Haven Countries
               Argentina                 ARG             5          5     27         5         9        18      104
               Australia                 AUS           144        149    141       144       181       186      327
               Brazil                    BRA             8         67    123        51       119       107      409
               Canada                    CAN           390        412    264       392       493       529      697
               China                     CHN             3         54    234        44       154       698    1,845
               France                    FRA           118        109    140       120       434       459      456
               Germany                   DEU            60        119    151        77       375       403      667
               India                     IND             6         21     68        10       179       173      436
               Indonesia                 IDN             5          9     34         9        40        36      183
               Italy                     ITA            16         35     71        29        96       115      355
               Japan                     JPN            80        188    220        95       895       907    1,170
               Mexico                    MEX            58         60    105        58        64        61      263
               Russia                    RUS             0         12     56        11        55        58      281
               Saudi Arabia              SAU             1          2     19         1         0         0       80
               Spain                     ESP            16         52     55        19       123       130      259
               South Africa              ZAF             1          7     13         3       100       101      106
               South Korea               KOR            11         17     62        11       226       225      388
               Turkey                    TUR             4          4     23         4        22        22      112
42




               United Kingdom            GBR           308        363    263       326     1,019     1,004      871

               B. Selected Tax Havens
               Bermuda                     BMU          30          0      6         1       195        1       11
               Cayman Islands              CYM          80          1      9         5       547        0        5
               Cura¸cao                    CUW           3          0      0         0        68        0        2
               Guernsey                    GGY          13          0      0         0        14        0        2
               Hong Kong                   HKG           8          9     41         9       147      140      177
               Ireland                      IRL         63         40     25        26       385       71       74
               Jersey                      JEY          14          0      2         0        94        0        2
               Netherlands                 NLD         179        116     66        98       339      376      232
               Panama                      PAN           3          0      4         2        26        0       13
               British Virgin Islands      VGB          14          0     11         0        15        0        8

               C. Total Foreign Holdings
               Total Foreign Holdings       --       2,058      2,326   3,036     1,960    7,852     7,076   12,733

               D. Domestic Position
               United States               USA       5,247      4,979   4,269     5,344   19,530    20,306   14,649

     Table 8: Estimated outward U.S. portfolios: alternative restatements, 2017. We present full nationality, sales-based,
     and guarantor-based restatements. Positions with an asterisk ( ) are our estimates.
                                                                 All Bonds                           Equity
           Destination                ISO Code    CPIS     Full Nat. Sales     Guarantor    CPIS    Full Nat.   Sales
           A. Selected Non-Tax Haven Countries
           Argentina                    ARG           37          36      74           37       4           4      42
           Australia                    AUS          173         191     191          175      61          66     116
           Brazil                       BRA           50         134     258          119      53          46     174
           Canada                       CAN          191         205     213          196      92         104     174
           China                        CHN           19         109     253           93      96         322     634
           India                         IND          19          48      98           29      86          87     173
           Indonesia                     IDN          44          55      80           55      18          17      67
           Japan                        JPN          209         251     316          219     314         331     388
           Mexico                       MEX           98         110     155           99      19          20      86
           Russia                       RUS           36         107     187          108      46          50     148
           Saudi Arabia                 SAU            3           5      20            5       2           2      27
           South Africa                 ZAF           28          47      23           32      33          34      39
           South Korea                  KOR           25          27      74           26      95          95     130
           Turkey                       TUR           39          38      76           39      11          11      48
           United Kingdom               GBR        1,279       1,228   1,038        1,424     582         561     439
           United States                USA        1,904       2,093   2,495        2,080   1,666       1,754   2,018
43




           B. Selected Tax Havens
           Bermuda                     BMU            23          2       7            6       38           1      2
           Cayman Islands              CYM            95          7      27           10      223          11     13
           Cura¸cao                    CUW             5          0       0            0        7           1      1
           Guernsey                    GGY            17          0       3            1       20          19     21
           Hong Kong                   HKG            21         16      70           19       64          51     66
           Ireland                      IRL         293         143     130          132     707          678    686
           Jersey                      JEY            47          0      18            1       50           0      1
           Netherlands                 NLD          984         566     385          506     333          371    340
           Panama                      PAN             8          5      10            7        3           0      5
           British Virgin Islands      VGB            32          1      20            1       10           7      8

           C. Total Foreign Holdings
           Total Foreign Holdings       --         5,758       6,311   7,418        6,333   4,246       4,254   5,966

           D. Domestic Position
           European Monetary Union     EMU        8,855        8,303   7,195        8,280   4,791       4,783   3,071
     Table 9: Estimated outward EMU portfolios: alternative restatements, 2017. We present full nationality, sales-based,
     and guarantor-based restatements. Positions with an asterisk ( ) are our estimates.
                                                       .1
           Share of External Bond Portfolio in BRICS

                                                       .08
                                                       .06
                                                       .04
44




                                                       .02
                                                       0




                                                             AUS   CAN   CHE    DNK      EMU   GBR      NOR      SWE   USA
                                                                                 Investing Country
                                                                               Nationality           Residency


     Figure 1: Portfolio shares in BRICS debt, across countries: residency vs. nationality, 2017. Using our restated TIC
     and CPIS data for each investing country, we show the share of all external bond investments that are attributed to BRICS
     countries (Brazil, China, India, Russia, and South Africa) on a nationality basis and on a residency basis.
                  British
              Virgin Islands   $12B




                                                                         Brazil
                               $16B
                                                                         $42B




                Cayman
                Islands


                               $27B




                 Ireland

                                                                         China
                                                                         $45B

              Luxembourg




                               $22B
              Netherlands                                                India
                                                                          $4B



                                                                        Russia
                                                                         $12B


                  Other
               Tax Havens
                                                                      South Africa
                                                                          $5B



Figure 2: Patterns of U.S. corporate bond investment in large emerging markets
via tax havens, 2017. This figure shows the network through which companies in Brazil,
China, India, Russia, and South Africa raise bond financing from U.S. investors via affiliates
located in tax havens. The amounts on the right show the total amount of investment
reallocated to each country from tax havens, and each of the colored lines break down these
amounts according to their source tax haven.



                                             45
                  British
              Virgin Islands   $25B




                                                                          Brazil
                Cayman                                                    $70B
                Islands        $23B




                 Ireland       $23B




                                                                          China
                                                                          $78B


              Luxembourg

                               $45B




                                                                          India
                                                                          $10B



                               $47B

              Netherlands

                                                                         Russia
                                                                          $72B




                               $22B
                  Other
               Tax Havens
                                                                       South Africa
                                                                           $8B



Figure 3: Patterns of EMU bond investment in large emerging markets via tax
havens, 2017. This figure shows the network through which companies in Brazil, China,
India, Russia, and South Africa raise bond financing from EMU investors via affiliates located
in tax havens. The amounts on the right show the total amount of investment reallocated
to each country from tax havens, and each of the colored lines break down these amounts
according to their source tax haven.



                                             46
                                                           0.25
     Share of Bond Positions Reallocated from Tax Havens


                                                           0.20


                                                           0.15


                                                           0.10
47




                                                           0.05


                                                           0.00
                                                               2007            2009           2011           2013        2015         2017
                                                                      Brazil          China          India    Russia   South Africa
     Figure 4: The importance of BRICS countries in tax haven bond issuance over time. We plot the share of the total
     reallocated tax haven bond holdings of our nine investor countries that is reallocated under nationality to each of Brazil, China,
     India, Russia, and South Africa.
                                                         .1
           Share of External Equity Portfolio in China

                                                         .08
                                                         .06
                                                         .04
48




                                                         .02
                                                         0




                                                               AUS   CAN   CHE    DNK      EMU   GBR      NOR      SWE   USA
                                                                                   Investing Country
                                                                                 Nationality           Residency


     Figure 5: Portfolio shares in Chinese equities, across countries: residency vs. nationality, 2017. Using our restated
     TIC and CPIS data for each investing country, we show the share of all external equity investments that are attributed to China
     on a nationality basis and on a residency basis.
                                                                                        L
                        Foreign                 A               Listed                               Investment
                       Investors                               Company                                 Vehicles
                                                              B                D



                                                              SPV
                                                              C                                       I        H
                Outside China
                 Inside China


                      Operating                 E                                       F             Chinese
                                                                  WFOE
49




                      Company               Contracts                              Contracts         Residents

                                                                                    G


                                                        Portfolio Investment                   FDI


     Figure 6: VIE structure. This figure displays a simplified characterization of the Variable Interest Entity (VIE) structure
     used by Chinese firms in order to access foreign capital. The Operating Company in China is fully owned by Chinese residents
     (arrow G ). The public Listed Company is located offshore, generally in the Cayman Islands: foreign investors (arrow A) and
     some Chinese residents (arrow I ) can hold shares in it. Chinese residents may also own stakes in offshore investment vehicles
     (arrow H ) that own shares in the Listed Company on their behalf (arrow L). The Listed Company owns a Wholly Foreign
     Owned Enterprise (WFOE) inside China (arrow D ), oftentimes through a special purpose vehicle (SPV) located in Hong Kong,
     the Cayman Islands, or the British Virgin Islands (arrows B and C ). The WFOE engages in contracts with the Operating
     Company and its Chinese owners (arrows E and F ) designed to transfer the profits of the Operating Company to the Listed
     Company. We highlight separately portfolio investment (solid red arrows ) and FDI (dashed blue arrows ) in the diagram.
                        1500          2000
           USD Billions
             1000                     500
                                      0




                                                 2005q1           2007q1          2009q1         2011q1            2013q1         2015q1              2017q1              2019q1

                                                                  VIE Market Value                   VIE Equity Offered                        FDI from HKG, VGB, CYM


                                                                    (a) VIE Market Value, Equity Offered, and Inward FDI
                           1,000
       Growth in USD Billions, 2016Q4 - 2018Q1
          200      400     0    600      800




                                                       VIE          FDI Equity     FDI Debt      FDI Liabilities   Portfolio     Portfolio           Loan           Tot. Liabilities
                                                   Market Value     Liabilities    Liabilities    From HKG,         Equity         Debt            Liabilities   (Ex. Reserves, TCs)
                                                                                                 VGB, or CYM       Liabilities   Liabilities


                                                                            (b) VIE Market Value and External Liabilities

Figure 7: China's external liabilities do not track VIEs' listed stock prices. Panel A
plots the total market value of all Chinese companies listed offshore via VIE structures (long-
dashed red line ), together with a measure of the cumulative value of VIE equity offerings
(solid blue line ). The graph also shows the total value of all inward FDI positions in China
from Hong Kong, the Cayman Islands, and the British Virgin Islands (short-dashed green
line ). Panel B shows the change in market value for all VIEs between 2016Q4 and 2018Q1,
alongside the contemporaneous changes in various categories of China's external liabilities,
as reported by China's State Administration of Foreign Exchange.



                                                                                                            50
                                .3        .25
                  China NFA, Share of GDP
                            .15     .2




                                                                                                                                $1.1T
                      .1        .05
51




                                0




                                                2005   2007        2009        2011      2013         2015        2017

                                                       Official NFA Position                    With VIE Adjustment, Baseline
                                                       Upper Bound on Chinese Holdings          Assets Reflect Listed Value

     Figure 8: Mismeasurement of China's Net Foreign Asset (NFA) position. This graph shows China's official NFA
     position as a share of GDP (dashed black line ), alongside our estimated NFA position, which accounts for the valuation effects
     due to the increases in the market values of the VIEs (solid red line ). The estimate labeled "Upper Bound on Chinese Holdings"
     (short-dashed gray line ) assigns to China any unattributed positions in the VIEs and any positions held by funds resident in
     the Cayman Islands or British Virgin Islands. The estimate labeled "Assets Reflect Listed Value" assumes that all recorded
     Chinese external assets track listed share prices (long-dashed gray line ). See Section 2 and Appendix Section G for details on
     the construction of these estimates.
                                                                                                                                                        750
                                                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               USA




                               100




                                                                                                                                                                  500
             Insurance-Based  (USD Billions)




                                                                                                                                      Insurance-Based  (USD Billions)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHN




                                   50




                                                                                                                                                         250
                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                                 CHE
                                                                                                              CHN
                                                                                                        BRA
                                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                                ISR                                                                                                                     GBR
                          0                                                                   RUS                                                                                                           NLD




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                    JEY
                                                                                   VGB
                                                                          BMU




                                                                                                                                        -250
                                                                                                                                                                                                    BMU
               -50




                                                                      IRL                                                                                                               IRL

                                                 NLD          LUX




                                                                                                                                                        -500
                                                       CYM
                               -100




                                                                                                                                                                          CYM

                                               -100                 -50                  0                    50            100                                               -500             -250            0             250           500
                                                                                Baseline  (USD Billions)                                                                                              Baseline  (USD Billions)


                                        (a) United States, Corporate Bonds: Funds vs. Insurers                                                               (b) United States, Common Equities: Funds vs. Insurers




                                                                                                                                                        20
                               4




                                                                                                                             USA                                                                                                         USA     CHN
52




                                                                                                                           DEU
                                        2




                                                                                                                     CHE
              SWF-Based  (USD Billions)




                                                                                                                                      SWF-Based  (USD Billions)
                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                        ITA                                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                                               GBR
                            0




                                                                                                        NOR
                                                                                     IRL
                                                                                        CYM                                                                                                                         JPN NOR




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HKG
                    -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      BMU    NLD




                                                                                                                                      -10
                                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
             -4




                                                        NLD                                                                                                                   CYM
                               -6




                                                                                                                                                        -20


                                                 LUX

                                                 -6             -4                  -2            0                  2            4                                     -20                   -10                0                  10                 20
                                                                                Baseline  (USD Billions)                                                                                              Baseline  (USD Billions)


                                                             (c) Norway, Bonds: Funds vs. SWF                                                                                        (d) Norway, Equities: Funds vs. SWF

     Figure 9: Representativeness of fund data: comparison with restatements based on holdings of U.S. insurers and
     Norwegian sovereign wealth fund, 2017. The blue circles plot the change in holdings relative to residency-based statistics
     for each investment destination in U.S. external corporate bond holdings (panel A), U.S. external common equity holdings
     (panel B), Norwegian external bond holdings (panel C), and Norwegian external equity holdings (panel D). The horizontal axis
     captures our baseline nationality restatement, while the vertical axis plots the change implied when we apply the matrix based
     on U.S. insurer holdings or holdings by Norway's sovereign wealth fund. The gray dashes are 45-degree lines.
                                               .6
          That is Domestic Under Nationality
           Share of Tax Haven Investment

                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0




                                                    AUS   CAN      CHE     DNK      EMU       GBR      NOR      SWE      USA

                                                                Baseline (j)              Issuance Distribution Matrix (b)


                                                                          (a) All Bonds
                                               .4
          That is Domestic Under Nationality
           Share of Tax Haven Investment

                                               .3
                                               .2
                                               .1
                                               0




                                                    AUS   CAN      CHE     DNK      EMU       GBR      NOR      SWE      USA

                                                                Baseline (j)              Issuance Distribution Matrix (b)


                                                                           (b) Equities

Figure 10: Home bias in tax havens, 2017. We plot the share of each country's in-
vestment in tax havens that is reallocated back to that investor country under nationality,
separately for bonds and for equities. The blue bars plot this share for our baseline restate-
ment that uses investor-specific reallocation matrices (j ) and the red bars plot this share
when the restatement uses the global issuance distribution matrix (b).



                                                                               53
                                                   .15
        Share of External U.S. Equity Investment

                                                   .1
                                                   .05
                                                   0




                                                         2007   2009          2011         2013       2015           2017

                                                                  Residency             Nationality          Sales


                                                                  (a) U.S. External Equity Holdings
                                                   .15
        Share of External EMU Equity Investment

                                                   .1
                                                   .05
                                                   0




                                                         2007   2009          2011         2013       2015           2017

                                                                  Residency             Nationality          Sales


                                                                  (b) EMU External Equity Holdings

Figure 11: Exposure to China in external equity portfolios, under residency, na-
tionality, and sales-based measures. We show the exposure to China in the external
equity portfolios of the United States and of the EMU under different methodologies.

                                                                                 54
