                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       UNPACKING HOUSEHOLD ENGEL CURVES

                                     Philippe De Vreyer
                                       Sylvie Lambert
                                      Martin Ravallion

                                     Working Paper 26850
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26850


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




No financial support was received beyond the authors' normal salaries at their academic
institutions. For helpful comments and discussions the authors thank Tanguy Bernard, Isabelle
Chort, Vassilis Hajivassiliou, Franco Peracchi and participants at the workshop on "Family and
Development" at the University of Bordeaux, 2019. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Philippe De Vreyer, Sylvie Lambert, and Martin Ravallion. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unpacking Household Engel Curves
Philippe De Vreyer, Sylvie Lambert, and Martin Ravallion
NBER Working Paper No. 26850
March 2020
JEL No. D12,D13,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

The classic Working-Leser household Engel curve is unpacked to reveal individual budget
allocations across commodities as a function of both individual and household total spending.
Two main findings emerge on calibrating our model to an unusual sub-household dataset for
Senegal. First, for all except education spending, our results are consistent with the separable
structures found in two-stage bargaining and collective models of the household. Second, there
are large biases in standard household Engel-curve estimates when compared to consistently
aggregated sub-household estimates, though in differing degrees and directions depending on the
type of commodity. The main source of bias is a household effect on sub-household spending
behavior, though this is partially offset by a bias due to intra-household inequality, which
emerges as a confounder in aggregating to the household level.

Philippe De Vreyer                             Martin Ravallion
LEDa, Université Paris-Dauphine                Department of Economics
Place du Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny        Georgetown University
Paris 75775                                    ICC 580
France                                         Washington, DC 20057
philippe.devreyer@dauphine.psl.eu              and NBER
                                               mr1185@georgetown.edu
Sylvie Lambert
Paris School of Economics-INRAE
48 bd Jourdan
Paris F-75014
France
sylvie.lambert@psemail.eu
1.      Introduction

        Ernst Engel (1857) famously studied household budgets for 200 working class Belgian
families, and found that the share devoted to food tends to decline with total household
spending--a property that came to be known as Engel's Law. Since then, "Engel curves" for
budget shares have been widely used and much studied across the world, with near universal
confirmation for Engel's Law. 2 Engel curves have found a wide range of applications, including
in the assessment of policies related to agriculture, taxation, trade, industrial organization,
housing, and in the measurement of poverty and inequality.
        While there have been methodological and computational advances in the specification
and estimation of Engel curves, a common and persistent feature has been the reliance on
household aggregates that Engel pioneered, along with a degree of imposed homogeneity in the
Engel curves, allowing only limited variability in the parameters across and within households.
        This paper studies some neglected but potentially confounding sources of heterogeneity
in standard household Engel curves. Three sources of heterogeneity are postulated. First, there
can be latent household effects on individual demand behavior. Members of a given household
are not autonomous individuals who happen to be living together, but rather they come together
selectively, and then interact and influence each other's behavior through the process of
consuming (and often working) together. While we may reject the unitary model, it can be
expected that there are aspects of the household, and shared local environment, that can have a
powerful influence on individual choices. This can happen via individual preferences, which are
to some extent formed within a household. Or it can stem from household- or location-specific
aspects of the constraints on exercising personal preferences. The role of household influences
on individual choices is widely recognized in the literature on consumer behavior outside
economics. 3 For the present purpose, this can be thought of as a household effect on individual
Engel curves. That effect is not of course identifiable from standard household-level cross-
sectional surveys.

2
  At the centenary of the publication of Engel's major work on household budgets, Houthakker (1957) provided
estimates across 30 countries largely confirming Engel's Law, though noting that the income elasticity of demand
for food tended to be higher in poorer countries. Houthakker reported one estimate for India (from the city of
Bhopal) of an elasticity of about unity, which was the only exception he found to Engel's Law.
3
  On the influence of the family and other group memberships on individual preferences and consumer behavior see
the surveys by Solomon et al. (2006, Chapters 10 and 11) and Arnould et al. (2005).
                                                       2
        Second, there are differences in individual demand parameters within households. This
has received some attention. It is known that Engel's Law may cease to hold at the household
level when income gains are assigned to people with different consumption patterns and different
preferences over how the extra money should be spent. Attanasio and Lechene (2010, 2014)
argue that this is a plausible explanation for why the household food share did not fall due to the
income gains to targeted households participating in Mexico's famous PROGRESA program,
which provided cash transfers, paid to women. This arrangement for payment appears to have
shifted the household Engel curve for food among PROGRESA participants.
        Third, there is heterogeneity in the extent of inequality within households. The existence
of intra-household inequality is known to be a source of bias in the measurement of poverty and
inequality. 4 It is less well known that intra-household inequality can also bias estimates of
empirical consumer demand functions, as invariably estimated from household aggregate data.
Yet for many goods, and (hence) expenditures, there is a typically an unobserved individual
assignment within the household, that may be a source of intra-household inequality, reflecting
different reservation utilities outside the household. Furthermore, intra-household inequality can
interact with individual parameter heterogeneity in influencing household demands, whereby
greater intra-household inequality magnifies the effect of differences in preferences.
        There is no obvious reason why these sources of heterogeneity are statistically ignorable
when estimating household Engel curves. Latent heterogeneity in demand behavior may well be
correlated with household total spending or income. For example, there may well be latent
differences in human capital that influence demands, such as when mother's education
influences the priority given to nutrition. In turn, human capital is likely to be positively
correlated with household consumption or income. Another example relates to the household's
social status in the local community of residence. Perceptions of the obligations that come with
higher social status may well influence spending patterns; for example, one may feel the need to
show off with a TV, or have enough food ready in case someone shows up. Such "status-
seeking" behavior can be expected at a given level of total spending, but also to be correlated
with that spending.


4
 Contributions include Haddad and Kanbur (1990), Findlay and Wright (1996), Lise and Seitz (2011), Bargain et al.
(2018), De Vreyer and Lambert (2020).
                                                       3
       A similar point can be made with regard to intra-household inequality. On a priori
grounds, it would seem hard to defend the assumption that such latent inequality is statistically
ignorable. One might expect that the extent of intra-household inequality varies with mean
consumption or income (and possibly other covariates of household demands). One way that
such a correlation can emerge is the existence of non-convexities in utility functions (or
household production functions) at low levels of consumption. These can readily generate a
negative correlation between the extent of inequality within households and household income in
that a form of triage emerges in poor households, whereby resources are allocated to assure that
at least one member is fed and clothed adequately. Once household income rises enough, more
of that extra income can be shared with those members who had previously been neglected.
However, one can make theoretical arguments suggesting that the correlation could go either
way. Kanbur and Haddad (1994) show that a (positive or negative) correlation between intra-
household inequality and household income can emerge from a model of Nash-type intra-
household bargaining in the allocation of resources.
       If intra-household inequality falls as household income rises, it may even be that Engel's
Law is an artifact of intra-household inequality. It is not difficult to imagine the possibility that
all individuals have constant budget shares, but that Engel's Law still emerges in the aggregate
household data due to the combined effect of preference heterogeneity and intra-household
inequality. Appendix A1 provides an example in which individual Cobb-Douglas preferences
can still generate Engel's Law at household level given how differing preferences interact with
differing threat points in intra-household bargaining.
       The upshot of these observations is that household Engel curves may well be biased by
these confounders. Testing this conjecture requires that we unpack the household Engel curves to
reveal the potential confounders. That is the aim of this paper.
       Past research on Engel curves has been constrained by the lack of data on spending
within the household. The focus has thus been on how one might infer aspects of distribution
within the household by looking solely at household aggregates. For example, one can gain
insights into distribution within the household by studying spending on "adult goods" versus
"child goods." A strand of the literature using non-unitary (bargaining and collective) models of
the household has provided insights into the measurement of intra-household inequality and

                                                   4
poverty, exploiting sharing rules that can be identified under certain assumptions, or using data
on the allocation of certain assigned goods within households. 5
        The paper proposes a model of person-specific Engel curves, with both "internal" (own-
spending) and "external" (household spending) parameters. In introducing the external effect we
relax a common (indeed, universal) assumption in the recent literature on intra-household
resource allocation in non-unitary models, which has postulated a two-stage structure, whereby
the household first chooses how to allocate total spending across its members, leaving them free
(in the second stage) to allocate their assigned share of total spending across (private)
commodities (as in, for example, Dunbar et al., 2013). In other words, it is commonly assumed
that an individual's budget shares are uncorrelated with household aggregate spending at a given
level of the individual's personal allocation of total household spending. Is that a valid
assumption? While we may choose to reject the (longstanding) unitary model, we can also
recognize that the household is a more complex social institution than the separable two-stage
model suggests. Living in richer household may well have an external effect on how a person
spends a given individual allocation of total spending, such as through peer effects within the
household or inter-temporal consumption behavior.
        Our model provides an encompassing specification that allows us to test some key
assumptions in the recent literature on identifying intra-household allocations from standard data
sources. Also, in our model, intra-household inequality emerges naturally as a determinant of
household-level demand functions through the aggregation process. For the purpose of this paper
we focus mainly on the longstanding Working-Leser specification for budget shares linear in log
total spending. Though this has been a popular specification in the literature, we acknowledge
that it is only one of a number of possibilities. 6 The generic concerns about bias raised here
remain in all such forms, though the specifics of the analysis will vary. We also test robustness to
allowing budget shares to be nonlinear in log total spending per capita.
        One of our theoretical findings is that, for the Working-Leser Engel curves relating the
budget share to (log) total spending, a weighted version of a Theil index of intra-household


5
  Contributions include Kanbur and Haddad (1994), Chiappori and Meghir (2015), Brown et al. (2018), Bargain et
al. (2018), Dunbar et al. (2013) and Chavas et al. (2018). The formulation of a collective model in Chiappori (1988)
has been influential. On the conditions for identification see Bourguignon et al. (2009).
6
  For an overview of the options see Lewbel (2008).
                                                         5
inequality is an omitted variable in standard household demand functions. 7 In the special case of
common Engel parameters, a Theil T index for intra-household inequality is the relevant omitted
variable. Predictions of the aggregate demand responses to household income changes are thus
conditional on how changes in spending are distributed within households.
         How much does all this matter empirically? The paper exploits an unusual data set for
Senegal to estimate sub-household Engel curves and so tests the aggregation conditions and
explores the implications for standard household demand analysis. The data allow us to assign
total spending within the household. We then focus on how different types of people allocate
their spending across commodities. We cannot, of course, relax all the homogeneity restrictions
found in the literature and still have an estimable model. We model individual budget shares
allowing for both internal ("own spending") effects and external effects stemming from
interdependence within the household. Thus, we can ask whether the intra-household data satisfy
the conditions for exact aggregation across individuals, meaning that they imply the existence of
the sort of Engel curve that is conventionally estimated.
         Substantial and partly predictable heterogeneity in Engel curves is revealed. We find that
the conditions for consistent estimation of household Engel curves using standard data are
convincingly rejected, and the biases are large. It is unclear how one should interpret the
standard aggregate household Engel curves in the light of the degree of confounding
heterogeneity that we find. On a more positive note, the (popular) assumption of two-stage
separability is generally accepted.

2.       Inside the aggregate household Engel curve

         We assume that individuals can be assigned to one (and only one) of a number of
possible types (male head, first wife, second wife,...), with fewer types than people. A key
identifying assumption is that Engel parameters vary between types but not within. (A
homogeneity assumption of this sort is common for identification purposes in the literature on
intra-household resource allocation. 8) The unique assignment of persons to types is given by a


7
  Working (1943) advocated this functional form, which Leser (1963) found to fit better than some options. For an
overview of this model and alternatives see Phlips (1983). In a largely separate literature, Theil (1967) had proposed
a class of functional forms for an inequality index.
8
  See, for example, the empirical implementation of the collective model in Dunbar et al. (2013).
                                                          6
pre-determined discrete function (, ), which returns the designated type for each person
i=1,.., in household j=1,..,m.
         The "unpacked" Working-Leser Engel curve for consumption by person i (of type (, ))
in household j for an assigned private good of type k (=1,..,K) is:
               
          =  +  ln 
                    +  ln 
                                    
                           +   +  +  (i=1,.., ; j=1,..,m;  = ( , )) (1)

where  is the share of person i's total expenditure  devoted to good k and 
                                                                            is total

household expenditure per capita,  is a vector of control variables (including log household
       
size),  is a household effect and  is an innovation error term. The data are assumed to

include multiple observations for a given type, such that (1) is estimable. Notice that (1) allows
                                          
the Engel parameters ( (,) , ( ,) , (,) , (,) ) to vary within households.
                                                                           9

                                                                                   
         A key feature of (1) is that we allow both an "own-spending" coefficient ( (,)  0) and

an "external effect" of household total expenditure on individual Engel curves conditional on
                               
"own-spending", i.e., we allow  (, )  0. The external effect merits explanation. As noted in

the introduction, some economic models of the household postulate a separable, two-stage,
process. At the first stage, the household decides an allocation of total spending across its
members (and how much to allocate to public goods within the household), while at the second
stage each individual chooses how her allocation of total spending is to be assigned across
private goods and services. The Appendix A1 provides a simple example of such a model.
Another example is found in the set of collective models of the household. 10. In such models,
household total spending only matters to individual budget allocations via the agreed individual
allocation of that spending. However, an external effect can be postulated. This can stem from
one or more of a number of factors, including: (i) future consumption-sharing possibilities in
richer households that are not already reflected in an individual's current spending; (ii) peer
effects within the household, such that (say) a "poor" individual in a "rich" household tends to
adjust her budget shares to conform; or (iii) the effects of measurement errors in individual
expenditures that are at least partially corrected by including household total spending. We treat
the existence of an external effect as an empirical issue.

9
  If we impose constant parameters (across person types) as well as constant sharing rules (across households) then
we can identify the sharing rules (Dunbar et al., 2013).
10
   Building on earlier work of Chiappori (1988) and Apps and Rees (1988).
                                                         7
                                                   
       It saves notation to interpret the  (,) and (,) parameters in (1) as incorporating any

correlations between the household effects and the two (log) expenditure variables. This is
consistent with the way household-level Engel curves are estimated in which the household-level
error term is assumed to be orthogonal to household total expenditures (and other covariates).
Our estimation method will address the concern that the  k
                                                         j 's are potentially correlated with the

                                                   
regressors, and will also allow us to estimate the  ( ,) despite the fact that we also have a

household effect. To simplify the notation we will drop the  's from (1) but they will return to
be explicit in the empirical analysis.
       By implication, our test of the assumed separable structure in empirical collective models
is robust to any (additive) latent household heterogeneity in individual Engel curves, as captured
by the  k
        j 's. This is important given that the latter are potentially correlated with (inter alia)

household total spending, as discussed in the Introduction.
                                                 k
       Aggregation to household-level: Neither Sij nor Yij is typically observed. To derive the

estimable household-level Engel curves from (1) we can proceed by first eliminating the
(unobserved) intra-household values of  by re-writing (1) as:
                         
                = (,) + (( ,) + (, ) ) ln 
                                           + 
                                             
                                                                                               (2)
Here the new error term is:
                           
                 (,) ln  +  + 
                              
                                                                                               (3)
where    / is the relative income for person i in household j. Next, on aggregating the

budget shares at the household level for good k we have:
                  1
                =                
                    =1   =  +  +   ln
                                      +
                                       
                                                                                               (4)
                       


(Clearly, the household-level analysis cannot distinguish  k from  k ). Here the household-level

Engel-curve parameters are related to the unpacked parameters as follows:
                      1
                                                       1
                                               
                  =1  ( ,) ;  +    =1  (( ,) + ( ,) )                                          (5)
                                                        

(Notice that the household parameters are implicitly weighted more heavily on household
members with larger income shares.) The error term of the household Engel curve in (4) is:
                =     
                  =1   = 
                              
                          + + =1  
                                  
                                                                                               (6)

                                                   8
where:
                            1
                          
                       =1 ( ,)  ln                                                                      (7)
                               

We shall refer to  as the "-weighted Theil index" for good k. (Note that the weighted Theil
index is not bounded below by zero, as in the unweighted index, given that 's can be negative.)
The corresponding ordinary Theil index applied to measuring intra-household inequality is: 11
                           1
                       =1  ln                                                                           (8)
                            

           We study the household Engel curves in the form of (4). However, these are still not the
standard estimable Engel curve, which has constant-parameters as follows:
                     =   + (  +   ) ln  + 
                                          
                                                                                                        (9)
Here:
                            1                             1
                                       
                        =1  ;  +    =1  + 
                                          
                                                                                                        (10)

while the error term in (9) is:
                    
                       +
                         +  -   + [(
                                     +  ) - (  +   )] ln        
                                                          + =1   (11)
                                                         

           The standard formula for the total spending elasticities of household demand for
Working-Leser Engel curves is:
                                      +
                     
                           = 1+                                                                         (12)
                                      

Note, however, that (in our model) this standard formula is only valid when all individuals gain
in proportion to their current allocation of the household's total consumption, in which case the
effect of the income gain on the intra-household inequality term in (6) can be set to zero. We do
not make this assumption in our empirical work, but it will help in interpreting our results.
           Conditions for consistent estimation using only household-level data: As usual, the key
assumption needed for consistent estimation of the household Engel curve in (9) is that

 , ln   = 0. (With other regressors we require of course the same orthogonality

condition.) From (11) it can be seen that there are three potential sources of bias: (i) correlated
heterogeneity in the -weighted Theil indices ( 's); (ii) correlated household effects (the 
                                                                                            's);


11
     See Theil (1967). For further discussion of the properties of this index see Bourguignon (1979).


                                                              9
                                                                                
and (iii) systematic heterogeneity in the individual Engel curves, such that [(( +  ) -
(  +   )] ln  ), ln 
                     ]  0. Given that we allow for a household effect on the sub-household

Engel curves, we can treat 
                            +  as orthogonal to ln                       
                                                    in (11), leaving the  's to pick up this

source of bias in the Engel curve when estimated on household data only.
        Thus, on unpacking the household Engel curve, two specific orthogonality conditions
stand out as problematic. The first is a familiar exogeneity condition, 
                                                                          ln   = 0. The

second is that   ln   = 0. If both hold then OLS is valid when applied to (9). In the special
                                                                       
case of constant Engel parameters across all household members ( (,) =  for all i,j) this

requires that the intra-household Theil index is orthogonal to household total spending.
        A similar unpacking of the household Engel curves can be conducted under other
specification choices. In particular, the case of the quadratic Engel curves is developed in
Appendix A2.
        Next we turn to the task of quantifying the extent of any bias in standard household Engel
curves using our data for Senegal.

3.      Data and descriptive statistics

        We use the Pauvreté et Structure Familiale (Poverty and Family Structure, henceforth
PSF) survey conducted in Senegal in 2006/2007. 12 The survey is described in detail in De
Vreyer et al. (2008). The PSF is a nationally representative survey covering about 1800
households spread over 150 clusters drawn randomly from the census districts so as to insure a
geographically representative sample. The survey describes a population of which the majority
(52%) live in rural areas.
        Senegalese households are large, with eight members on average in the PSF. The families
are typically multigenerational. Polygamous unions are common, with 25% of married men and



12
  The PSF survey stems from the cooperation between a team of French researchers and the National Statistical
Agency of Senegal. Momar Sylla and Matar Gueye of the Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la Démographie
of Senegal (ANSD) on the one hand and Philippe De Vreyer, Sylvie Lambert and Abla Safir (World Bank) designed
the survey. The data collection was conducted by the ANSD thanks to the funding of the IDRC (International
Development Research Center), INRA Paris and CEPREMAP.

                                                     10
39% of married women engaged in such unions, which mostly comprise a husband and two
wives (only 20% of polygamous unions have more than two wives).
       The survey collected details on each household's structure and budgetary arrangements.
Each household was divided into "cells" according to the following rule: the head of household
and unaccompanied dependent members, such as his widowed parent or his children whose
mothers do not live in the same household, are grouped together. Then, each wife of the head and
her children make up a separate group. Finally, any other family nucleus such as a married child
of the household head with his/her spouse and children, forms a separate cell. This
disaggregation emerged from field interviews as being the relevant way to split the household
into its component groups. Enumerators saw this as a natural way to divide households and had
no difficulty organizing the household in this way and collecting the data accordingly. For the
purpose of this study we confine our analysis to households comprising at least two cells, which
reduces the sample size to 1430 households and 3979 cells.
       Consumption expenditures are recorded in several parts: first, all public expenditures
within the household are collected (housing, electricity bills etc). Regarding food expenditures, a
detailed account is made of who shares which meal and how much money is specifically used to
prepare this meal (the "DQ", i.e. "dépenses quotidiennes," which is the name the Senegalese give
to the amount of money a woman has at her disposal to buy fresh ingredients for the meals of the
day). Then individual consumption is collected at the cell level (such as clothing, mobile phone,
transportation, food outside the home), by interviewing directly the cell's head. Finally,
expenditures that are shared between several cells but not the whole household are collected.
Hence, a measure of per capita consumption can be constructed at the cell level
       Thanks to these features of our data we can construct a relatively individualized measure
of consumption, which is rarely available in household surveys, thus allowing us to un-pack the
household Engel curve. The measure of cell-specific total spending we use is the amount of
expenditures specific to the cell (eventually shared with some other cell of the household) plus
the cell's imputed share of the household's joint expenditures. For consumption purposes, cell
heads are assumed to be the decision makers at the cell level.




                                                11
         When looking at total expenditures, inequalities within the household are evident. 13 The
ratio between the expenditures of the richest and the poorest group within a household can be as
high as 5.3 even after trimming off the 5% most unequal households. Computing an inequality
index for the distribution of cash expenditures in the population, we find a Gini index of 0.471 if
we attribute to each person the average per capita consumption level in his or her household. By
contrast, the index is 0.497 if instead each individual is attributed the per capita consumption in
his cell (i.e. the sum of the per capita expenditures specific to the cell and of the cell's share of
public household expenditures, distributed on a per capita basis within the cell). The Gini index
of inequality in the distribution of the cell-specific component of cash expenditures (ignoring the
joint consumption within the household) is 0.779.
         The cell-specific consumption data reveal a sizeable gender gap. Male headed cells have
a per capita consumption 33% higher than that of female headed ones, and this difference is
statistically significant at the 1% level (t= 13.12).
         Table 1 provides summary statistics for our sample on the main variables. We divide this
into household (Table 1a) and cell level by type (Table 1b). Average household food share is
62.5%, though it ranges widely, from 6.9% to 99.8%. The average size is 9 persons (larger than
for the full sample given that we exclude single-cell households), ranging from 2 to 44. The
average number of cells is 2.8 (ranging from 2 to 12). 36% of cells are those of the head, 37% of
the spouse. 86.5% of household heads are male. Notice that spouses have a higher food share
than heads (Table 1b).

4.       Results comparing household and cell-specific Engel curves

         We use these data to estimate household Engel curves in two ways. The first entails
estimating the cell-specific Engel curves in equation (1) and then aggregating up to the
household level. The second is the standard method using only the household aggregate data,
ignoring the fact that we have sub-household data, as in equation (9). We then compare the two.
         Estimates with household fixed effects: Mundlak's (1978) method for estimating panel
data models is well suited to our task, whereby the household effect is replaced by a linear-in-


13
  For further discussion of intra-household inequality in Senegal and its implications for the measurement of
poverty see De Vreyer and Lambert (2020).
                                                         12
parameters function of the mean household characteristics. 14 As shown by Mundlak (1978), this
                                 
gives the same estimates for the  ( ) 's as one would obtain with the usual within-estimator

(allowing for a household fixed effect, correlated with the regressors) but also gives estimates of
    
the  's.
           Table 2 summarizes the results. The regressions included urban and regional dummy
variables as well as (log) household size and (log) cell size. The complete results for all Engel
curves are found in the Appendix B1. Appendix A3 gives results for an augmented specification
where the supplementary control variables are age, sex and education of household head; age and
education of cell head; number of children less than 10 in household and household structure.
This augmented specification gave similar results to Table 2.
                                                       
           The top two panels of Table 2 give the  and  separately for three types of people: the
household head and other members in his/her cell (type 1), head's spouses and their children
                                                                           
(type 2) and other household members (type 3). The next panel down gives  + for the same
three types, followed by test statistics. The row "+ from HH level regression" gives the
coefficient obtained by the standard household level data analysis. In other words, this is an
estimate of equation (9) but treating  as a zero-mean error term orthogonal to the regressors.
The row "+ from cell regressions" is obtained by consistent aggregation from the cell-level
Engel curves in equation (1). Here the means are computed at two levels: first, for each
                                                 
household, we compute the weighted mean of the  + coefficients, with weights equal to the
budget share of each cell. Second, we compute the average over the sample of households. Table
2 also gives the Hausman test, indicating that the fixed effects specification is to be preferred for
the cell level Engel curves (against the null hypothesis that the random effect model is the correct
specification).
           Note that Table 2 provides results for public consumption as well as private consumption.
While the public consumption Engel curve makes sense at the household level, that is not so at
cell level, since public consumption is assigned on a per capita basis. For completeness we give
the cell Engel curves for this case, but it should be noted that they do not have the same



14
     Also see the discussion of this method and extensions in Wooldridge (2018).


                                                          13
interpretation. Thus, we label the column for public goods with parentheses, as "(public)", to
remind readers of this difference with regard to the cell-level Engel curves.
       The main results for the quadratic Engel curves are given in Appendix A4. The
coefficients on the squared terms are more often significant for the household-level Engel curves
than for the cell-level. Indeed, the coefficients on the squared terms are not significantly different
from zero in four out of six cases for the cell-level regressions. When estimated using only the
household level data, the coefficients on household total spending are reasonably similar
between the linear and quadratic specifications, with the latter estimated at mean points
(comparing the estimates of Tables 2 and A4). On the other hand, the corresponding aggregated
cell-level Engel coefficients increase substantially in absolute value when we switch to the
quadratic specification (even though the underlying quadratic terms are generally not significant)
and the coefficients seem unreasonably large. Finally, when switching to the quadratic, we are
still led to conclude that the standard household-level Engel curves (estimated on household
aggregate data) are deceptive about the underlying cell-level Engel curves when aggregated to
household level. Overall, these observations lead us to prefer the standard Working-Leser form.
We confine attention to that specification below.
                                                 
       We cannot reject the null hypothesis that  =0 in most cases. So our results are generally
consistent with the separable structure of the two-stage models as discussed in Section 2, which
is a necessary but not sufficient condition for these models to be valid. The main exception is
education spending, for which a strong external effect is evident. This can be interpreted as a
social effect of education, such that, at a given level of own-spending, individuals living in richer
households feel social pressure to spend more on their children's schooling. Here the social
effect could well be the father exercising influence over the spouse(s) to spend more on his
children's schooling (including making conditional monetary transfers to), though some role may
also be played by competition among the wives.
       In the case of food, Engel's Law (+ < 0) is coming primarily from the "own-spending"
effect (the ) rather than the external effect ( ), though both go in the same direction, consistent
with Engel's Law. For a majority of categories, the two effects go in the same direction. The
exceptions are transport and clothing; in the case of transport the positive own-spending effect is
partly offset by a negative external effect, with the opposite pattern for clothing (except for that

                                                 14
of the head). The own expenditure effects () and total effects (+) are positive for all
categories of private goods except food, implying that all except food are luxury goods. As
expected, food is a necessity.
        For most categories, the Engel parameters are similar within the household, for both the
        
 's and  's. Statistically, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that spouse and head have the
same Engel curves for food, public expenditures, clothing and other goods.
        Table 3 provides the estimates of the Working-Leser Engel curves constrained to have

 =0. This gives more precise estimates. 15
        Comparison of household and cell-based estimates: Our results suggest large biases in
the standard estimates of the household Engel parameters from only household aggregate data.
For only two categories of spending (transport and clothing) can we not reject the null hypothesis
that the household-level estimation of the Engel curves gives the same parameter estimates as
one would obtain by consistent aggregation of the individual-level Engel curves for household
members. For education, food and other goods and services the differences in the coefficients are
sizeable as well as statistically significant (Table 2). When we constrain the estimates for (non-
education) spending such that  = 0 we find that the null that the coefficients are the same can
be rejected for every category of spending (Table 3)
        A further insight into the extent of the bias is in Figure 1, which provides the cell-based
density functions of the Engel parameters across households for each category of spending, as
derived from Table 2. 16 It is notable how tight the distributions are around their means from
Table 2. When we compare these densities with the results from the standard household-level
specification in Table 2 we see that for every category, the latter are well outside the bulk of the
density function of Engel parameters. Clearly, these are not small biases.
        For food, Engel's Law holds either way, although the cell analysis indicates a far steeper
decline in the food share as total consumption rises; indeed, the estimated parameter is 2.5 times
greater when we use the cell data and aggregate up to the household level. At the mean budget
share for food of 0.625, this difference would reduce the implied income elasticity of demand for


15
   Tables A5 to A8 in Appendix A reproduces the results presented in tables 3 to 6 for augmented specifications that
include a fuller set of controls.
16
   20 extreme observations were dropped to make the density functions easier to view. This trimming mostly
affected the food Engel coefficients; the mean food coefficient for the trimmed distribution in Figure 1 is -0.254.
                                                         15
food (assuming inequality neutrality) by one third--from 0.82 (using household data only) to
0.55 (using cell data).
       It is interesting to note that for food (in general consumed jointly by all household
members), as well as for the public goods, the cell-level Engel parameters are very similar across
individual types (specifically for the household head and his spouse(s)). On the other hand for
goods such as clothing and transports, some cell level heterogeneity in Engel parameters emerge.
       To help interpret our results, consider the effects on the budget share devoted to food by a
household comprising two adults in the following stylized cases:
       Case 1: Total spending by the head increases in the amount =  with no external
       effect and no change in the spending done directly by the spouse. The share of the head's
                               
       spending going to food ( ) changes by  / and the share of total household
                                                     
       spending devoted to food (  ) changes by   = ( -   +  )/.
       Case 2: This is the reverse: the spouse's total spending increases in the amount = 
       and (similarly to Case 1) there is no external effect and no change in the spending done
                                                                               
       directly by the head. The share of the spouse's spending going to food ( ) changes by
        / and the share of total household spending devoted to food changes by   =
        
       ( -   +  )/.
We saw in Table 1b that heads have a lower food share than spouses, namely 57.1% and 66.9%
respectively, with a household food share of 62.5% (Table 1a). Thus, Case 1 changes the
household food share by -0.26/ while it changes by -0.16/ for Case 2. The food share
falls less when the spending gain is for the spouse. Given the similarity in their Engel
parameters, the difference in the impact on aggregate food share between the two cases (0.10/
) is almost entirely due to the difference in individual food shares between the head and the
                           
spouse (at mean points,  -  = -0.10).

5.     Sources of bias
       Recall that our model points to two main sources of bias in the standard household-level
Engel curves, namely the confounding differences across households in either the household
             
effects (the  's), and the -weighted Theil index ( 's). In this section we use our data to see



                                                 16
which confounder matters most, so as to better understand the sources of bias in standard
household Engel curves.
         We begin in Table 4 by adding one or both of the two confounders to a standard
household Engel curve. This makes it very clear that the household effects are the main source of
bias, since the gap between the standard household-level estimates of + and our aggregated
cell-specific coefficients is much reduced when we control for household fixed effects, while the
impact of controlling for the -weighted Theil index is much smaller and goes in the other
direction. 17
         As a corroboration of that finding, if the household effects are indeed the main source of
bias then we should get similar results to the standard household Engel curve if we ignore the

 's when estimating our cell-based Engel curves. Table 5 gives the analogous results to Table 2
             
ignoring the  's in (1), which is then estimated by OLS. This confirms our intuition. Consider
for instance the food Engel curve, for which the estimate of + in Table 5, based on the cell-
model, falls to -0.091, which is fairly close to the household-based estimate (-0.112). The gap
between Table 2 and Table 5 is mainly due to the difference in the estimated 's. Using OLS one
would (incorrectly) reject the two-stage structure as a model for household decision making.
         To further understand the sources of bias we also provide regressions for both of the
confounding components of the error term in the standard Engel curve estimated on household
data alone. The total bias in estimates of + can be decomposed into the bias due to the 's and
that due to the 's. 18 In order to assess the relative weight of these two sources of bias, we look
at how these confounders correlate with log of total expenditures and log of household
size. Table 6 shows the results of the regressions, for each category of goods, of each of these
confounders on all variables included in the Engel curve specification. 19 (The Appendix B3 gives
full results.) The top panel of Table 6 gives results for the household effects while the lower
panel gives results for the -weighted Theil index. We have greater explanatory power (higher


17
   Appendix B2 gives results with the full set of controls, though this makes little difference. It also shows that using
the intra-household Theil index directly rather than the -weighted Theil gives very similar results.
18
   More precisely, the bias is the regression coefficient of  on ln    ( , ln 
                                                                                       / (ln 
                                                                                                    )), which is the sum
                                   
of the regression coefficient of  on ln    
                                             and that of  
                                                            on ln  .
19
   To calculate the fixed effect we used the STATA predict command (which is akin to averaging the residuals of
the Mundlak estimates of the Engel curves over cells). The estimates in Table 6 are based on the cell-level Engel
curves with the basic control variables. Appendix A8 provides results using a fuller set of controls.
                                                           17
R2) for the 's. We see that household total spending is a significant predictor of the household
effects in all categories. 20 For food and "public" expenditures, the effect is positive, while it is
negative for other categories of spending. (Log household size has a negative effect, and the sum
of the coefficients on log total spending and log household size is close to zero for most
categories, suggesting that the relevant predictor is log per capita spending.)
         Turning next to the lower panel of Table 6, we find that the intra-household -weighted
Theil index of every category of spending is correlated with one or both of log household
expenditure and log household size. This holds with or without the extra controls. The -
weighted inequality index for transport, clothing, education and other spending tends to rise with
household total spending, while falling for food and public spending.
         Both confounders are significantly correlated with total household spending, but in
                                                                                
opposite directions. And for all categories of spending, the effect through the  's dominates that
via the  's. For the food Engel curve, the 
                                            's are positively correlated with ln  while the

 's are negatively correlated. On balance, the positive effect through the 
                                                                            's is dominant. All
other consumption categories also have offsetting components of the bias term, though here the
sign pattern is reversed, with the 
                                    's negatively correlated with ln  while the 
                                                                                 
                                                                                 's are

correlated positively. Again, the dominant channel of confounding is the latent household effects
in standard Engel curves.
         This pattern we find in the directions and sizes of the two sources of bias in + implies
that only adding controls for intra-household inequality to a standard household-level Engel
curve will increase the bias.
         We also augmented the regressions for the confounders with other control variables; full
details are found in the Appendix B3. For one or more categories of spending, the household
effect was also correlated with the number of children, and the age, gender and education of the
head. While significant in many cases, adding the extra covariates did not much reduce the
(absolute value) of the coefficient on (log) total spending.




20
   Note that this is consistent with the fact that we find support for the two-stage structure. Differences in household
total spending are correlated with the household effect but individuals are largely basing their own budget
allocations on their share of household total spending.
                                                           18
6.        Conclusions

          Traditional Engel curves can hide considerable heterogeneity in parameters and resource
allocation within households. Furthermore, this heterogeneity need not be ignorable from the
point of view of reliably estimating household Engel curves. Indeed, once we depart from the
unitary model of the household, the interpretation of standard household-level Engel curves
becomes unclear.
          We have derived conditions for consistent aggregation to the household level of
individual Engel curves of the Working-Leser form. Our approach allows both internal and
external income effects at individual level. Unpacking household Engel curves this way reveals
the conditions required for the standard household Engel curve to be unbiased in the presence of
intra-household inequality and latent behavioral heterogeneity across households.
          We have applied these ideas to an unusual data set for Senegal in which the household
spending choices are identified at sub-household level by exploiting the "cell" structure that is
common in Senegalese households. This provides a rare window for unpacking household Engel
curves.
          Two key lessons emerge. First, the (often-assumed) two-stage structure in bargaining-
collective models of the household carries a testable implication with our data, namely that
household spending should only matter to individual choices via the intra-household allocation
of total spending. This exclusion restriction is generally consistent with our results. The
exception is education spending, for which cell-specific budget shares are independently, and
significantly, affected by the household's overall standard of living.
          Second, our data reveal large biases in the standard household-level Engel curves due to
correlated heterogeneity at sub-household level. For example, for the food share Engel curve, the
coefficient on log total household spending is -0.11 using only household data but -0.28 when
one estimates the Engel curve from the sub-household data and aggregates up to the household
data. This is enough to reduce the income elasticity of demand for food (evaluated at mean food
share) by one third, from 0.82 to 0.55.
          There are two aspects of these findings that call for a note of caution. The first is that,
while the two-stage structure assumed in implementations of the collective model performs well,
this does not validate all aspects of that model, such as the assumption of Pareto efficiency
                                                    19
within households. The second is that our test of the two-stage structure allows for latent
household heterogeneity, in the form of a household fixed effect in Engel curves. Two-stage
budgeting does not do so well when we relax this, to allow the possibility that the household
preference parameter is itself influenced by total household spending.
       In these data we find that the bulk of the bias is accountable to the influence of household
fixed effects on sub-household Engel curves. The channel of bias via intra-household inequality
partially offsets that due to the latent household effects in standard Engel curves calibrated to
only household-level data. Thus, only adding controls to reflect intra-household inequality will
tend to increase the bias in household-level Engel curves.
       Given that we find (at least for our data) that the bulk of the bias in standard household
Engel curves is due to household effects on sub-household Engel curves, it may be expected that
the most promising means of removing (or at least attenuating) the bias is to use longitudinal
data, assuming that the confounding household effect in individual consumption behavior is time
invariant. That conclusion remains to be investigated further in future work.




                                                 20
                     Table 1a: Summary statistics at household level


 Variable                                     N        Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max
 Log(household exp. per cap.)                1,430     12.414    0.835      10.344   15.315
 Hhold share food exp.                       1,430     0.625     0.187       0.069   0.998
 Hhold share public exp.                     1,430     0.088     0.082       0.000   0.808
 Hhold share transport exp.                  1,430     0.060     0.096       0.000   0.835
 Hhold share clothing exp.                   1,430     0.065     0.070       0.000   0.888
 Hhold share education exp.                  1,430     0.024     0.056       0.000   0.818
 Hhold share other exp.                      1,430     0.139     0.117       0.000   0.892
 HHead is male                               1,430     0.857     0.351       0.000   1.000
 Head's age                                  1,429     51.667    13.852     20.000   93.000
 Head's educ. 1 to 3 years                   1,430     0.034     0.182       0.000   1.000
 Head's educ. 4 to 5 years                   1,430     0.101     0.302       0.000   1.000
 Head's educ. junior school                  1,430     0.075     0.263       0.000   1.000
 Head's educ. High school or more            1,430     0.090     0.287       0.000   1.000
 Head's educ. Koranic                        1,430     0.301     0.459       0.000   1.000
 Household size                              1,430     9.055     5.165       2.000   44.000
 Number of cells                             1,430     2.790     1.193       2.000   12.000
 Two cells: Head + SP                        1,430     0.446     0.497       0.000   1.000
 Two cells: Head + Oth                       1,430     0.110     0.313       0.000   1.000
 At least 3 cells: Head + n SP               1,430     0.097     0.295       0.000   1.000
 At least 3 cells: Head + n SP + Oth         1,430     0.287     0.453       0.000   1.000
 Other kinds                                 1,430     0.060     0.238       0.000   1.000
 Number of kids less than 10                 1,430     2.720     2.328       0.000   16.000
 Dakar                                       1,430     0.327     0.469       0.000   1.000
 Other urban                                 1,430     0.201     0.401       0.000   1.000
 Rural                                       1,430     0.473     0.499       0.000   1.000
 Diourbel                                    1,430     0.040     0.196       0.000   1.000
 Fatick                                      1,430     0.082     0.274       0.000   1.000
 Kaolack                                     1,430     0.068     0.252       0.000   1.000
 Kolda                                       1,430     0.052     0.222       0.000   1.000
 Louga                                       1,430     0.087     0.283       0.000   1.000
 Matam                                       1,430     0.125     0.331       0.000   1.000
 Saint-Louis                                 1,430     0.058     0.234       0.000   1.000
 Tambacounda                                 1,430     0.048     0.214       0.000   1.000
 Thies                                       1,430     0.068     0.252       0.000   1.000
 Ziguinchor                                  1,430     0.038     0.192       0.000   1.000
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.




                                                  21
                                                               Table 1b: Summary statistics at cell level

                                             Head                                         Spouses                                     Other
Variable               N        Mean         Std.      Min       Max      N      Mean       Std.    Min      Max      N      Mean     Std.      Min      Max
                                             Dev.                                          Dev.                                       Dev.
Log(Cell exp. per    1,430     12.634        0.935    10.263    16.460   1,485   12.214    0.830    9.932   15.479   1,064   12.265   0.809    10.068   16.049
cap.)
Cell share food      1,430      0.571        0.222    0.020     1.000    1,485   0.669     0.192    0.082   1.000    1,064   0.611    0.197    0.018    1.000
exp.
Cell share public    1,430      0.081        0.089    0.000     0.924    1,485   0.090     0.092    0.000   0.834    1,064   0.098    0.094    0.000    0.740
exp.
Cell share           1,430      0.089        0.137    0.000     0.939    1,485   0.037     0.079    0.000   0.861    1,064   0.051    0.097    0.000    0.842
transport exp.
Cell share           1,430      0.067        0.084    0.000     0.973    1,485   0.067     0.079    0.000   0.833    1,064   0.079    0.091    0.000    0.978
clothing exp.
Cell share           1,430      0.013        0.056    0.000     0.827    1,485   0.022     0.058    0.000   0.885    1,064   0.017    0.051    0.000    0.706
education exp.
Cell share other     1,430      0.179        0.165    0.000     0.917    1,485   0.114     0.117    0.000   0.855    1,064   0.144    0.124    0.000    0.944
exp.
Cell's head is       1,430      0.865        0.377    0.000     4.000    1,485   0.018     0.241    0.000   4.000    1,064   0.474    0.602    0.000    4.000
male
Cell head's age      1,429     51.750        13.946   20.000    95.000   1,485   39.485   13.011    15.00   96.000   1,063   35.352   14.192   13.000   98.000
                                                                                                      0
Cell head's educ.:   1,430      0.034        0.182    0.000     1.000    1,485   0.043     0.203    0.000   1.000    1,064   0.055    0.229    0.000    1.000
1 to 3 years
Cell head's educ.:   1,430      0.101        0.302    0.000     1.000    1,485   0.091     0.288    0.000   1.000    1,064   0.147    0.354    0.000    1.000
4 to 5 years
Cell head's educ.:   1,430      0.075        0.263    0.000     1.000    1,485   0.044     0.205    0.000   1.000    1,064   0.068    0.251    0.000    1.000
junior school
Cell head's educ.:   1,430      0.091        0.290    0.000     2.000    1,485   0.038     0.194    0.000   2.000    1,064   0.055    0.229    0.000    1.000
High school +
Cell head's educ.:   1,430      0.302        0.461    0.000     2.000    1,485   0.178     0.382    0.000   1.000    1,064   0.184    0.390    0.000    2.000
Koranic
Cell size            1,430      2.236        1.894    1.000     15.000   1,485   4.166     2.109    1.000   12.000   1,064   3.400    1.798    1.000    14.000
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
                                     Table 2: Mundlak estimates of Engel curves

                                       Food          (Public)        Transport        Clothing       Education       Other
  for head's cell                      -0.072        -0.027          -0.028           0.008          0.085           0.035
 (s.e.)                                (0.038)       (0.020)         (0.024)          (0.020)        (0.013)         (0.030)
  for spouses' cell type               -0.079        -0.028          -0.024           -0.024         0.087           0.068
 (s.e.)                                (0.048)       (0.026)         (0.030)          (0.025)        (0.016)         (0.038)
  for o. members' cells                -0.025        -0.025          -0.017           -0.041         0.083           0.024
 (s.e.)                                (0.046)       (0.025)         (0.029)          (0.024)        (0.015)         (0.037)
  for head's cell                      -0.212        -0.036          0.103            0.018          0.017           0.109
 (s.e)                                 (0.015)       (0.008)         (0.010)          (0.008)        (0.005)         (0.012)
  for spouses' cells                   -0.204        -0.037          0.090            0.055          0.025           0.071
 (s.e)                                 (0.021)       (0.011)         (0.013)          (0.011)        (0.007)         (0.016)
  for o. members's cells               -0.260        -0.035          0.084            0.071          0.025           0.115
 (s.e.)                                (0.017)       (0.009)         (0.011)          (0.009)        (0.006)         (0.014)
 + for head's cell                     -0.284        -0.063          0.076            0.026          0.102           0.144
 (s.e)                                 (0.041)       (0.022)         (0.025)          (0.021)        (0.014)         (0.032)
 + for spouses' cells                  -0.283        -0.064          0.066            0.031          0.112           0.138
 (s.e)                                 (0.042)       (0.023)         (0.026)          (0.022)        (0.014)         (0.033)
 + for o. members' cells               -0.284        -0.060          0.067            0.030          0.108           0.140
 (s.e)                                 (0.043)       (0.023)         (0.027)          (0.022)        (0.014)         (0.034)
 F stat. spouses vs head diff.         0.010         0.034           2.672            1.146          10.202          0.582
 (p-value)                             (0.920)       (0.853)         (0.102)          (0.284)        (0.001)         (0.445)
 F stat. other vs head diff.           0.003         0.282           1.356            0.419          2.478           0.214
 (p-value)                             (0.955)       (0.595)         (0.244)          (0.518)        (0.115)         (0.644)
 F stat. spouses vs other diff.        0.016         0.402           0.018            0.039          0.843           0.019
 (p-value)                             (0.899)       (0.526)         (0.893)          (0.844)        (0.359)         (0.890)
 + from hhld regression                -0.112        0.002           0.051            0.002          0.008           0.048
 (s.e.)                                (0.006)       (0.003)         (0.004)          (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.004)
 + from cell regressions               -0.284        -0.063          0.070            0.029          0.108           0.141
 (s.e.)                                (0.041)       (0.022)         (0.026)          (0.021)        (0.014)         (0.033)
 z stat. hhold vs cell reg. diff.      4.050         1.850           -0.500           -0.690         -3.710          -2.450
 (p-value)                             (0.000)       (0.064)         (0.616)          (0.493)        (0.000)         (0.014)
 Chi2 stat. Hausman test f.e.          79.024        49.856          65.660           57.201         121.447         55.813
 (p-value)                             (0.000)       (0.049)         (0.001)          (0.010)        (0.000)         (0.014)
 Number of households                  1,430         1,430           1,430            1,430          1,430           1,430
 Number of cells                       3,979         3,979           3,979            3,979          3,979           3,979
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
Note: Other covariates in regressions include urban and regional dummies, together with (log) household size and (log) cell size.
The  are the coefficients of total household expenditures in cell level Engel curves, while the  are the coefficients of own (cell)
expenditures. + from h'hold regression is the standard Engel coefficient obtained from regression at the household level, while
+ from cell regressions is the comparable Engel coefficient obtained by consistently aggregating cell level estimates. Standard
errors in parentheses. Bootstrapped p-values for the z-stat of the difference between the household and the cell level estimates (50
replications).
    Table 3: Mundlak estimates for linear Engel curves, constrained to have =0, save education

                                       Food            (Public)       Transport      Clothing       Education        Other
  for head's cell                      0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000          0.085            0.000
 (s.e.)                                (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.013)          (0.000)
  for spouses' cell type               0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000          0.087            0.000
 (s.e.)                                (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.016)          (0.000)
  for o. members' cells                0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000          0.083            0.000
 (s.e.)                                (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.015)          (0.000)
  for head's cell                      -0.221          -0.037         0.100          0.037          0.017            0.103
 (s.e)                                 (0.009)         (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.005)          (0.007)
  for spouses' cells                   -0.220          -0.038         0.090          0.046          0.025            0.095
 (s.e)                                 (0.011)         (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.007)          (0.009)
  for o. members' cells                -0.231          -0.034         0.089          0.050          0.025            0.102
 (s.e.)                                (0.012)         (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.006)          (0.009)
 + for head's cell                     -0.221          -0.037         0.100          0.037          0.102            0.103
 (s.e)                                 (0.009)         (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.014)          (0.007)
 + for spouses' cells                  -0.220          -0.038         0.090          0.046          0.112            0.095
 (s.e)                                 (0.011)         (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.014)          (0.009)
 + for o. members' cells               -0.231          -0.034         0.089          0.050          0.108            0.102
 (s.e)                                 (0.012)         (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.014)          (0.009)
 F stat. spouses vs head diff.         0.004           0.038          3.026          2.728          10.202           1.051
 (p-value)                             (0.948)         (0.846)        (0.082)        (0.099)        (0.001)          (0.305)
 F stat. other vs head diff.           0.875           0.232          2.433          4.482          2.478            0.006
 (p-value)                             (0.350)         (0.630)        (0.119)        (0.034)        (0.115)          (0.939)
 F stat. spouses vs other diff.        0.811           0.346          0.006          0.423          0.843            0.520
 (p-value)                             (0.368)         (0.557)        (0.940)        (0.516)        (0.359)          (0.471)
 + from h'hold regression              -0.112          0.002          0.051          0.002          0.008            0.048
 (s.e.)                                (0.006)         (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.004)
 + from cell regressions               -0.223          -0.037         0.093          0.044          0.108            0.100
 (s.e.)                                (0.009)         (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.014)          (0.007)
 z stat. h'hold vs cell reg. diff.     6.740           4.640          -3.450         -3.390         -3.710           -3.870
 (p-value)                             (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.000)          (0.000)
 Number of households                  1,430           1,430          1,430          1,430          1,430            1,430
 Number of cells                       3,979           3,979          3,979          3,979          3,979            3,979
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
Note: Other covariates in regressions include urban and regional dummies, together with (log) household size and (log) cell size.
The  are the coefficients of total household expenditures in cell level Engel curves. They are here constrained to be equal to 0,
except for education. The  are the coefficients of own (cell) expenditures. + from hhld regression is the standard Engel
coefficient obtained from regression at the household level, while + from cell regressions is the comparable Engel coefficient
obtained by consistently aggregating cell level estimates. Standard errors in parentheses. Bootstrapped p-values for the z-stat of
the difference between the household and the cell level estimates (50 replications).




                                                                 24
        Table 4: Impact of confounders on log household expenditure per capita coefficient

                                    Food        (Public)      Transport       Clothing        Education            Other
+ from h'hold regression           -0.112        0.002          0.051           0.002           0.008              0.048
    No extra covariate             (0.006)      (0.003)        (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.002)            (0.004)
(1) -weighted Theil only           -0.097        0.003          0.043           -0.001          0.008              0.046
                                   (0.006)      (0.003)        (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.002)            (0.005)
    (2) Fixed effect only          -0.226        -0.035         0.110           0.026           0.027              0.109
                                   (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)            (0.002)
          (1) + (2)                -0.217        -0.034         0.104           0.024           0.028              0.106
                                   (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)            (0.002)
 + from cell regression            -0.284        -0.063         0.070           0.029           0.108              0.141
  No extra covariate                 (0.041)      (0.022)        (0.026)        (0.021)         (0.014)            (0.033)
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
Note: standard errors are between parentheses. Other covariates include (log) household size, and regional and rural/urban
dummies. The table shows the values of the log household per capita expenditure coefficient in a household level Engel curve
estimation (equation (9)). The first line shows the results obtained when the expenditure for a given class of items is regressed
on log household expenditures per capita with controls for log household size and location dummies (as in table 2, line +
from hhld regression). Lines 2 to 4 show the values of the coefficient when the -weighted Theil is added to the regressors (line
2), or the fixed effect (line 3) or both (line 4). The last line displays the values obtained when the coefficient is built by
consistently aggregating estimates of the cell level Engel curves following equation (10) (same as table 2, line + from cell
regression).




                                                             25
                                                     Table 5: OLS estimates

                                                 Food        (Public)      Transport      Clothing      Education         Other
      for head's cell                           0.141         0.030          -0.074        -0.032         -0.000          -0.065
     (s.e.)                                     (0.014)       (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.005)         (0.011)
      for spouses' cell type                    0.044         0.038          -0.016        -0.032         -0.012          -0.022
     (s.e.)                                     (0.016)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.008)        (0.005)         (0.013)
      for o. members' cells                     0.141         0.042          -0.038        -0.060         -0.015          -0.070
     (s.e.)                                     (0.016)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.008)        (0.005)         (0.013)
      for head's cell                           -0.239        -0.028         0.122          0.027         0.004           0.114
     (s.e)                                      (0.012)       (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.004)         (0.009)
      for spouses' cells                        -0.129        -0.037         0.052          0.030         0.025           0.059
     (s.e)                                      (0.016)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.008)        (0.005)         (0.012)
      for o. members's cells                    -0.227        -0.029         0.072          0.055         0.022           0.107
     (s.e.)                                     (0.015)       (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.005)         (0.012)
     + for head's cell                          -0.098        0.002          0.048         -0.005         0.004           0.049
     (s.e)                                      (0.007)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.005)
     + for spouses' cells                       -0.085        0.002          0.036         -0.002         0.012           0.037
     (s.e)                                      (0.007)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.005)
     + for o. members' cells                    -0.086        0.013          0.034         -0.005         0.007           0.037
     (s.e)                                      (0.008)       (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.006)
     F stat. spouses vs head diff.              1.996         0.000          4.812          0.293         7.757           2.575
     (p-value)                                  (0.158)       (0.996)       (0.028)        (0.588)        (0.005)         (0.109)
     F stat. other vs head diff.                1.333         4.168          5.309          0.001         0.975           2.229
     (p-value)                                  (0.248)       (0.041)       (0.021)        (0.974)        (0.324)         (0.135)
     F stat. spouses vs other diff.             0.014         4.125          0.107          0.203         2.277           0.002
     (p-value)                                  (0.907)       (0.042)       (0.744)        (0.652)        (0.131)         (0.962)
     + from hhld level regression               -0.112        0.002          0.051          0.002         0.008           0.048
     (s.e.)                                     (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.004)
     + from cell level regressions              -0.090        0.004          0.040         -0.004         0.008           0.041
     (s.e.)                                     (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.001)         (0.003)
     z stat. hhold vs cell reg. diff.           -2.630        -0.610         2.010          1.080         -0.080          1.330
     (p-value)                                  (0.009)       (0.542)       (0.044)        (0.279)        (0.936)         (0.184)
     Number of households                       1,430         1,430          1,430          1,430         1,430           1,430
     Number of cells                            3,979         3,979          3,979          3,979         3,979           3,979
    Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
    Note: OLS estimates of Engel curves at the household and cell levels. Standard errors in parentheses. Other covariates in
    regressions include urbanization and regional dummies, together with (log) household size and (log) cell size. Bootstrapped p-
    values for the z-stat of the difference between the household and the cell level estimates (50 replications).
.




                                                                   26
                               Table 6: Regressions for the two confounders
                    (1)           (2)                   (3)                (4)                 (5)              (6)
                    Food          (Public)              Transport          Clothing            Education        Other
Household effects in cell Engel curves
Log (total hhold    0.113***      0.0382***             -0.0546***         -0.0224***          -0.0140***       -0.0599***
exp.)               (0.00564)     (0.00313)             (0.00316)          (0.00244)           (0.00152)        (0.00412)
Log (hhold size)    -0.214***     -0.0349***            0.0740***          0.0356***           0.0151***        0.124***
                    (0.00755)     (0.00419)             (0.00423)          (0.00326)           (0.00204)        (0.00552)
R2                  0.441         0.289                 0.391              0.149               0.105            0.312
Intra-household Theil indices (-weighted)
Log (total hhold    -0.0101*** -0.00104***              0.00493***         0.00127***          0.000158**       0.00482***
exp.)               (0.00131)     (0.000121)            (0.000695)         (0.000161)          (7.88e-05)       (0.000629)
Log (hhold size)    0.00305*      2.76e-05              -0.00219**         0.000167            0.000448***      -0.00149*
                    (0.00176)     (0.000162)            (0.000930)         (0.000216)          (0.000105)       (0.000842)
R2                  0.055         0.070                 0.050              0.062               0.045            0.055
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations. Note: N=1,430. OLS estimates. Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1. Other covariates in regressions include urban and regional dummies. Household fixed effects were computed from cell
level regressions using STATA predict command.
Figure 1: Kernel density functions for estimated Engel parameters for log total spending




                                            28
References

Apps, Patricia F., and Ray Rees. 1988. "Taxation and the Household," Journal of Public
       Economics 35(3): 355­69.
Arnould, Eric, Craig Thompson, 2005, "Consumer Culture Theory (CCT): Twenty Years of
       Research," Journal of Consumer Research 31(4): 868­882.
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Valérie Lechene, 2010. "Conditional Cash Transfers, Women and the
       Demand for Food." Working Paper no. 10/17, Inst. Fiscal Studies, London.
________________, and _____________, 2014, "Efficient Responses to Targeted Cash
       Transfers," Journal of Political Economy 122(1): 178-222.
Bargain, Olivier, Guy Lacroix, and Luca Tiberti, 2018, "Validating the Collective Model of the
       Household using Direct Evidence on Sharing," Partnership for Economic Policy Working
       Paper No. 2018-06.
Bourguignon, François, 1979, "Decomposable Income Inequality Measures," Econometrica 47:
       901-920.
Bourguignon, François, Martin Browning, and Pierre-André Chiappori, 2009, "Efficient Intra-
       Household Allocations and Distribution Factors: Implication and Identification," Review
       of Economic Studies 75: 503-528.
Brown, Caitlin and Rossella Calvi and Jacob Penglase, 2018, "Sharing the Pie: Undernutrition,
       Intra-Household Allocation, and Poverty."
Chavas, Jean-Paul, Martina Menon, Elisa Pagani, and Federico Perali, 2018, "Collective
       household welfare and intra-household inequality," Theoretical Economics 13: 667­696.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, 1988. "Rational Household Labor Supply." Econometrica 56:63­89.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, and Costas Meghir, 2015, "Intrahousehold Inequality." In Handbook of
       Income Distribution (Anthony B. Atkinson and François Bourguignon, eds.), 1369­1418,
       North Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
De Vreyer, Philippe, and Sylvie Lambert, 2020, "Inequality, poverty and the intra-household
       allocation of consumption in Senegal," World Bank Economic Review, in press.
De Vreyer, Philippe, Sylvie Lambert, Abla Safir and Momar B. Sylla, 2008, "Pauvreté et
       Structure Familiale, Pourquoi une Nouvelle Enquête ?", Stateco 102: 261-275.


                                              29
Dunbar, Geoffrey R., Arthur Lewbel and Krishna, Pendakur, 2013, "Children's Resources in
       Collective Households: Identification, Estimation, and an Application to Child Poverty in
       Malawi," American Economic Review 103(1): 438-71.
Engel, Ernst, 1857, "Die Productions- und Consumtionsverhältnisse des Königreichs Sachsen,"
       Zeitschrift des statistischen Bureaus des Königlich Sächsischen Ministerium des Inneren
       8­9: 28­29.
Findlay, Jeanette, and Robert E. Wright, 1996, "Gender, Poverty and the IntraHousehold
       Distribution of Resources," Review of Income and Wealth 42(3): 335-351.
Haddad, Lawrence, and Ravi Kanbur, 1990, "How Serious is the Neglect of Intra-Household
       Inequality?," Economic Journal 100: 866-881.
Houthakker, H. S., 1957, "An International Comparison of Household Expenditure Patterns,
       Commemorating the Centenary of Engel's Law," Econometrica 25:532-551.
Kanbur, Ravi, and Lawrence Haddad, 1994, "Are Better off Households More Unequal or Less
       Unequal?" Oxford Economic Papers 46(3): 445­458.
Leser, C. E. V., 1963, "Forms of Engel Functions," Econometrica 31: 694- 703.

Lise, Jeremy, and Shannon Seitz, 2011, "Consumption Inequality and Intra-household
       Allocations," Review of Economic Studies 78(1): 328-355.
Mundlak, Yair, 1978, "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data," Econometrica
       46(1): 69-85.
Phlips, Louis, 1983, Applied Consumption Analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Solomon, Michael, Gary Bamossy, Soren Askegaard, and Margaret Hogg, 2006, Consumer
       Behavior: A European Perspective, Third Edition, Harlow, Essex: Prentice Hall.Theil,
       Henri, 1967, Economics and Information Theory, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 2018, "Correlated Random Effects Models with Unbalanced Panels,"
       Journal of Econometrics, in press.
Working, H., 1943, "Statistical Laws of Family Expenditures," Journal of the American
       Statistical Association 38: 43-56.




                                              30
Appendix:

A1. An example of Engel's Law with constant individual budget shares

          Engel's Law (that the share devoted to food falls as income rises) is typically attributed to
consumer preferences. Here we illustrate that it can also arise from how intra-household
inequality interacts with heterogeneity in preferences within the household.
          Following the literature on non-unitary models, we imagine a two-stage structure. For the
purpose of this example, our characterization of the first stage follows Kanbur and Haddad
(1994) in assuming that intra-household inequality in spending emerges from Nash model of
intra-household bargaining with unequal threat points (reservation incomes if the household
breaks apart). We assume that a Nash bargain is struck for sharing household income  (for

household j) between two types of people, labelled 1 and 2, with given threat points 1 > 2 .
The solution for (1 , 2 ) maximizes (1 - 1 )(2 - 2 ) subject to 1 + 2 =  . Then the

share of  going to person 1 is:
                        1             1 -2
                 1          = 0.5 +          > 0.5                                             (A1)
                                       

Notice that 1 falls as  increases. The bargained shares will tend toward equality as one

expands the total, although the shares will never reach equality, given the inequality in threat
points.
          In the second stage, each individual allocates their share of total spending across "food"
and "non-food" goods. The new observation here is that the inequality that emerges in the first
stage has implications for household Engel curves when there are also differences in preferences
within the household. To make the argument stark, let us suppose that each individual has Cobb-
Douglas preferences over food and non-food consumption,  , 
                                                            
                                                            respectively for person i

(=1,2) in household j, with a weight on (log) food consumption of  , which is taken to be
constant across households for a given type of person. Consumption choices are constrained by
the intra-household allocation of income, as emerges from the first stage of Nash bargaining.
Given Cobb-Douglas preferences, the food share is constant for each person, being equated with
 .



                                                     31
       In this model, Engel's Law does not hold at the individual level; the own-income
elasticity of demand for food (and non-food) is unity. Nonetheless, the household aggregate food
share can vary with household total income as long as preferences and threat points differ
between people. Specifically, it is readily verified that the household aggregate food share is
given by:
                                           1 +2        (1 -2 )(1 -2 )
                   = 1 1 + 2 2 =                   +                                         (A2)
                                              2              

Only if either preferences are the same (1 = 2 ) or the threat points are the same (1 = 2 )
will the household aggregate food share identify the mean of the individual food shares, with
Engel's Law failing to hold. A case consistent with Engel's Law is when partner 1, with the
higher threat point, also has the stronger preference for food.
       Notice that an Engel curve motivated by (A2) is not estimable when the threat points in
intra-household bargaining are unobserved, as is typically the case. Instead, the estimable model
takes the form:
                       1 +2       (1 -2 )(1 -2 )
                   =          +                    +                                         (A3)
                          2             

Here  is the mean threat point for type i persons, and (1 - 2 )(1 - 2 ) becomes a parameter,
with the regression error term:
                       (1 -2 )[(1 -1 )-(2 -2 )]                 1
                   =                                with      = 0                            (A4)
                                                                

Thus, OLS applied to (A3) using only household level data will give consistent estimates of the
household Engel parameters, although the coefficients (1 , 2 ) for person-types are not
identified. However, as Section 2 shows, this unbiasedness property does not hold when we
consider the more complex, and more widely used, Working-Leser specification for the Engel
curves, allowing non-constant individual budget shares.




                                                        32
A2. Unpacking quadratic household Engel Curves.

         The "unpacked" Working-Leser Engel curve for consumption by person i (of type (, ))
in household j for an assigned private good of type k (=1,..,K) is:
            
          =  +  ln 
                      
                    +  ln 
                             
                           + 1 ln  
                                      
                                    + 2 (ln 
                                                  
                                             )² + 3 (
                                                           
                                                      )² +  + 
                                                              


         (i=1,.., ; j=1,..,m; t= (, ))                                                 (A5)
where  is the share of person i's total expenditure  devoted to good k and (for notational
                                                                            
convenience)  is redefined as total household expenditure (not per capita),  is a household

effect and  is an innovation error term. To derive the estimable household-level Engel curves

we can proceed as before by first eliminating the (unobserved) intra-household values of  by
re-writing (A5) as:
                                                                                 2
                            
          =  + ( +  + (1 + 23 ) ) ln 
                                                
                                      + 1 + 2 + 3 
                                                      
                                                    +  (A6)

Here the new error term is:
                                  
                   ln  + 3 ( )² +  + 
                                     
                                                                                        (A7)
where    / is the relative income for person i in household j. Next, on aggregating the

budget shares at the household level for good k we have:
                                                                         2
                 =                 
                   =1   =  +  +  +   ln  +  
                                            
                                               + 
                                                 
                                                                                       (A8)

Here the household-level Engel-curve parameters are related to the unpacked parameters as
follows:
                                              
                          =1   ;  +   =1  ( +  );
                              
                                           
                           =   (1 + 23 ) = 1
                              =1

                        =              
                          =1  (1 + 2 + 3 )                                              (A9)
The error term of the household Engel curve is:
                         =                  
                           =1   = 2 +3 +  + =1  
                                                
                                                                                        (A10)
where:
                 
                 2                  
                    =1   ln   3  =1 3  (ln  )²                                          (A11)



                                                  33
A3: Mundlak estimates ­ augmented specification
This table is similar to table 2, for an Engel curve specification that includes the following
supplementary control variables: age, sex and education of household head; age and education of
cell head; number of children less than 10 in household and household structure.

                                    Food           (Public)          Transport       Clothing        Education           Other
 for head's cell                    -0.080          -0.008            -0.025           0.002            0.076            0.036
(s.e.)                              (0.041)         (0.022)           (0.026)         (0.021)          (0.013)           (0.032)
 for spouses' cell type             -0.075          -0.009            -0.029          -0.028            0.079            0.061
(s.e.)                              (0.051)         (0.027)           (0.032)         (0.027)          (0.017)           (0.041)
 for o. members' cells              -0.024          -0.006            -0.022          -0.051            0.077            0.026
(s.e.)                              (0.049)         (0.026)           (0.031)         (0.026)          (0.016)           (0.039)
 for head's cell                    -0.203          -0.036            0.099            0.019            0.018            0.102
(s.e)                               (0.016)         (0.009)           (0.010)         (0.008)          (0.005)           (0.013)
 for spouses' cells                 -0.203          -0.037            0.089            0.055            0.022            0.074
(s.e)                               (0.021)         (0.011)           (0.013)         (0.011)          (0.007)           (0.017)
 for o. members's cells             -0.260          -0.035            0.083            0.077            0.025            0.111
(s.e.)                              (0.018)         (0.010)           (0.011)         (0.009)          (0.006)           (0.014)
+ for head's cell                   -0.283          -0.044            0.074            0.021            0.094            0.138
(s.e)                               (0.044)         (0.023)           (0.028)         (0.023)          (0.014)           (0.035)
+ for spouses' cells                -0.278          -0.046            0.061            0.027            0.101            0.135
(s.e)                               (0.045)         (0.024)           (0.028)         (0.024)          (0.015)           (0.036)
+ for o. members' cells             -0.284          -0.041            0.061            0.025            0.102            0.136
(s.e)                               (0.046)         (0.024)           (0.029)         (0.024)          (0.015)           (0.036)
F stat. spouses vs head             0.181            0.054            4.169            1.401            4.145            0.150
diff.
(p-value)                           (0.671)         (0.817)           (0.041)         (0.236)          (0.042)           (0.699)
F stat. other vs head diff.         0.005            0.234            2.489            0.430            3.424            0.034
(p-value)                           (0.943)         (0.629)           (0.115)         (0.512)          (0.064)           (0.853)
+ from hhld level                   -0.103           0.003            0.052            0.001            0.004            0.044
regression
(s.e.)                              (0.006)         (0.003)           (0.004)         (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.005)
+ from cell level                   -0.281          -0.044            0.065            0.025            0.099            0.137
regressions
(s.e.)                              (0.044)         (0.024)           (0.028)         (0.023)          (0.015)           (0.035)
t stat. hhold vs cell reg.          3.983            1.979            -0.487          -1.020           -6.400            -2.602
diff.
(p-value)                           (0.000)         (0.048)           (0.626)         (0.308)          (0.000)           (0.009)
Chi2 stat. Hausman test            135.844         121.198            99.323         103.602          206.664            87.356
for f.e.
(p-value)                           (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.022)         (0.011)          (0.000)           (0.121)
Number of households                1,429            1,429            1,429            1,429            1,429            1,429
Number of cells                     3,976            3,976            3,976            3,976            3,976            3,976
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
Note: Other covariates in regressions include urban and regional dummies, together with (log) household size and (log) cell size.
Supplementary control variables are: age, age^2, sex and education of household head ; age, age^2 and education of cell head ;
number of children less than 10 in household and household structure. Standard errors in parentheses.
The  are the coefficients of total household expenditures in cell level Engel curves, while the  are the coefficients of own (cell)
expenditures. + from hhld regression is the standard Engel coefficient obtained from regression at the household level, while
+ from cell regressions is the comparable Engel coefficient obtained by consistently aggregating cell level estimates.


                                                                34
A4. Mundlak estimates for the quadratic Engel curves
         Coefficients of the Engel curves for each cell type have been omitted from the table but
are available from the authors.
                                            Food         (Public)      Transport        Clothing       Education         Other
Log h'hold exp. from h'hold reg.            0.482         0.209          -0.452          -0.036          -0.019         -0.183
(++)
(s.e.)                                     (0.119)       (0.063)         (0.073)         (0.058)         (0.045)        (0.090)
Log h'hold exp. from cell reg.              0.904         0.911          -0.388          -0.882          -0.142         -0.402
(++)
(s.e.)                                     (0.705)       (0.382)         (0.433)         (0.369)         (0.236)        (0.558)
z stat. h'hold vs cell reg. diff.          -0.340        -1.130          -0.070          1.890           0.530           0.190
(p-value)                                  (0.737)       (0.259)         (0.940)         (0.059)         (0.599)        (0.852)
[log h'hold exp.]² from h'hold reg.        -0.020        -0.007          0.017           0.001           0.001           0.008
(r)
(s.e.)                                     (0.004)       (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)
[log h'hold exp.]² from cell reg. (r)      -0.064        -0.051          -0.008          0.080           0.018           0.026
(s.e.)                                     (0.038)       (0.020)         (0.023)         (0.020)         (0.013)        (0.030)
z stat. h'hold vs cell reg. diff.           0.680         1.270          0.670           -2.760          -0.950         -0.310
(p-value)                                  (0.494)       (0.204)         (0.502)         (0.006)         (0.343)        (0.759)
log h'hold exp. (+++2rlnY)                 -0.107         0.004          0.047           0.002           0.008           0.047
(h'hold reg)
(s.e.)                                     (0.006)       (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.004)
log h'hold exp. (cell reg)                 -0.963        -0.565          -0.634          1.444           0.376           0.343
(+++2rlnY)
(s.e.)                                       (0.646)       (0.349)         (0.397)        (0.338)        (0.216)         (0.511)
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. +++2rlnY evaluated at mean points. z-stats are computed using bootstrap simulations
with 50 replications. Other covariates in regressions include urbanization and regional dummies, together with (log) household
size and (log) cell size.




                                                               35
A5: Mundlak estimates, augmented specification with =0, save education
This table is similar to Table 3, for an Engel curve specification that includes the following
supplementary control variables: age, sex and education of household head; age and education of
cell head; number of children less than 10 in household and household structure.
                                    Food         Common           Transport        Clothing        Education           Other
                                                                                                                   goods/services
 for head's cell                   0.000           0.000             0.000           0.000           0.076              0.000
(s.e.)                             (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.013)            (0.000)
 for spouses' cell type            0.000           0.000             0.000           0.000           0.079              0.000
(s.e.)                             (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.017)            (0.000)
 for o. members' cells             0.000           0.000             0.000           0.000           0.077              0.000
(s.e.)                             (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.016)            (0.000)
 for head's cell                   -0.217          -0.037            0.099           0.039           0.018              0.098
(s.e)                              (0.009)         (0.005)           (0.006)        (0.005)          (0.005)            (0.007)
 for spouses' cells                -0.213          -0.038            0.086           0.048           0.022              0.093
(s.e)                              (0.012)         (0.006)           (0.007)        (0.006)          (0.007)            (0.009)
 for o. members's cells            -0.230          -0.034            0.086           0.053           0.025              0.100
(s.e.)                             (0.012)         (0.006)           (0.008)        (0.006)          (0.006)            (0.010)
+ for head's cell                  -0.217          -0.037            0.099           0.039           0.094              0.098
(s.e)                              (0.009)         (0.005)           (0.006)        (0.005)          (0.014)            (0.007)
+ for spouses' cells               -0.213          -0.038            0.086           0.048           0.101              0.093
(s.e)                              (0.012)         (0.006)           (0.007)        (0.006)          (0.015)            (0.009)
+ for o. members' cells            -0.230          -0.034            0.086           0.053           0.102              0.100
(s.e)                              (0.012)         (0.006)           (0.008)        (0.006)          (0.015)            (0.010)
F stat. spouses vs head            0.108           0.056             4.283           3.139           4.145              0.383
diff.
(p-value)                          (0.742)         (0.813)           (0.039)        (0.076)          (0.042)            (0.536)
F stat. other vs head diff.        1.208           0.204             3.427           5.388           3.424              0.034
(p-value)                          (0.272)         (0.652)           (0.064)        (0.020)          (0.064)            (0.854)
F stat. spouses vs other           1.568           0.352             0.005           0.532           0.038              0.419
diff.
(p-value)                          (0.210)         (0.553)           (0.943)        (0.466)          (0.846)            (0.517)
+ from hhld level                  -0.103          0.003             0.052           0.001           0.004              0.044
regression
(s.e.)                             (0.006)         (0.003)           (0.004)        (0.003)          (0.002)            (0.005)
+ from cell level                  -0.218          -0.037            0.091           0.046           0.099              0.096
regressions
(s.e.)                             (0.009)         (0.005)           (0.006)        (0.005)          (0.015)            (0.007)
t stat. hhold vs cell reg.         10.428          6.760             -5.666         -8.093           -6.403             -6.052
diff.
(p-value)                          (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)
Number of households               1,429           1,429             1,429           1,429           1,429              1,429
Number of cells                    3,976           3,976             3,976           3,976           3,976              3,976
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
Note: Other covariates in regressions include urban and regional dummies, together with (log) household size and (log) cell size.
Supplementary control variables are: age, age^2, sex and education of household head ; age, age^2 and education of cell head ;
number of children less than 10 in household and household structure. Standard errors in parentheses.
The  are the coefficients of total household expenditures in cell level Engel curves, while the  are the coefficients of own (cell)
expenditures. + from hhld regression is the standard Engel coefficient obtained from regression at the household level, while
+ from cell regressions is the comparable Engel coefficient obtained by consistently aggregating cell level estimates.



                                                                36
A6: Impact of confounders on log household exp. per capita coefficient
Augmented specification

This table is similar to Table 4, for an Engel curve specification that includes the following
supplementary control variables: age, sex and education of household head; age and education of
cell head; number of children less than 10 in household and household structure.


                                  Food           (Public)        Transport          Clothing          Education         Other

 + from hhld regression             -0.103          0.003            0.052              0.001             0.004            0.044
     No extra covariate             (0.006)        (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.005)
 (1) -weighted Theil only           -0.086          0.004            0.042              -0.002            0.004            0.041
                                    (0.006)        (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.005)
   (2) Fixed effect only            -0.215         -0.035            0.103              0.026             0.030            0.103
                                    (0.002)        (0.001)           (0.002)           (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.002)
          (1) + (2)                 -0.204         -0.034            0.097              0.024             0.030            0.100
                                    (0.002)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.002)
 + from cell regression             -0.281         -0.044            0.065              0.025             0.099            0.137
  No extra covariate                 (0.044)       (0.024)          (0.028)             (0.023)          (0.015)          (0.035)
 Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
 Note: standard errors are between parentheses. Other covariates include (log) household size, and regional and rural/urban
 dummies. Supplementary control variables are: age, age^2, sex and education of household head ; age, age^2 and education of
 cell head ; number of children less than 10 in household and household structure. The table shows the values of the log
 household per capita expenditure coefficient in a household level Engel curve estimation (equation (9)). The first line shows the
 results obtained when the expenditure for a given class of items is regressed on log household expenditures per capita with
 controls for log household size and location dummies (as in table 2, line + from hhld regression). Lines 2 to 4 show the
 values of the coefficient when the -weighted Theil is added to the regressors (line 2), or the fixed effect (line 3) or both (line
 4). The last line displays the values obtained when the coefficient is built by consistently aggregating estimates of the cell level
 Engel curves following equation (10) (same as table 2, line + from cell regression).




                                                                37
  A7: OLS estimates of Engel curves ­ augmented specification

  This table is similar to table 5, for an Engel curve specification that includes the following
  supplementary control variables: age, sex and education of household head; age and education of
  cell head; number of children less than 10 in household and household structure.

                                        Food           (Public)        Transport       Clothing        Education           Other
 for head's cell                        0.142           0.032           -0.068           -0.036          -0.004           -0.066
(s.e.)                                  (0.014)         (0.008)         (0.009)          (0.008)         (0.005)          (0.011)
 for spouses' cell type                 0.051           0.040           -0.017           -0.031          -0.016           -0.026
(s.e.)                                  (0.016)         (0.009)         (0.010)          (0.008)         (0.005)          (0.013)
 for o. members' cells                  0.140           0.042           -0.037           -0.063          -0.014           -0.068
(s.e.)                                  (0.016)         (0.009)         (0.010)          (0.009)         (0.005)          (0.013)
 for head's cell                        -0.233          -0.029           0.118           0.030            0.004            0.109
(s.e)                                   (0.012)         (0.006)         (0.007)          (0.006)         (0.004)          (0.009)
 for spouses' cells                     -0.122          -0.038           0.049           0.029            0.022            0.059
(s.e)                                   (0.016)         (0.009)         (0.010)          (0.008)         (0.005)          (0.013)
 for o. members's cells                 -0.215          -0.033           0.071           0.060            0.017            0.099
(s.e.)                                  (0.015)         (0.008)         (0.010)          (0.008)         (0.005)          (0.012)
+ for head's cell                       -0.091          0.003            0.050           -0.005           0.000            0.043
(s.e)                                   (0.007)         (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.002)          (0.006)
+ for spouses' cells                    -0.071          0.002            0.032           -0.002           0.006            0.033
(s.e)                                   (0.007)         (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.002)          (0.006)
+ for o. members' cells                 -0.075          0.009            0.034           -0.003           0.003            0.032
(s.e)                                   (0.009)         (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.005)         (0.003)          (0.007)
F stat. spouses vs head diff.           3.988           0.035            8.672           0.399            3.098            1.521
(p-value)                               (0.046)         (0.852)         (0.003)          (0.528)         (0.078)          (0.217)
F stat. other vs head diff.             2.062           1.238            5.448           0.173            0.589            1.772
(p-value)                               (0.151)         (0.266)         (0.020)          (0.677)         (0.443)          (0.183)
F stat. spouses vs other diff.          0.127           1.604            0.097           0.023            0.651            0.048
(p-value)                               (0.721)         (0.205)         (0.755)          (0.880)         (0.420)          (0.827)
+ from hhld level regression            -0.103          0.003            0.052           0.001            0.004            0.044
(s.e.)                                  (0.006)         (0.003)         (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.002)          (0.005)
+ from cell level regressions           -0.079          0.004            0.039           -0.003           0.004            0.036
(s.e.)                                  (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.003)          (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.004)
t stat. hhold vs cell reg. diff.        -3.124          -0.190           2.693           1.000            0.256            1.271
(p-value)                               (0.002)         (0.849)         (0.007)          (0.318)         (0.798)          (0.204)
Number of households                    1,429           1,429            1,429           1,429            1,429            1,429
Number of cells                         3,976           3,976            3,976           3,976            3,976            3,976
  Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
  Note: OLS estimates of Engel curves at the household and cell levels. Standard errors in parentheses. Other covariates in
  regressions include urbanization and regional dummies, together with (log) household size and (log) cell size. Supplementary
  control variables are: age, age^2, sex and education of household head ; age, age^2 and education of cell head ; number of
  children less than 10 in household and household structure.




                                                                  38
A8: Regressions for the two confounders, with additional controls
This table is similar to table 6, for specifications that include the following supplementary
control variables: age, sex and education of household head; age and education of cell head;
number of children less than 10 in household and household structure.

                     (1)            (2)                    (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                     Food           (Public)               Transport        Clothing         Education        Other
  Household effects in cell Engel curves
  Log (total hhold   0.110***       0.0394***              -0.0478***       -0.0240***       -0.0190***       -0.0582***
  exp.)              (0.00601)      (0.00334)              (0.00338)        (0.00262)        (0.00159)        (0.00440)
  Log (hhold size)   -0.195***      -0.0371***             0.0590***        0.0318***        0.0243***        0.117***
                     (0.0119)       (0.00661)              (0.00670)        (0.00519)        (0.00315)        (0.00872)
  R2                 0.484          0.702                  0.380            0.386            0.235            0.333
  Intra-household Theil indices ( -weighted)
  Log (total hhold   -0.0114*** -0.00118***                0.00566***       0.00153***       7.39e-05         0.00528***
  exp.)              (0.00136)      (0.000134)             (0.000712)       (0.000192)       (6.45e-05)       (0.000629)
  Log (hhold size)   0.00711*** 0.000592**                 -0.00418***      -0.000412        0.000209         -0.00332***
                     (0.00269)      (0.000266)             (0.00141)        (0.000381)       (0.000128)       (0.00125)
  R2                 0.092          0.091                  0.092            0.083            0.136            0.092
Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations. Note: N=1,430. Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Other
covariates in regressions include urban and regional dummies. Other covariates in regressions include urbanization and regional
dummies, together with (log) household size and (log) cell size. Supplementary control variables are: age, age^2, sex and
education of household head ; age, age^2 and education of cell head ; number of children less than 10 in household and
household structure.




                                                              39
       Appendix B
       B1 Mundlak estimates of Engel curves.
                                      Table B1. 1: Household level Engel curves estimates
VARIABLES                                        Food      (Public)    Transport       Clothing   Education      Other
Log(total hhold exp. per cap.)               -0.103***     0.00291     0.0515***       0.000598   0.00430*    0.0439***
                                             (0.00634)   (0.00334)     (0.00392)      (0.00308)   (0.00234)   (0.00474)
Log(hhold size)                             -0.0696***     0.00240     0.0171**        0.000661   0.0289***    0.0205**
                                              (0.0127)   (0.00668)     (0.00782)      (0.00615)   (0.00467)   (0.00947)
Nb. cells=2: Head + oth.                       -0.0136     0.00801       -0.0123       -0.00882     -0.0106    0.0374**
                                              (0.0240)    (0.0127)      (0.0148)       (0.0117)   (0.00885)    (0.0180)
Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses                -0.0184     0.00824       0.00471        0.00302    -0.00156     0.00396
                                              (0.0153)   (0.00808)     (0.00946)      (0.00745)   (0.00565)    (0.0115)
Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth.      -0.0370*** -0.00699           0.0113       0.0159**   -0.00886*    0.0257**
                                              (0.0142)   (0.00747)     (0.00875)      (0.00689)   (0.00523)    (0.0106)
Other types of households                      -0.0361    -0.00651        0.0118      -0.000311    -0.00219      0.0333
                                              (0.0281)    (0.0148)      (0.0173)       (0.0136)    (0.0104)    (0.0210)
Sex of hhold head (1 for male)                 0.00108     -0.0109        0.0180       -0.00919   -0.0227**      0.0237
                                              (0.0242)    (0.0128)      (0.0150)       (0.0118)   (0.00893)    (0.0181)
Hhold head's educ: 1 to 3 years of sch.         0.0204    -0.00854      -0.00255        -0.0111     0.00357    -0.00172
                                              (0.0217)    (0.0114)      (0.0134)       (0.0105)   (0.00801)    (0.0162)
Hhold head's educ: 4 to 5 years of sch.      -0.0283** 0.0252***        -0.00425      -0.000452    -0.00491      0.0127
                                              (0.0140)   (0.00737)     (0.00863)      (0.00679)   (0.00516)    (0.0105)
Hhold head's educ: 6 to 9 years of sch.        -0.0256   -0.000201      -0.00696        -0.0102     0.0111*   0.0318***
                                              (0.0160)   (0.00843)     (0.00987)      (0.00777)   (0.00590)    (0.0120)
Hhold head educ: 10 years of sch. or more -0.0539*** -0.00369            0.00292       -0.00164   0.0344***     0.0219*
                                              (0.0160)   (0.00843)     (0.00987)      (0.00777)   (0.00590)    (0.0120)
Hhold head has koranic educ.                  -0.00622   -0.000216      -0.00476     -0.00971**     0.00347    0.0174**
                                             (0.00952)   (0.00502)     (0.00588)      (0.00463)   (0.00351)   (0.00712)
Other urban                                   -0.0908*     0.0445*        0.0202        0.00412     -0.0268      0.0487
                                              (0.0470)    (0.0248)      (0.0290)       (0.0228)    (0.0173)    (0.0352)
Rural                                          -0.0472     0.00608        0.0374        0.00630     -0.0239      0.0213
                                              (0.0459)    (0.0242)      (0.0284)       (0.0223)    (0.0169)    (0.0344)
Diourbel                                        0.0712  -0.0870***       0.00742       -0.00455     0.0342*     -0.0213
                                              (0.0498)    (0.0263)      (0.0307)       (0.0242)    (0.0184)    (0.0372)
Fatick                                        0.0995**    -0.0462*       -0.0292        -0.0127   0.000868      -0.0122
                                              (0.0473)    (0.0250)      (0.0292)       (0.0230)    (0.0175)    (0.0354)
Kaolack                                       0.187*** -0.0759***      -0.0629**        0.00281      0.0132    -0.0638*
                                              (0.0480)    (0.0253)      (0.0296)       (0.0233)    (0.0177)    (0.0359)
kolda                                         0.152*** -0.0984***        -0.0283         0.0251      0.0182    -0.0683*
                                              (0.0485)    (0.0256)      (0.0300)       (0.0236)    (0.0179)    (0.0363)
Louga                                           0.0760   -0.0557**       -0.0123      -0.000241     0.00654     -0.0142
                                              (0.0474)    (0.0250)      (0.0293)       (0.0231)    (0.0175)    (0.0355)
Matam                                         0.146*** -0.0659***        -0.0474        0.00942     0.00702     -0.0495
                                              (0.0470)    (0.0248)      (0.0290)       (0.0228)    (0.0173)    (0.0351)
Saint-Louis                                   0.184*** -0.0958***        -0.0256        -0.0244      0.0145     -0.0525
                                              (0.0481)    (0.0254)      (0.0297)       (0.0234)    (0.0178)    (0.0360)
Tambacounda                                   0.130*** -0.0779***        0.00570        -0.0165     0.00623     -0.0474
                                              (0.0489)    (0.0258)      (0.0302)       (0.0238)    (0.0181)    (0.0366)
Thies                                         0.133***    -0.0493*       -0.0323       -0.00300     0.00820     -0.0565
                                              (0.0479)    (0.0253)      (0.0296)       (0.0233)    (0.0177)    (0.0359)
Ziguinchor                                    0.257*** -0.0940***      -0.0681**        -0.0102    5.83e-05   -0.0846**
                                              (0.0494)    (0.0261)      (0.0305)       (0.0240)    (0.0182)    (0.0370)
                                                            40
VARIABLES                                          Food          (Public)      Transport          Clothing      Education           Other
Number of cells in household                     0.000714        0.00287        -0.00465          0.00290      -0.00448**          0.00264
                                                (0.00599)      (0.00316)       (0.00370)         (0.00291)      (0.00221)        (0.00448)
Number of children less than 10 in hh.           0.000326        0.00112         0.00202         -0.000609      -0.00170*         -0.00116
                                                (0.00260)      (0.00137)       (0.00161)         (0.00126)     (0.000959)        (0.00195)
Household head's age in y.                        0.00163       -0.00147        0.000810         -0.000749      -0.000636         0.000418
                                                (0.00195)      (0.00103)       (0.00120)        (0.000946)     (0.000718)        (0.00146)
(Household head's age)^2                        -1.30e-05       1.34e-05        -8.35e-06         6.73e-06       5.92e-06        -4.73e-06
                                                (1.81e-05)     (9.54e-06)      (1.12e-05)       (8.79e-06)      (6.67e-06)       (1.35e-05)
Constant                                         1.974***        0.117**       -0.642***           0.0750         -0.0276        -0.496***
                                                  (0.109)       (0.0575)         (0.0673)         (0.0530)       (0.0402)         (0.0815)

Observations                                      1,429           1,429           1,429            1,429           1,429           1,429
R-squared                                         0.426           0.180           0.179            0.049           0.136           0.187
      Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
      Note. Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
      The reference category for urbanization and region is Dakar and for education level, it is no education. Household structure is
      described with the following series of dummies: Nb. cells=2: Head + oth equals 1 if the household is composed of 2 cells only,
      the second cell being headed by someone who isn't the spouse of the head; Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses equals one for
      households composed of more than two cells, all of them being headed either by the household head or by one of his spouse(s);
      Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth equals one for households composed of more than two cells, , that headed by the
      household head, at least one headed by a spouse of the head and at least one headed by someone not married to the household
      head. The reference category is the two cells household composed of the household head and his spouse.




                                                                    41
                                 Table B1.2: Cell level Engel curves estimates with all covariates
VARIABLES                                        Food         Common        Transport       Clothing   Education      Other
Cell type: spouse                               -0.153         0.00411         0.216*        -0.0758   -0.175***      0.183
                                               (0.194)         (0.104)        (0.123)        (0.102)    (0.0642)     (0.155)
Cell type: other                               -0.0921          0.0563          0.122        -0.0587    -0.158**      0.130
                                               (0.213)         (0.114)        (0.135)        (0.112)    (0.0704)     (0.170)
Log(total hhold exp. per cap.)               -0.0802**        -0.00805        -0.0252        0.00150   0.0756***      0.0363
                                              (0.0400)        (0.0213)       (0.0252)       (0.0211)    (0.0132)    (0.0320)
Spouse*log(hhold exp.)                         0.00519       -0.000510       -0.00364       -0.0293*     0.00381      0.0245
                                              (0.0305)        (0.0163)       (0.0193)       (0.0161)    (0.0101)    (0.0244)
Other*log(hhold exp.)                         0.0566**         0.00215        0.00329     -0.0530***     0.00158     -0.0106
                                              (0.0275)        (0.0147)       (0.0174)       (0.0145)   (0.00909)    (0.0220)
Log(total cell exp.)                         -0.203***      -0.0362***      0.0991***      0.0192**    0.0185***    0.102***
                                              (0.0158)       (0.00841)      (0.00995)      (0.00830)   (0.00521)    (0.0126)
Spouse*log(cell exp.)                        -0.000789       -0.000769       -0.00969      0.0358**      0.00314     -0.0277
                                              (0.0297)        (0.0159)       (0.0188)       (0.0157)   (0.00982)    (0.0238)
Other*log(cell exp.)                         -0.0575**         0.00116        -0.0161      0.0574***     0.00626     0.00874
                                              (0.0254)        (0.0135)       (0.0160)       (0.0134)   (0.00838)    (0.0203)
Log(hhold size)                              -0.232***       -0.0620**      0.0706**         0.0568*   0.0583***     0.108**
                                              (0.0556)        (0.0296)       (0.0351)       (0.0293)    (0.0184)    (0.0444)
Spouse*log(hhold size)                         -0.0365          0.0171      0.000424          0.0140      0.0131    -0.00820
                                              (0.0276)        (0.0147)       (0.0174)       (0.0145)   (0.00910)    (0.0220)
Other*log(hhold size)                          0.00231        -0.00241        0.00701        0.00999    -0.00880    -0.00809
                                              (0.0323)        (0.0172)       (0.0204)       (0.0170)    (0.0107)    (0.0258)
Log(cell size)                                0.229***       0.0352***     -0.0983*** -0.0283***        -0.00264   -0.135***
                                              (0.0160)       (0.00854)       (0.0101)      (0.00843)   (0.00529)    (0.0128)
Spouse*log(cell size)                           0.0212         -0.0117        0.00981     -0.0471***    -0.00481      0.0327
                                              (0.0298)        (0.0159)       (0.0188)       (0.0157)   (0.00983)    (0.0238)
Other*log(cell size)                           0.0451*        -0.00375         0.0128     -0.0626***   -0.000969     0.00944
                                              (0.0253)        (0.0135)       (0.0160)       (0.0133)   (0.00836)    (0.0202)
Nb. cells=2: Head + oth.                      -0.391**       0.218***         -0.0632         0.0221      0.0298      0.184
                                               (0.153)        (0.0815)       (0.0964)       (0.0804)    (0.0505)     (0.122)
Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses                 -0.248         -0.0668          0.123          0.127     -0.0456      0.110
                                               (0.166)        (0.0888)        (0.105)       (0.0877)    (0.0550)     (0.133)
Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth.       -0.0590**          0.0235        -0.0292        -0.0170     0.0172*   0.0644***
                                              (0.0292)        (0.0156)       (0.0185)       (0.0154)   (0.00966)    (0.0234)
Other types of households                    -0.487***       0.297***         -0.0534        0.00824      0.0231      0.212
                                               (0.171)        (0.0913)        (0.108)       (0.0902)    (0.0566)     (0.137)
Sex of hhold head (1 for male)                  0.0853       -0.0934**        -0.0260         0.0235      0.0251     -0.0146
                                              (0.0863)        (0.0461)       (0.0545)       (0.0455)    (0.0285)    (0.0690)
Hhold head's educ: 1 to 3 years of sch.         0.168*         -0.0720         0.0204        -0.0232     -0.0126     -0.0810
                                              (0.0983)        (0.0524)       (0.0620)       (0.0518)    (0.0325)    (0.0785)
Hhold head's educ: 4 to 5 years of sch.        -0.0260       0.126***         0.00140        -0.0524     -0.0328     -0.0159
                                              (0.0643)        (0.0343)       (0.0406)       (0.0339)    (0.0212)    (0.0514)
Hhold head's educ: 6 to 9 years of sch.      -0.203***       0.0864**          0.0577         0.0165      0.0223      0.0204
                                              (0.0769)        (0.0410)       (0.0485)       (0.0405)    (0.0254)    (0.0614)
Hhold head educ: 10 years of sch. or more -1.499***          1.385***         -0.0131         -0.272     0.324**      0.0759
                                               (0.418)         (0.223)        (0.264)        (0.220)     (0.138)     (0.334)
Hhold head has koranic educ.                   -0.806*       1.077***          -0.361       -0.593**      0.0468      0.636*
                                               (0.460)         (0.246)        (0.290)        (0.242)     (0.152)     (0.368)
Other urban                                     -0.428         0.436**         -0.102         -0.109     -0.0545      0.258
                                               (0.326)         (0.174)        (0.206)        (0.172)     (0.108)     (0.261)
Rural                                           -0.484         0.387**         -0.110        -0.0674     -0.0244      0.298
                                               (0.324)         (0.173)        (0.204)        (0.170)     (0.107)     (0.258)
Diourbel                                        0.467        -0.652***          0.131          0.148      0.129       -0.223
                                                               42
VARIABLES                                       Food        Common      Transport      Clothing    Education        Other
                                              (0.333)         (0.177)      (0.210)      (0.175)      (0.110)       (0.266)
Fatick                                         0.491       -0.480***         0.138       0.0892       0.0143        -0.253
                                              (0.327)         (0.174)      (0.206)      (0.172)      (0.108)       (0.261)
Kaolack                                        0.542*       -0.401**        0.0460       0.0616       0.0141        -0.263
                                              (0.329)         (0.175)      (0.207)      (0.173)      (0.109)       (0.263)
kolda                                          0.630*       -0.435**         0.169    -0.000771       0.0153        -0.379
                                              (0.329)         (0.175)      (0.207)      (0.173)      (0.109)       (0.263)
Louga                                          0.575*      -0.484***        0.0931       0.0435       0.0239        -0.251
                                              (0.327)         (0.174)      (0.206)      (0.172)      (0.108)       (0.261)
Matam                                          0.631*       -0.441**        0.0714       0.0975       0.0141        -0.373
                                              (0.326)         (0.174)      (0.206)      (0.172)      (0.108)       (0.260)
Saint-Louis                                   0.673**      -0.476***         0.110       0.0141       0.0973        -0.418
                                              (0.334)         (0.178)      (0.210)      (0.176)      (0.110)       (0.266)
Tambacounda                                    0.561*       -0.438**        0.0541       0.0384       0.0270        -0.243
                                              (0.330)         (0.176)      (0.208)      (0.174)      (0.109)       (0.264)
Thies                                          0.528        -0.367**        0.0694       0.0484      0.00294        -0.282
                                              (0.328)         (0.175)      (0.207)      (0.173)      (0.108)       (0.262)
Ziguinchor                                     0.611*      -0.512***        0.0653        0.103    -0.000836        -0.267
                                              (0.334)         (0.178)      (0.211)      (0.176)      (0.110)       (0.266)
Cell head's educ: 1 to 3 years of sch.      -0.000562       -0.00245     0.000695        0.0130     -0.00882      -0.00190
                                             (0.0270)        (0.0144)     (0.0171)     (0.0142)    (0.00893)      (0.0216)
Cell head's educ: 4 to 5 years of sch.        -0.0290        0.00219      0.00710      -0.00569     0.000829       0.0245*
                                             (0.0182)      (0.00972)      (0.0115)    (0.00960)    (0.00602)      (0.0146)
Cell head's educ: 6 to 9 years of sch.        -0.0271        0.00194     -0.00620        0.0118     -0.00114        0.0207
                                             (0.0241)        (0.0129)     (0.0152)     (0.0127)    (0.00797)      (0.0193)
Cell head educ: 10 years of sch. or more     -0.00715          -0.168       0.0220       0.0314       0.0990        0.0224
                                              (0.340)         (0.181)      (0.215)      (0.179)      (0.112)       (0.272)
Cell head has koranic educ.                    0.0240         -0.0162       0.0272     -0.00533       0.0152       -0.0449
                                              (0.257)         (0.137)      (0.162)      (0.135)     (0.0849)       (0.205)
Number of cells in household                   0.0142        0.00330      0.00461       -0.0393      -0.0158        0.0330
                                             (0.0711)        (0.0379)     (0.0449)     (0.0375)     (0.0235)      (0.0568)
Number of children less than 10 in hh.       0.000264       -4.94e-05     0.00569       0.00197    -0.00561*      -0.00226
                                             (0.0101)      (0.00537)    (0.00635)     (0.00530)    (0.00333)     (0.00804)
Household head's age in y.                    -0.0171        0.00845     -0.00731       0.00175      0.00494       0.00932
                                             (0.0165)      (0.00881)      (0.0104)    (0.00870)    (0.00546)      (0.0132)
(Household head's age)^2                   0.000333**    -0.000382***    0.000129      8.26e-05    -5.68e-05     -0.000106
                                           (0.000150)      (8.01e-05)   (9.48e-05)    (7.91e-05)   (4.96e-05)   (0.000120)
Cell head's age in y.                        -0.00198        0.00515     0.000719      -0.00500     0.000198      0.000917
                                            (0.00748)      (0.00399)    (0.00472)     (0.00394)    (0.00247)     (0.00597)
(Cell head's age)^2                         -6.56e-06        1.45e-06    -1.06e-05   3.16e-05***   -2.76e-06     -1.31e-05
                                            (1.96e-05)     (1.05e-05)   (1.24e-05)    (1.03e-05)   (6.48e-06)   (1.57e-05)
Other*HeadOth                                  0.0199      -0.000113     -0.00291      -0.00110     -0.00371       -0.0120
                                             (0.0295)        (0.0157)     (0.0186)     (0.0155)    (0.00974)      (0.0235)
Spouse*HeadnSP                                 0.0278       -0.00126    -0.0274**       -0.0131     -0.00718        0.0211
                                             (0.0216)        (0.0115)     (0.0137)     (0.0114)    (0.00715)      (0.0173)
Spouse*HeadnSPOth                              0.0197       -0.00210       -0.0100     -0.00868     -0.00645       0.00756
                                             (0.0217)        (0.0116)     (0.0137)     (0.0115)    (0.00718)      (0.0174)
Other*HeadnSPOth                              0.00807          0.0103    0.000430       0.00808      -0.0165       -0.0105
                                             (0.0384)        (0.0205)     (0.0242)     (0.0202)     (0.0127)      (0.0306)
Other*Otherkinds = o,                             -               -            -            -            -             -

Spouse*sexhhead                             0.000782        0.0109       -0.0557       0.0235        0.0278     -0.00734
                                            (0.0951)       (0.0507)     (0.0600)      (0.0501)      (0.0314)    (0.0760)
Other*sexhhead                               -0.0270       0.00179       -0.0286      -0.00232     0.0457***     0.0103
                                                             43
VARIABLES                 Food    Common     Transport   Clothing   Education      Other
                       (0.0371)   (0.0198)   (0.0234)    (0.0196)    (0.0123)    (0.0297)
Spouse*prim1to3head      0.0120    -0.0184     0.0214     0.00721     0.00535     -0.0275
                       (0.0435)   (0.0232)   (0.0275)    (0.0229)    (0.0144)    (0.0348)
Other*prim1to3head       0.0489    -0.0407     0.0471     0.00671    -0.00810     -0.0539
                       (0.0505)   (0.0270)   (0.0319)    (0.0266)    (0.0167)    (0.0404)
Spouse*prim4to5head     0.00713    0.00808   -0.00705     0.00972    -0.00349     -0.0144
                       (0.0286)   (0.0153)   (0.0180)    (0.0151)   (0.00944)    (0.0228)
Other*prim4to5head     -0.00232    0.00325     0.0140    -0.00791      0.0101     -0.0172
                       (0.0331)   (0.0177)   (0.0209)    (0.0174)    (0.0109)    (0.0264)
Spouse*juniorshead      0.00573    0.00243    -0.0158      0.0301    -0.00597     -0.0165
                       (0.0356)   (0.0190)   (0.0225)    (0.0188)    (0.0118)    (0.0285)
Other*juniorshead        0.0199    0.00635    -0.0185      0.0177    -0.0250*   -0.000400
                       (0.0387)   (0.0206)   (0.0244)    (0.0204)    (0.0128)    (0.0309)
Spouse*hsoroverhead    -0.00103     -0.173     0.0435      0.0354      0.124      -0.0293
                        (0.341)    (0.182)    (0.215)     (0.180)     (0.113)     (0.273)
Other*hsoroverhead       0.0301     -0.158     0.0511      0.0466      0.0874     -0.0574
                        (0.342)    (0.183)    (0.216)     (0.180)     (0.113)     (0.273)
Spouse*koranichead       0.0345    -0.0156     0.0186    -0.00361      0.0243     -0.0583
                        (0.258)    (0.138)    (0.163)     (0.136)    (0.0852)     (0.206)
Other*koranichead        0.0535    -0.0161     0.0199     0.00115      0.0125     -0.0709
                        (0.258)    (0.138)    (0.163)     (0.136)    (0.0853)     (0.206)
Spouse*othurb            0.0357    0.00138    -0.0238    -0.00950    -0.00235    -0.00140
                       (0.0708)   (0.0377)   (0.0446)    (0.0373)    (0.0234)    (0.0565)
Other*othurb            -0.0224    0.00991     -0.119      0.0291     -0.0112      0.114
                        (0.118)   (0.0630)   (0.0746)    (0.0622)    (0.0390)    (0.0944)
Spouse*rural             0.0492   -0.00730    -0.0150    -0.00727    -0.00433     -0.0153
                       (0.0687)   (0.0367)   (0.0434)    (0.0362)    (0.0227)    (0.0549)
Other*rural             -0.0231    0.00101    -0.122*      0.0460     -0.0222      0.120
                        (0.117)   (0.0624)   (0.0738)    (0.0616)    (0.0387)    (0.0935)
Spouse*diourbel        -0.00199    -0.0279     0.0123      0.0221     -0.0132     0.00874
                       (0.0749)   (0.0400)   (0.0473)    (0.0395)    (0.0247)    (0.0598)
Other*diourbel           0.0266    -0.0336      0.108     -0.0191     -0.0388     -0.0428
                        (0.124)   (0.0662)   (0.0783)    (0.0654)    (0.0410)    (0.0992)
Spouse*fatick           0.00550    -0.0465     0.0357     0.00158    -0.00972      0.0133
                       (0.0710)   (0.0378)   (0.0448)    (0.0374)    (0.0234)    (0.0567)
Other*fatick             0.0101    -0.0408      0.119     -0.0357     0.00648     -0.0592
                        (0.118)   (0.0629)   (0.0744)    (0.0621)    (0.0390)    (0.0942)
Spouse*kaolack        -0.000403    -0.0247     0.0238     0.00246    -0.00451     0.00338
                       (0.0724)   (0.0386)   (0.0457)    (0.0381)    (0.0239)    (0.0579)
Other*kaolack            0.0278    -0.0353     0.125*     -0.0443      0.0145     -0.0879
                        (0.119)   (0.0636)   (0.0753)    (0.0628)    (0.0394)    (0.0953)
Spouse*kolda             0.0152    -0.0425    0.00285    -0.00987      0.0123      0.0221
                       (0.0727)   (0.0388)   (0.0459)    (0.0383)    (0.0240)    (0.0581)
Other*kolda              0.0382    -0.0258      0.106     -0.0450     0.00957     -0.0834
                        (0.120)   (0.0638)   (0.0755)    (0.0630)    (0.0395)    (0.0956)
Spouse*louga            -0.0254    -0.0169     0.0146      0.0119     -0.0110      0.0267
                       (0.0712)   (0.0380)   (0.0449)    (0.0375)    (0.0235)    (0.0569)
Other*louga              0.0266    -0.0223      0.104     -0.0213     0.00753     -0.0943
                        (0.119)   (0.0633)   (0.0749)    (0.0625)    (0.0392)    (0.0948)
Spouse*matam            0.00141    -0.0191     0.0364      0.0101    -0.00612     -0.0226
                       (0.0706)   (0.0376)   (0.0445)    (0.0372)    (0.0233)    (0.0564)
Other*matam              0.0370    -0.0356      0.117     -0.0406      0.0120     -0.0896
                        (0.118)   (0.0629)   (0.0745)    (0.0621)    (0.0390)    (0.0943)
Spouse*saintlouis        0.0441    -0.0265    -0.0107    -0.00564    -0.00401     0.00273
                                    44
VARIABLES                      Food     Common       Transport    Clothing     Education      Other
                            (0.0723)    (0.0385)     (0.0456)     (0.0381)      (0.0239)    (0.0577)
Other*saintlouis              0.0125     -0.0184        0.105      -0.0355       -0.0326     -0.0314
                             (0.127)    (0.0678)     (0.0802)     (0.0669)      (0.0420)     (0.102)
Spouse*tamba                  0.0142     -0.0302      -0.0274      0.00605     -0.00484       0.0422
                            (0.0741)    (0.0395)     (0.0467)     (0.0390)      (0.0245)    (0.0592)
Other*tamba                   0.0431     -0.0444       0.0868      -0.0350      0.00418      -0.0547
                             (0.121)    (0.0643)     (0.0761)     (0.0635)      (0.0398)    (0.0963)
Spouse*thies                0.00388      -0.0550       0.0159      0.00229     -0.00586       0.0387
                            (0.0716)    (0.0382)     (0.0452)     (0.0377)      (0.0236)    (0.0572)
Other*thies                   0.0284     -0.0309        0.105      -0.0553     0.000444      -0.0481
                             (0.119)    (0.0635)     (0.0751)     (0.0627)      (0.0393)    (0.0951)
Spouse*ziguinchor            -0.0176     -0.0183       0.0206      0.00289       -0.0102      0.0227
                            (0.0740)    (0.0395)     (0.0467)     (0.0390)      (0.0245)    (0.0591)
Other*ziguinchor           -0.000473     -0.0194        0.111      -0.0484      0.00401      -0.0464
                             (0.120)    (0.0642)     (0.0760)     (0.0634)      (0.0398)    (0.0962)
Spouse*prim1to3cellh         -0.0344      0.0129       0.0189     -0.00270        0.0180     -0.0128
                            (0.0383)    (0.0204)     (0.0242)     (0.0202)      (0.0126)    (0.0306)
Other*prim1to3cellh = o,         -           -            -            -             -           -

Spouse*prim4to5cellh        -0.0128     0.00951      0.00498      0.00646      -0.000104    -0.00805
                           (0.0273)     (0.0146)     (0.0172)     (0.0144)     (0.00902)    (0.0218)
Other*prim4to5cellh = o,        -           -            -            -             -           -

Spouse*juniorscellh         0.0275      0.00875       -0.0114     -0.00802      0.00221      -0.0190
                           (0.0380)     (0.0203)     (0.0240)     (0.0200)      (0.0126)    (0.0304)
Other*juniorscellh = o,        -            -             -           -             -            -

Spouse*hsorovercellh        -0.00235        0.182      -0.0235      -0.0531       -0.0867     -0.0162
                             (0.336)      (0.179)       (0.212)     (0.177)       (0.111)     (0.269)
Other*hsorovercellh          -0.0190        0.163      -0.0268      -0.0488       -0.0970      0.0281
                             (0.340)      (0.182)       (0.215)     (0.179)       (0.112)     (0.272)
Spouse*koraniccellh          -0.0299       0.0217      -0.0193      0.00380       -0.0157      0.0394
                             (0.258)      (0.137)       (0.163)     (0.136)      (0.0851)     (0.206)
Other*koraniccellh           -0.0405       0.0187      -0.0200    -0.000520       -0.0173      0.0597
                             (0.257)      (0.137)       (0.162)     (0.135)      (0.0850)     (0.205)
Spouse*nbcells              -0.00238     0.000632      0.00118      0.00368    -0.000461     -0.00265
                           (0.00966)    (0.00515)    (0.00610)    (0.00509)     (0.00319)   (0.00772)
Other*nbcells                0.00232     -0.00550      0.00147      0.00195       0.00158    -0.00182
                           (0.00911)    (0.00486)    (0.00575)    (0.00480)     (0.00301)   (0.00728)
Spouse*nbkidslt10inh       0.0130***     -0.00116     -0.00283     -0.00325      -0.00122    -0.00455
                           (0.00409)    (0.00218)    (0.00258)    (0.00215)     (0.00135)   (0.00327)
Other*nbkidslt10inh          0.00401     0.00378*    -0.000989     -0.00243     0.000955     -0.00532
                           (0.00428)    (0.00229)    (0.00270)    (0.00226)     (0.00142)   (0.00342)
Spouse*agehhead            -0.000294      0.00547     -0.00100     -0.00354       0.00228    -0.00290
                           (0.00830)    (0.00443)    (0.00524)    (0.00437)     (0.00274)   (0.00663)
Other*agehhead              0.000959      0.00273     0.000580     -0.00265       0.00194    -0.00356
                           (0.00839)    (0.00448)    (0.00529)    (0.00442)     (0.00277)   (0.00670)
Spouse*agehheadsq          -2.15e-05     4.08e-07      6.33e-06    1.95e-05    -2.47e-05*    1.99e-05
                           (3.86e-05)   (2.06e-05)   (2.44e-05)   (2.03e-05)   (1.28e-05)   (3.09e-05)
Other*agehheadsq           -3.89e-05     2.46e-05     -5.84e-06    1.02e-05     -1.69e-05    2.68e-05
                           (3.93e-05)   (2.10e-05)   (2.48e-05)   (2.07e-05)   (1.30e-05)   (3.14e-05)
Spouse*agechead              0.00349     -0.00496     0.000389      0.00214     -8.56e-05   -0.000972
                           (0.00790)    (0.00421)    (0.00498)    (0.00416)     (0.00261)   (0.00631)
Other*agechead               0.00316     -0.00543     0.000571      0.00181      7.80e-05   -0.000193
                                           45
VARIABLES                            Food         Common      Transport      Clothing    Education       Other
                                  (0.00701)      (0.00374)    (0.00442)    (0.00369)     (0.00232)     (0.00560)
Spouse*agecheadsq                 -1.13e-05       -9.24e-06    3.10e-06     -3.39e-06     5.52e-06      1.53e-05
                                  (3.40e-05)     (1.81e-05)   (2.14e-05)   (1.79e-05)    (1.12e-05)    (2.71e-05)
Other*agecheadsq = o,                  -              -            -             -            -             -

HH mean for _Itypecell_2             -1.838**       -0.872*        0.331        0.320       0.606**       1.452**
                                      (0.881)       (0.470)      (0.556)      (0.464)       (0.291)       (0.704)
HH mean for _Itypecell_3               -1.019    -1.108***         0.483        0.359      0.631***        0.654
                                      (0.664)       (0.354)      (0.419)      (0.350)       (0.219)       (0.530)
HH mean for _ItypXloghh_2             -0.0482        0.0402     0.0692*        0.0500      -0.0386*       -0.0727
                                     (0.0618)      (0.0330)     (0.0390)     (0.0325)      (0.0204)      (0.0494)
HH mean for _ItypXloghh_3              0.0127        0.0160       0.0279       0.0468     -0.0383**       -0.0651
                                     (0.0575)      (0.0307)     (0.0363)     (0.0303)      (0.0190)      (0.0459)
HH mean for logcellexp               0.114***      0.0331*     -0.00818       -0.0195    -0.0845***       -0.0353
                                     (0.0319)      (0.0170)     (0.0201)     (0.0168)      (0.0105)      (0.0255)
HH mean for _ItypXlogce_2            0.207***       -0.0124   -0.105***    -0.0683***        0.0209       -0.0415
                                     (0.0407)      (0.0217)     (0.0257)     (0.0214)      (0.0134)      (0.0325)
HH mean for _ItypXlogce_3            0.138***     0.000795     -0.0507*    -0.0623***       0.00647       -0.0319
                                     (0.0427)      (0.0228)     (0.0269)     (0.0225)      (0.0141)      (0.0341)
HH mean for _ItypXloghha2              0.128         0.0634      -0.110*      -0.0136     -0.0696**       0.00232
                                      (0.101)      (0.0539)     (0.0638)     (0.0532)      (0.0334)      (0.0808)
HH mean for _ItypXloghha3              0.137         0.0641   -0.165***       -0.0537       -0.0288        0.0460
                                     (0.0845)      (0.0451)     (0.0533)     (0.0445)      (0.0279)      (0.0675)
HH mean for logcellsize               -0.0482     -0.00123        0.0173      -0.0151     0.0552***      -0.00787
                                     (0.0333)      (0.0178)     (0.0210)     (0.0175)      (0.0110)      (0.0266)
HH mean for _ItypXlogcea2           -0.161***        0.0172    0.109***      0.0434*       -0.00388      -0.00477
                                     (0.0425)      (0.0227)     (0.0268)     (0.0224)      (0.0140)      (0.0340)
HH mean for _ItypXlogcea3           -0.125***       -0.0393   0.0857***     0.0716***       -0.0167        0.0234
                                     (0.0473)      (0.0252)     (0.0298)     (0.0249)      (0.0156)      (0.0378)
HH mean for prim1to3cellh             -0.0167    0.0855***    -0.0648**       -0.0162       0.00826       0.00391
                                     (0.0484)      (0.0258)     (0.0305)     (0.0255)      (0.0160)      (0.0386)
HH mean for prim4to5cellh             -0.0339        0.0230      -0.0151       0.0192     -0.000129       0.00686
                                     (0.0326)      (0.0174)     (0.0206)     (0.0172)      (0.0108)      (0.0261)
HH mean for juniorscellh             0.122***       -0.0194      -0.0432      -0.0394      -0.00564       -0.0143
                                     (0.0468)      (0.0250)     (0.0295)     (0.0247)      (0.0155)      (0.0374)
HH mean for hsorovercellh            1.575***    -1.272***       -0.0709        0.240      -0.362**        -0.110
                                      (0.485)       (0.259)      (0.306)      (0.255)       (0.160)       (0.387)
HH mean for koraniccellh               0.718     -1.083***         0.316     0.625**        -0.0383        -0.538
                                      (0.512)       (0.273)      (0.323)      (0.270)       (0.169)       (0.409)
HH mean for agechead                   0.0184    -0.0150**     -9.26e-05     0.00200       -0.00187      -0.00343
                                     (0.0119)     (0.00636)   (0.00752)     (0.00628)     (0.00394)     (0.00952)
HH mean for agecheadsq            -0.000317**   0.000396***    -4.93e-05    -0.000104      2.37e-05      5.05e-05
                                   (0.000135)    (7.18e-05)   (8.49e-05)    (7.08e-05)    (4.44e-05)   (0.000107)
HH mean for _DHeadOth_3 = o,              -             -            -            -             -             -

HH mean for _DHeadnSP_2              0.347         0.143        -0.192      -0.216*        0.0842        -0.167
                                    (0.249)       (0.133)      (0.157)      (0.131)       (0.0822)      (0.199)
HH mean for _DHeadnSPOth_2 = o,        -             -             -            -             -             -

HH mean for _DHeadnSPOth_3         -0.562**      0.394***      -0.0428      0.0410        0.00820        0.162
                                    (0.230)       (0.123)      (0.145)      (0.121)       (0.0760)      (0.184)
HH mean for _DOtherkinds_3 = o,        -             -             -           -              -            -

HH mean for _Dsexhhead_2            -0.360*       0.248**       0.204        0.0427       -0.151**      0.0161
                                                    46
VARIABLES                         Food     Common     Transport   Clothing   Education     Other
                                (0.213)     (0.114)    (0.135)     (0.112)    (0.0705)    (0.170)
HH mean for _Dsexhhead_3        -0.0815       0.109     0.0920     -0.0473    -0.114**     0.0423
                                (0.143)    (0.0762)   (0.0901)    (0.0752)    (0.0472)    (0.114)
HH mean for _Dprim1to3head_2     -0.256      0.0545    0.00852      0.0238      0.0357     0.133
                                (0.172)    (0.0918)    (0.109)    (0.0907)    (0.0569)    (0.138)
HH mean for _Dprim1to3head_3   -0.318**      0.0837    -0.0494      0.0112     0.00898    0.264**
                                (0.144)    (0.0770)   (0.0911)    (0.0760)    (0.0477)    (0.115)
HH mean for _Dprim4to5head_2     0.0644   -0.233***    0.00161      0.0546     0.0626*     0.0502
                                (0.111)    (0.0594)   (0.0703)    (0.0587)    (0.0368)   (0.0890)
HH mean for _Dprim4to5head_3    -0.0339   -0.155***    -0.0124     0.113**      0.0368     0.0520
                               (0.0897)    (0.0478)   (0.0566)    (0.0472)    (0.0296)   (0.0716)
HH mean for _Djuniorshead_2     0.273**    -0.170**    -0.0596     -0.0379     -0.0180     0.0118
                                (0.132)    (0.0704)   (0.0832)    (0.0695)    (0.0436)    (0.105)
HH mean for _Djuniorshead_3     0.221**    -0.129**    -0.0424     -0.0685      0.0116    0.00669
                                (0.106)    (0.0564)   (0.0667)    (0.0556)    (0.0349)   (0.0844)
HH mean for _Dhsoroverhead_2   1.324***   -1.182***     0.0501       0.264   -0.459***    0.00291
                                (0.509)     (0.272)    (0.321)     (0.268)     (0.168)    (0.407)
HH mean for _Dhsoroverhead_3   1.419***   -1.213***    -0.0465       0.195    -0.397**     0.0419
                                (0.500)     (0.267)    (0.316)     (0.264)     (0.165)    (0.400)
HH mean for _Dkoranichead_2      0.836    -1.062***      0.359     0.558**     -0.0789     -0.612
                                (0.515)     (0.275)    (0.325)     (0.271)     (0.170)    (0.411)
HH mean for _Dkoranichead_3      0.758    -1.048***      0.326     0.580**     -0.0823     -0.534
                                (0.514)     (0.274)    (0.324)     (0.270)     (0.170)    (0.410)
HH mean for _Dothurb_2           0.546     -0.708**      0.119       0.226      0.0637     -0.247
                                (0.611)     (0.326)    (0.385)     (0.322)     (0.202)    (0.488)
HH mean for _Dothurb_3           0.722*    -0.536**      0.367      0.0432      0.0983   -0.696**
                                (0.433)     (0.231)    (0.273)     (0.228)     (0.143)    (0.346)
HH mean for _Drural_2            0.738     -0.672**      0.149       0.146     0.00203     -0.363
                                (0.606)     (0.323)    (0.383)     (0.319)     (0.200)    (0.484)
HH mean for _Drural_3           0.843**    -0.502**      0.408     -0.0427      0.0771   -0.784**
                                (0.428)     (0.229)    (0.270)     (0.226)     (0.142)    (0.342)
HH mean for _Ddiourbel_2         -0.638   1.019***      -0.129      -0.322      -0.197     0.268
                                (0.622)     (0.332)    (0.393)     (0.328)     (0.206)    (0.497)
HH mean for _Ddiourbel_3        -0.792*   0.905***      -0.378      -0.112      -0.111     0.488
                                (0.443)     (0.236)    (0.279)     (0.233)     (0.146)    (0.354)
HH mean for _Dfatick_2           -0.700     0.820**     -0.242      -0.189     0.00591     0.305
                                (0.610)     (0.325)    (0.385)     (0.321)     (0.201)    (0.487)
HH mean for _Dfatick_3          -0.840*   0.648***      -0.426     -0.0348     -0.0679    0.721**
                                (0.435)     (0.232)    (0.274)     (0.229)     (0.144)    (0.347)
HH mean for _Dkaolack_2          -0.672      0.623*    -0.0984      -0.133   -0.000146     0.280
                                (0.615)     (0.328)    (0.388)     (0.324)     (0.203)    (0.491)
HH mean for _Dkaolack_3          -0.692      0.440*     -0.365      0.0551     -0.0629     0.625*
                                (0.436)     (0.233)    (0.275)     (0.230)     (0.144)    (0.349)
HH mean for _Dkolda_2            -0.885     0.677**     -0.237      0.0269    -0.00155     0.420
                                (0.613)     (0.327)    (0.387)     (0.323)     (0.202)    (0.490)
HH mean for _Dkolda_3          -0.866**     0.456**    -0.479*       0.148     -0.0802    0.821**
                                (0.436)     (0.233)    (0.275)     (0.230)     (0.144)    (0.348)
HH mean for _Dlouga_2            -0.862     0.779**     -0.104     -0.0789     -0.0236     0.290
                                (0.609)     (0.325)    (0.385)     (0.321)     (0.201)    (0.487)
HH mean for _Dlouga_3          -0.932**     0.591**     -0.338      0.0162     -0.0477    0.711**
                                (0.435)     (0.232)    (0.274)     (0.229)     (0.144)    (0.347)
HH mean for _Dmatam_2            -0.878     0.669**     -0.145      -0.190     0.00839     0.535
                                (0.610)     (0.325)    (0.385)     (0.321)     (0.201)    (0.487)
HH mean for _Dmatam_3          -0.937**     0.551**     -0.358    0.000877     -0.0700    0.814**
                                             47
VARIABLES                                Food      Common       Transport    Clothing     Education        Other
                                       (0.432)      (0.231)      (0.273)      (0.228)       (0.143)       (0.345)
HH mean for _Dsaintlouis_2              -0.912     0.705**        -0.118      -0.0722        -0.154        0.552
                                       (0.625)      (0.333)      (0.394)      (0.329)       (0.206)       (0.499)
HH mean for _Dsaintlouis_3            -1.090**     0.603**        -0.384       0.0761       -0.0709      0.865**
                                       (0.453)      (0.241)      (0.286)      (0.238)       (0.149)       (0.361)
HH mean for _Dtamba_2                   -0.754     0.664**        0.0506       -0.138       -0.0302        0.208
                                       (0.616)      (0.328)      (0.389)      (0.324)       (0.203)       (0.492)
HH mean for _Dtamba_3                  -0.804*     0.561**        -0.304       0.0544       -0.0809        0.573
                                       (0.441)      (0.235)      (0.279)      (0.232)       (0.146)       (0.353)
HH mean for _Dthies_2                   -0.684       0.629*      -0.0952       -0.108        0.0120        0.246
                                       (0.612)      (0.326)      (0.386)      (0.322)       (0.202)       (0.489)
HH mean for _Dthies_3                 -0.868**     0.507**        -0.321       0.0444       -0.0304       0.668*
                                       (0.434)      (0.232)      (0.274)      (0.229)       (0.143)       (0.347)
HH mean for _Dziguinchor_2              -0.594     0.767**        -0.131       -0.234        0.0143        0.178
                                       (0.621)      (0.331)      (0.392)      (0.327)       (0.205)       (0.496)
HH mean for _Dziguinchor_3             -0.839*     0.584**        -0.379       0.0288       -0.0379       0.643*
                                       (0.441)      (0.235)      (0.279)      (0.232)       (0.146)       (0.353)
HH mean for _Dprim1to3cellh_2           0.0103      -0.0527       0.0120     0.00734        -0.0182       0.0413
                                      (0.0645)     (0.0344)     (0.0407)     (0.0340)      (0.0213)      (0.0516)
HH mean for _Dprim1to3cellh_3 = o,         -            -            -            -             -            -

HH mean for _Dprim4to5cellh_2          0.0735       -0.0132       -0.0115     -0.0322      0.00446        -0.0211
                                      (0.0468)     (0.0249)      (0.0295)    (0.0246)      (0.0154)      (0.0374)
HH mean for _Dprim4to5cellh_3 = o,        -             -             -           -            -              -

HH mean for _Djuniorscellh_2         -0.169***      0.0103      0.0866**      0.0205       0.0373*        0.0140
                                      (0.0651)     (0.0347)     (0.0411)     (0.0343)      (0.0215)      (0.0520)
HH mean for _Djuniorscellh_3 = o,         -            -            -            -             -             -

HH mean for _Dhsorovercellh_2         -1.662***     1.280***         0.118      -0.252       0.373**       0.143
                                        (0.489)       (0.261)      (0.309)     (0.258)       (0.162)      (0.391)
HH mean for _Dhsorovercellh_3         -1.785***     1.291***         0.136      -0.192      0.436***       0.114
                                        (0.488)       (0.260)      (0.308)     (0.257)       (0.161)      (0.390)
HH mean for _Dkoraniccellh_2             -0.719     1.092***        -0.342    -0.642**        0.0423       0.568
                                        (0.513)       (0.273)      (0.324)     (0.270)       (0.169)      (0.410)
HH mean for _Dkoraniccellh_3             -0.709     1.097***        -0.331    -0.631**        0.0545       0.520
                                        (0.515)       (0.274)      (0.325)     (0.271)       (0.170)      (0.411)
HH mean for _Cnbcells_2                  0.0408       -0.0133    0.000878       0.0173        0.0125      -0.0581
                                       (0.0816)      (0.0435)     (0.0515)    (0.0430)      (0.0269)     (0.0652)
HH mean for _Cnbcells_3                 -0.0452        0.0199      0.00307      0.0363        0.0141      -0.0282
                                       (0.0740)      (0.0395)     (0.0467)    (0.0390)      (0.0244)     (0.0591)
HH mean for _Cnbkidslt10inh_2           -0.0175     0.000524      -0.00311     0.00140       0.00873      0.00995
                                       (0.0163)     (0.00872)     (0.0103)   (0.00861)     (0.00540)     (0.0131)
HH mean for _Cnbkidslt10inh_3          0.00282      0.000829      -0.00547    -0.00302       0.00636     -0.00152
                                       (0.0132)     (0.00703)    (0.00832)   (0.00694)     (0.00436)     (0.0105)
HH mean for _Cagehhead_2                 0.0140     -0.00941        0.0121     0.00508       -0.0101      -0.0117
                                       (0.0186)     (0.00990)     (0.0117)   (0.00978)     (0.00613)     (0.0148)
HH mean for _Cagehhead_3                 0.0180     -0.0164*        0.0124     0.00336     -0.0108**     -0.00649
                                       (0.0165)     (0.00883)     (0.0104)   (0.00872)     (0.00547)     (0.0132)
HH mean for _Cagehheadsq_2            -0.000262   0.000328***    -0.000163   -0.000138     0.000109*     0.000126
                                     (0.000185)    (9.86e-05)   (0.000117)   (9.74e-05)    (6.11e-05)   (0.000148)
HH mean for _Cagehheadsq_3           -0.000315*   0.000411***   -0.000183*   -0.000115    0.000113**     8.92e-05
                                     (0.000170)    (9.06e-05)   (0.000107)   (8.94e-05)    (5.61e-05)   (0.000136)
HH mean for _Cagechead_2                -0.0199     0.0161**      -0.00280    -0.00431       0.00289      0.00809
                                                      48
VARIABLES                                          Food           Common      Transport     Clothing    Education        Other
                                                 (0.0128)        (0.00682)    (0.00807)    (0.00673)    (0.00422)      (0.0102)
HH mean for _Cagechead_3                        -0.0254**        0.0224***     -0.00337     -0.00209     0.00322       0.00526
                                                 (0.0120)        (0.00638)    (0.00755)    (0.00630)    (0.00395)     (0.00955)
HH mean for _Cagecheadsq_2                     0.000314**      -0.000390***    6.78e-05    0.000146*    -3.78e-05     -0.000100
                                               (0.000143)        (7.63e-05)   (9.03e-05)   (7.53e-05)   (4.73e-05)   (0.000114)
HH mean for _Cagecheadsq_3                     0.000363**      -0.000451***    8.79e-05     0.000106    -3.64e-05     -6.88e-05
                                               (0.000141)        (7.52e-05)   (8.89e-05)   (7.42e-05)   (4.65e-05)   (0.000113)
Constant                                         2.973***          0.463*     -0.786***     -0.00826       -0.250     -1.391***
                                                  (0.475)          (0.253)      (0.300)      (0.250)      (0.157)       (0.379)

Observations                                      3,972            3,972        3,972        3,972        3,972        3,972
R-squared                                         0.487            0.245        0.263        0.132        0.201        0.280
       Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
       Note: Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     49
          B2: Household level Engel curves estimates, controlling for confounders.
             Table B2.1: Household level Engel Curves, with -weighted Theil, household fixed effect and all covariates
VARIABLES                                       Food         Common       Transport       Clothing       Education         Other
-weighted Theil                              0.799***        0.906***     1.088***        2.131***         -0.466*      0.515***
                                              (0.0389)        (0.126)      (0.0723)        (0.145)         (0.265)       (0.0766)
Household fixed effect                       0.991***        0.970***     1.052***        1.057***       1.354***       1.013***
                                             (0.00677)      (0.00673)      (0.0108)       (0.0119)        (0.0154)      (0.00973)
Log(total hhold exp. per cap.)               -0.204***     -0.0339***     0.0971***      0.0243***       0.0304***      0.100***
                                             (0.00173)     (0.000902)     (0.00149)      (0.00120)      (0.000985)      (0.00174)
Log(hhold size)                              0.0190***       0.000776       0.00369     -0.0104***       0.0219***     -0.0403***
                                             (0.00304)      (0.00168)     (0.00269)      (0.00232)       (0.00183)      (0.00325)
Nb. cells=2: Head + oth.                     0.0129**        0.000396      -0.00667      -0.0112**         0.00161        0.00632
                                             (0.00566)      (0.00318)     (0.00510)      (0.00438)       (0.00347)      (0.00607)
Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses              0.0101***        0.00197    -0.0281***       -0.00370      -0.00516**      0.0234***
                                             (0.00362)      (0.00203)     (0.00327)      (0.00280)       (0.00221)      (0.00387)
Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth.       -0.00626*      0.00479**   -0.00980***        0.00410     -0.00903*** 0.0138***
                                             (0.00334)      (0.00188)     (0.00302)      (0.00259)       (0.00205)      (0.00358)
Other types of households                      -0.0107        0.00223       0.00102      -0.00981*        -0.00248      0.0176**
                                             (0.00662)      (0.00372)     (0.00597)      (0.00512)       (0.00405)      (0.00709)
Sex of hhold head (1 for male)                -0.00501       0.00548*    -0.0187***       -0.00275       0.0279***        0.00643
                                             (0.00571)      (0.00321)     (0.00516)      (0.00442)       (0.00354)      (0.00612)
Hhold head's educ: 1 to 3 years of sch.      0.0134***     -0.0167***     0.0181***      0.0119***        -0.00330     -0.0223***
                                             (0.00511)      (0.00288)     (0.00462)      (0.00396)       (0.00313)      (0.00548)
Hhold head's educ: 4 to 5 years of sch.     -0.0135***       0.00341*    0.00857***      0.00550**       -0.000171       -0.00105
                                             (0.00330)      (0.00186)     (0.00297)      (0.00255)       (0.00202)      (0.00353)
Hhold head's educ: 6 to 9 years of sch.     -0.00883**       0.000856    -0.0147***      0.0211***      -0.0119***      0.00871**
                                             (0.00377)      (0.00212)     (0.00340)      (0.00293)       (0.00232)      (0.00404)
Hhold head educ: 10 years of sch. or more   -0.0200***      -0.00408*     0.0105***     -0.0157***       0.0106***      0.0120***
                                             (0.00379)      (0.00212)     (0.00340)      (0.00293)       (0.00233)      (0.00404)
Hhold head has koranic educ.                 -0.128***       0.134***       0.00235     -0.0626***      -0.0193***      0.0634***
                                             (0.00240)      (0.00157)     (0.00203)      (0.00184)       (0.00140)      (0.00245)
Other urban                                    0.0184*        0.00215        0.0112       -0.00707        -0.00507        -0.0139
                                              (0.0111)      (0.00624)     (0.01000)      (0.00857)       (0.00679)       (0.0119)
Rural                                        0.0273**        -0.00703        0.0140       -0.00263        -0.00857       -0.0205*
                                              (0.0108)      (0.00609)     (0.00977)      (0.00837)       (0.00663)       (0.0116)
Diourbel                                       -0.0135      -0.0151**       -0.0154         0.0128         -0.0117      0.0290**
                                              (0.0117)      (0.00662)      (0.0106)      (0.00908)       (0.00720)       (0.0126)
Fatick                                         0.00605     -0.0250***      -0.00726        0.00498        -0.00151      0.0245**
                                              (0.0112)      (0.00627)      (0.0101)      (0.00863)       (0.00683)       (0.0120)
Kaolack                                       -0.00165      -0.0145**      -0.00668        0.00291         0.00760         0.0124
                                              (0.0114)      (0.00638)      (0.0102)      (0.00875)       (0.00693)       (0.0121)
kolda                                          0.00804     -0.0230***     -0.0217**       -0.00144       0.0149**          0.0191
                                              (0.0115)      (0.00646)      (0.0103)      (0.00885)       (0.00700)       (0.0123)
Louga                                          -0.0150       -0.00547       -0.0142         0.0118        -0.00361        0.0228*
                                              (0.0112)      (0.00630)      (0.0101)      (0.00865)       (0.00685)       (0.0120)
Matam                                          0.00217       -0.0122*     -0.000111        0.00742         0.00290      -9.38e-05
                                              (0.0111)      (0.00624)     (0.01000)      (0.00856)       (0.00678)       (0.0119)
Saint-Louis                                  0.0262**      -0.0175***    -0.0300***       -0.00151        -0.00369        0.0221*
                                              (0.0114)      (0.00641)      (0.0102)      (0.00878)       (0.00695)       (0.0122)
Tambacounda                                  -0.000871     -0.0222***     -0.0257**        0.00539        -0.00139      0.0414***
                                              (0.0116)      (0.00650)      (0.0104)      (0.00893)       (0.00706)       (0.0124)
Thies                                        0.000137      -0.0307***       -0.0153        0.00210        -0.00336      0.0445***
                                              (0.0113)      (0.00636)      (0.0102)      (0.00874)       (0.00692)       (0.0121)

                                                               50
VARIABLES                                             Food             Common          Transport          Clothing        Education      Other
Ziguinchor                                          -0.00837            -0.0101          -0.0133          -0.00113         -0.00384   0.0385***
                                                    (0.0118)          (0.00659)         (0.0105)         (0.00901)        (0.00714)     (0.0125)
Number of cells in household                     -0.00606***          -0.000563       0.00346***        0.00324***      -0.00349*** 0.00335**
                                                   (0.00141)         (0.000794)        (0.00128)         (0.00110)       (0.000864)    (0.00151)
Number of children less than 10 in hh.            0.00547***        0.000870**       -0.00239***        -0.00118**        -0.000162  -0.00206***
                                                  (0.000614)         (0.000345)       (0.000555)        (0.000475)       (0.000376)   (0.000658)
Household head's age in y.                         0.000890*        0.00408***          0.000431       -0.00474***       0.00159*** -0.00183***
                                                  (0.000459)         (0.000261)       (0.000414)        (0.000360)       (0.000282)   (0.000492)
(Household head's age)^2                         -3.53e-05***       9.93e-06***       -7.24e-06*       2.76e-05***      -1.54e-05*** 1.39e-05***
                                                   (4.26e-06)        (2.40e-06)        (3.84e-06)        (3.32e-06)       (2.62e-06)  (4.57e-06)
Constant                                            3.203***           0.223***        -1.135***           -0.0255        -0.435***    -1.000***
                                                    (0.0279)           (0.0147)         (0.0244)          (0.0199)         (0.0166)     (0.0284)

Observations                                          1,429             1,429            1,429             1,429            1,429            1,429
R-squared                                             0.968             0.948            0.903             0.866            0.868            0.908
           Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
           Note: Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
           The reference category for urbanization and region is Dakar and for education level, it is no education. Household structure is
           described with the following series of dummies: Nb. cells=2: Head + oth equals 1 if the household is composed of 2 cells only,
           the second cell being headed by someone who isn't the spouse of the head; Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses equals one for
           households composed of more than two cells, all of them being headed either by the household head or by one of his spouse(s);
           Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth equals one for households composed of more than two cells, , that headed by the
           household head, at least one headed by a spouse of the head and at least one headed by someone not married to the household
           head. The reference category is the two cells household composed of the household head and his spouse.




                                                                         51
          Table B2.2: Household level Engel Curves, with Intra-household Theil, household fixed effect and all
                                                     covariates
VARIABLES                                Food           (Public)     Transport      Clothing       Education       Other

Intra-household Theil                        -0.162***   -0.0322***     0.106***      0.0299***   -0.00944*       0.0533***
                                             (0.00827)    (0.00452)     (0.00736)     (0.00682)   (0.00492)       (0.00863)
Household fixed effect                        0.991***    0.970***      1.053***       1.064***   1.354***         1.013***
                                             (0.00685)    (0.00674)      (0.0108)      (0.0129)    (0.0154)       (0.00975)
Log(total hhold exp. per cap.)               -0.205***   -0.0339***     0.0972***     0.0248***   0.0304***        0.100***
                                             (0.00175)   (0.000903)     (0.00150)     (0.00132)  (0.000984)       (0.00174)
Log(hhold size)                              0.0182***    0.000785        0.00341   -0.00820*** 0.0218***        -0.0402***
                                             (0.00307)    (0.00168)     (0.00271)     (0.00247)   (0.00183)       (0.00326)
Nb. cells=2: Head + oth.                      0.0147**    0.000341       -0.00638    -0.0135***     0.00165         0.00565
                                             (0.00572)    (0.00318)     (0.00513)     (0.00467)   (0.00347)       (0.00608)
Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses              0.0107***      0.00197    -0.0278***    -0.00606** -0.00511**        0.0236***
                                             (0.00366)    (0.00203)     (0.00329)     (0.00298)   (0.00221)       (0.00388)
Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth.       -0.00601*    0.00477**   -0.00977***       0.00402 -0.00901***       0.0137***
                                             (0.00338)    (0.00188)     (0.00304)     (0.00276)   (0.00204)       (0.00359)
Other types of households                     -0.00986      0.00220       0.00103      -0.0103*    -0.00247        0.0172**
                                             (0.00670)    (0.00372)     (0.00601)     (0.00546)   (0.00405)       (0.00711)
Sex of hhold head (1 for male)                -0.00404    0.00546*     -0.0181***      -0.00664   0.0280***         0.00661
                                             (0.00577)    (0.00321)     (0.00519)     (0.00471)   (0.00354)       (0.00613)
Hhold head's educ: 1 to 3 years of sch.      0.0135***   -0.0167***     0.0182***      0.0109**    -0.00328      -0.0222***
                                             (0.00517)    (0.00288)     (0.00465)     (0.00423)   (0.00313)       (0.00550)
Hhold head's educ: 4 to 5 years of sch.     -0.0133***    0.00341*     0.00865***      0.00483*   -0.000166        -0.00104
                                             (0.00333)    (0.00186)     (0.00299)     (0.00272)   (0.00202)       (0.00354)
Hhold head's educ: 6 to 9 years of sch.     -0.00899**    0.000874     -0.0146***     0.0206***  -0.0119***       0.00895**
                                             (0.00381)    (0.00212)     (0.00342)     (0.00313)   (0.00232)       (0.00405)
Hhold head educ: 10 years of sch. or more   -0.0194***    -0.00407*     0.0107***    -0.0177***   0.0106***       0.0120***
                                             (0.00383)    (0.00212)     (0.00343)     (0.00313)   (0.00233)       (0.00406)
Hhold head has koranic educ.                 -0.128***    0.134***        0.00252    -0.0639*** -0.0192***        0.0635***
                                             (0.00242)    (0.00157)     (0.00204)     (0.00196)   (0.00140)       (0.00245)
Other urban                                    0.0190*      0.00211        0.0116      -0.00865    -0.00499         -0.0139
                                              (0.0112)    (0.00624)      (0.0101)     (0.00915)   (0.00679)        (0.0119)
Rural                                         0.0277**     -0.00708        0.0143      -0.00311    -0.00850        -0.0206*
                                              (0.0110)    (0.00610)     (0.00983)     (0.00894)   (0.00663)        (0.0116)
Diourbel                                       -0.0138    -0.0151**       -0.0157        0.0145     -0.0117        0.0288**
                                              (0.0119)    (0.00662)      (0.0106)     (0.00968)   (0.00720)        (0.0126)
Fatick                                         0.00553   -0.0250***      -0.00735       0.00549    -0.00154        0.0247**
                                              (0.0113)    (0.00628)      (0.0101)     (0.00921)   (0.00683)        (0.0120)
Kaolack                                       -0.00211    -0.0144**      -0.00709       0.00495     0.00750          0.0122
                                              (0.0115)    (0.00638)      (0.0103)     (0.00934)   (0.00693)        (0.0122)
kolda                                          0.00634   -0.0229***     -0.0224**       0.00260   0.0148**           0.0192
                                              (0.0116)    (0.00646)      (0.0104)     (0.00945)   (0.00700)        (0.0123)
Louga                                          -0.0155     -0.00545       -0.0145        0.0135    -0.00368         0.0228*
                                              (0.0113)    (0.00630)      (0.0101)     (0.00923)   (0.00685)        (0.0120)
Matam                                          0.00178     -0.0122*     -0.000409       0.00904     0.00283       -0.000258
                                              (0.0112)    (0.00624)      (0.0101)     (0.00914)   (0.00678)        (0.0119)
Saint-Louis                                   0.0254**   -0.0174***    -0.0302***     -0.000934    -0.00374         0.0224*
                                              (0.0115)    (0.00641)      (0.0103)     (0.00937)   (0.00695)        (0.0122)
Tambacounda                                   -0.00207   -0.0221***     -0.0262**       0.00829    -0.00147       0.0415***
                                              (0.0117)    (0.00650)      (0.0105)     (0.00953)   (0.00706)        (0.0124)
Thies                                         -0.00103   -0.0306***       -0.0160       0.00554    -0.00350       0.0444***
                                              (0.0115)    (0.00637)      (0.0103)     (0.00933)   (0.00692)        (0.0122)
Ziguinchor                                    -0.00895      -0.0101       -0.0137      0.000610    -0.00394       0.0383***
                                                            52
VARIABLES                                                   Food                (Public)           Transport           Clothing   Education     Other
                                                          (0.0119)             (0.00659)            (0.0106)          (0.00962)   (0.00714)    (0.0126)
Number of cells in household                           -0.00633***             -0.000565          0.00323**          0.00487*** -0.00353*** 0.00320**
                                                         (0.00143)            (0.000795)           (0.00128)          (0.00116)  (0.000864)   (0.00152)
Number of children less than 10 in hh.                  0.00560***           0.000867**          -0.00228***        -0.00186***   -0.000143 -0.00200***
                                                        (0.000621)            (0.000345)          (0.000558)         (0.000507)  (0.000376) (0.000659)
Household head's age in y.                              0.000973**           0.00408***            0.000501         -0.00524*** 0.00160*** -0.00179***
                                                        (0.000464)            (0.000261)          (0.000416)         (0.000382)  (0.000282) (0.000493)
(Household head's age)^2                               -3.61e-05***          9.93e-06***         -7.94e-06**        3.25e-05***     -1.56e- 1.35e-05***
                                                                                                                                     05***
                                                         (4.31e-06)           (2.40e-06)          (3.87e-06)          (3.53e-06) (2.62e-06)  (4.58e-06)
Constant                                                  3.206***             0.224***           -1.138***             -0.0257   -0.435***  -1.002***
                                                          (0.0283)             (0.0147)            (0.0245)            (0.0217)    (0.0166)    (0.0285)

Observations                                                1,429                1,429               1,429               1,429              1,429               1,429
R-squared                                                   0.967                0.948               0.902               0.848              0.868               0.907
           Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
           Note: Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
           The reference category for urbanization and region is Dakar and for education level, it is no education. Household structure is described with the
           following series of dummies: Nb. cells=2: Head + oth equals 1 if the household is composed of 2 cells only, the second cell being headed by
           someone who isn't the spouse of the head; Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses equals one for households composed of more than two cells, all of
           them being headed either by the household head or by one of his spouse(s); Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth equals one for households
           composed of more than two cells, , that headed by the household head, at least one headed by a spouse of the head and at least one headed by
           someone not married to the household head. The reference category is the two cells household composed of the household head and his spouse.




                                                                                  53
         B3: Correlates of confounders.
                                         Table B3.1 : Correlates of household fixed effects
VARIABLES                                        Food           (Public)      Transport      Clothing    Education           Other
Log(total hhold exp.)                         0.110***       0.0394***     -0.0478***     -0.0240***     -0.0190***    -0.0582***
                                             (0.00601)       (0.00334)      (0.00338)       (0.00262)     (0.00159)     (0.00440)
Log(hhold size)                              -0.195***      -0.0371***      0.0590***      0.0318***      0.0243***      0.117***
                                              (0.0119)       (0.00661)      (0.00670)       (0.00519)     (0.00315)     (0.00872)
Number of cells in household                   0.00671         0.00346     -0.00724**        -0.00178     -0.000719     -0.000423
                                             (0.00567)       (0.00315)      (0.00320)       (0.00247)     (0.00150)     (0.00415)
Number of children less than 10 in hh.       -0.00453*        0.000420    0.00360***          0.00104     -0.00111*      0.000580
                                             (0.00246)       (0.00137)      (0.00139)       (0.00107)    (0.000652)     (0.00180)
Household head's age in y.                    0.000830     -0.00569***       0.000190     0.00419***    -0.00165***       0.00212
                                             (0.00184)       (0.00102)      (0.00104)      (0.000804)    (0.000488)     (0.00135)
(Household head's age)^2                      2.19e-05        3.31e-06       4.94e-07    -2.40e-05***   1.58e-05***      -1.75e-05
                                             (1.71e-05)      (9.51e-06)     (9.65e-06)     (7.47e-06)     (4.53e-06)    (1.25e-05)
Nb. cells=2: Head + oth.                       -0.0311         0.00739       -0.00409         0.00485      -0.00916       0.0321*
                                              (0.0227)        (0.0126)       (0.0128)       (0.00992)     (0.00602)       (0.0166)
Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses               -0.0283*         0.00666      0.0303***         0.00837       0.00266      -0.0197*
                                              (0.0145)       (0.00806)      (0.00818)       (0.00633)     (0.00384)       (0.0106)
Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth.       -0.0291**         -0.0117       0.0187**         0.0108*      0.000205         0.0111
                                              (0.0134)       (0.00745)      (0.00756)       (0.00585)     (0.00355)     (0.00983)
Other types of households                      -0.0286        -0.00944         0.0116         0.00975      0.000116         0.0166
                                              (0.0266)        (0.0148)       (0.0150)        (0.0116)     (0.00704)       (0.0195)
Sex of hhold head (1 for male)                 0.00833         -0.0163       0.0323**        -0.00295    -0.0373***         0.0159
                                              (0.0229)        (0.0127)       (0.0129)        (0.0100)     (0.00607)       (0.0168)
Hhold head's educ: 1 to 3 years of sch.        0.00618         0.00825       -0.0193*       -0.0206**       0.00503         0.0204
                                              (0.0206)        (0.0114)       (0.0116)       (0.00897)     (0.00544)       (0.0151)
Hhold head's educ: 4 to 5 years of sch.        -0.0166       0.0222***        -0.0113        -0.00471      -0.00357         0.0141
                                              (0.0132)       (0.00735)      (0.00746)       (0.00577)     (0.00351)     (0.00969)
Hhold head's educ: 6 to 9 years of sch.        -0.0175        -0.00126        0.00772     -0.0288***      0.0170***      0.0228**
                                              (0.0151)       (0.00841)      (0.00853)       (0.00660)     (0.00401)       (0.0111)
Hhold head educ: 10 years of sch. or more   -0.0396***       -0.000601       -0.00439       0.0160**      0.0174***         0.0113
                                              (0.0151)       (0.00841)      (0.00853)       (0.00661)     (0.00401)       (0.0111)
Hhold head has koranic educ.                  0.123***       -0.138***       -0.00750      0.0508***      0.0168***    -0.0457***
                                             (0.00902)       (0.00501)      (0.00508)       (0.00393)     (0.00239)     (0.00661)
Other urban                                   -0.102**         0.0454*        0.00316          0.0106       -0.0158       0.0591*
                                              (0.0445)        (0.0247)       (0.0251)        (0.0194)      (0.0118)       (0.0326)
Rural                                          -0.0666          0.0154         0.0165         0.00731       -0.0110         0.0384
                                              (0.0435)        (0.0242)       (0.0245)        (0.0190)      (0.0115)       (0.0319)
Diourbel                                       0.0843*      -0.0745***         0.0229         -0.0176     0.0338***        -0.0489
                                              (0.0471)        (0.0262)       (0.0266)        (0.0206)      (0.0125)       (0.0345)
Fatick                                        0.0923**         -0.0224        -0.0192         -0.0167       0.00167        -0.0357
                                              (0.0448)        (0.0249)       (0.0252)        (0.0196)      (0.0119)       (0.0328)
Kaolack                                       0.182***      -0.0651***       -0.0477*       -0.000522       0.00388     -0.0723**
                                              (0.0455)        (0.0252)       (0.0256)        (0.0198)      (0.0120)       (0.0333)
kolda                                         0.143***      -0.0785***       -0.00333          0.0218       0.00237     -0.0852**
                                              (0.0460)        (0.0255)       (0.0259)        (0.0201)      (0.0122)       (0.0337)
Louga                                          0.0873*       -0.0529**        0.00525         -0.0121       0.00733        -0.0349
                                              (0.0449)        (0.0250)       (0.0253)        (0.0196)      (0.0119)       (0.0329)
Matam                                         0.140***       -0.0564**       -0.0413*         0.00129       0.00287        -0.0469
                                              (0.0445)        (0.0247)       (0.0251)        (0.0194)      (0.0118)       (0.0326)
Saint-Louis                                   0.154***      -0.0819***        0.00791         -0.0210        0.0132     -0.0720**
                                              (0.0456)        (0.0253)       (0.0257)        (0.0199)      (0.0121)       (0.0334)

                                                               54
VARIABLES                                                   Food                 (Public)          Transport         Clothing            Education             Other
Tambacounda                                               0.130***            -0.0582**            0.0325             -0.0227             0.00554           -0.0867**
                                                          (0.0464)             (0.0258)           (0.0261)           (0.0202)             (0.0123)           (0.0340)
Thies                                                     0.125***              -0.0213           -0.00909           -0.00624             0.00820          -0.0962***
                                                          (0.0454)             (0.0252)           (0.0256)           (0.0198)             (0.0120)           (0.0333)
Ziguinchor                                                0.258***           -0.0886***           -0.0454*           -0.00841             0.00252           -0.118***
                                                          (0.0468)             (0.0260)           (0.0264)           (0.0204)             (0.0124)           (0.0343)
Constant                                                 -1.340***             -0.130**           0.531***            0.111**            0.297***           0.531***
                                                           (0.103)             (0.0573)           (0.0581)           (0.0450)             (0.0273)           (0.0756)

Observations                                                1,429               1,429                1,429              1,429               1,429               1,429
R-squared                                                   0.484               0.702                0.380              0.386               0.235               0.333
           Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
           Note: Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
           The reference category for urbanization and region is Dakar and for education level, it is no education. Household structure is described with the
           following series of dummies: Nb. cells=2: Head + oth equals 1 if the household is composed of 2 cells only, the second cell being headed by
           someone who isn't the spouse of the head; Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses equals one for households composed of more than two cells, all of
           them being headed either by the household head or by one of his spouse(s); Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth equals one for households
           composed of more than two cells, , that headed by the household head, at least one headed by a spouse of the head and at least one headed by
           someone not married to the household head. The reference category is the two cells household composed of the household head and his spouse.




                                                                                  55
                                               Table B3.2 : Correlates of -weighted Theils
VARIABLES                                         Food           (Public)     Transport          Clothing      Education         Other
Log(total hhold exp.)                        -0.0114***      -0.00118***     0.00566***       0.00153***         7.39e-05    0.00528***
                                              (0.00136)       (0.000134)     (0.000712)       (0.000192)       (6.45e-05)    (0.000629)
Log(hhold size)                              0.00711***       0.000592**    -0.00418***        -0.000412        0.000209    -0.00332***
                                              (0.00269)       (0.000266)      (0.00141)       (0.000381)      (0.000128)      (0.00125)
Number of cells in household                    0.00209         -7.07e-05    -0.00143**          7.84e-05    0.000287***      -0.000955
                                              (0.00128)       (0.000127)     (0.000672)       (0.000182)       (6.10e-05)    (0.000594)
Number of children less than 10 in hh.      -0.00176***         -7.95e-05    0.00106***          7.14e-05   -0.000107***    0.000815***
                                             (0.000556)        (5.51e-05)    (0.000292)        (7.88e-05)      (2.65e-05)    (0.000258)
Household head's age in y.                    -0.000664          9.86e-06    0.000449**         -1.88e-05   -8.07e-05***       0.000304
                                             (0.000416)        (4.13e-05)    (0.000218)        (5.90e-05)      (1.98e-05)    (0.000193)
(Household head's age)^2                       6.36e-06         -1.46e-07   -4.34e-06**          2.17e-07    8.19e-07***      -2.91e-06
                                              (3.87e-06)       (3.83e-07)     (2.03e-06)       (5.48e-07)      (1.84e-07)     (1.79e-06)
Nb. cells=2: Head + oth.                        0.00683         0.000268       -0.00241       -0.00167**         4.44e-05      -0.00306
                                              (0.00513)       (0.000509)      (0.00269)       (0.000728)      (0.000244)      (0.00238)
Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses                -0.00295         -9.97e-06       0.00210        -0.000162     -0.000344**        0.00137
                                              (0.00328)       (0.000325)      (0.00172)       (0.000465)      (0.000156)      (0.00152)
Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth.         -0.00253        -0.000422        0.00140         0.000249         9.97e-05       0.00120
                                              (0.00303)       (0.000300)      (0.00159)       (0.000430)      (0.000144)      (0.00140)
Other types of households                       0.00562         0.000232       -0.00249        -0.000959        0.000147       -0.00255
                                              (0.00601)       (0.000595)      (0.00315)       (0.000851)      (0.000286)      (0.00278)
Sex of hhold head (1 for male)                 -0.00716        -0.000288       0.00469*         -2.41e-05    -0.000549**        0.00333
                                              (0.00518)       (0.000513)      (0.00272)       (0.000734)      (0.000246)      (0.00240)
Hhold head's educ: 1 to 3 years of sch.       -0.000159         0.000232       0.000317        -0.000209       -0.000236       5.41e-05
                                              (0.00464)       (0.000460)      (0.00244)       (0.000658)      (0.000221)      (0.00215)
Hhold head's educ: 4 to 5 years of sch.         0.00197         0.000292      -0.000822        -0.000406       -0.000114      -0.000916
                                              (0.00299)       (0.000296)      (0.00157)       (0.000424)      (0.000142)      (0.00139)
Hhold head's educ: 6 to 9 years of sch.       -0.000586         0.000260       0.000339         -4.44e-06      -0.000241       0.000232
                                              (0.00342)       (0.000339)      (0.00179)       (0.000484)      (0.000163)      (0.00158)
Hhold head educ: 10 years of sch. or more      0.00655*      0.000919***       -0.00286      -0.00125***      -0.000313*      -0.00305*
                                              (0.00342)       (0.000339)      (0.00179)       (0.000485)      (0.000163)      (0.00159)
Hhold head has koranic educ.                   -0.00212         -8.84e-05       0.00134          3.35e-05      -0.000148       0.000981
                                              (0.00204)       (0.000202)      (0.00107)       (0.000289)       (9.69e-05)    (0.000944)
Other urban                                     -0.0131         -0.00131        0.00715          0.00122        -9.53e-05       0.00609
                                               (0.0101)       (0.000996)      (0.00527)        (0.00143)      (0.000478)      (0.00466)
Rural                                           -0.0128         -0.00154        0.00683          0.00139        0.000136        0.00600
                                              (0.00983)       (0.000973)      (0.00515)        (0.00139)      (0.000467)      (0.00455)
Diourbel                                        0.00373         0.000123       -0.00225        -0.000140        0.000260       -0.00172
                                               (0.0107)        (0.00106)      (0.00559)        (0.00151)      (0.000507)      (0.00493)
Fatick                                          0.00274         0.000476       -0.00166        -0.000148        -8.72e-05      -0.00131
                                               (0.0101)        (0.00100)      (0.00531)        (0.00143)      (0.000482)      (0.00469)
Kaolack                                          0.0149          0.00128       -0.00812         -0.00140        0.000261       -0.00693
                                               (0.0103)        (0.00102)      (0.00539)        (0.00146)      (0.000489)      (0.00476)
kolda                                           0.00614         0.000498       -0.00447         0.000358        0.000393       -0.00291
                                               (0.0104)        (0.00103)      (0.00545)        (0.00147)      (0.000494)      (0.00481)
Louga                                           0.00832         0.000759       -0.00474        -0.000613        0.000161       -0.00388
                                               (0.0102)        (0.00101)      (0.00532)        (0.00144)      (0.000483)      (0.00470)
Matam                                           0.00961         0.000781       -0.00532        -0.000828        0.000219       -0.00446
                                               (0.0101)       (0.000996)      (0.00527)        (0.00142)      (0.000478)      (0.00466)
Saint-Louis                                     0.00717          0.00111       -0.00405        -0.000623       -0.000199       -0.00340
                                               (0.0103)        (0.00102)      (0.00540)        (0.00146)      (0.000490)      (0.00477)
Tambacounda                                     0.00553         0.000522       -0.00373          6.92e-05       0.000231       -0.00261
                                               (0.0105)        (0.00104)      (0.00549)        (0.00148)      (0.000498)      (0.00485)

                                                                  56
VARIABLES                                                     Food              (Public)            Transport             Clothing             Education                Other
Thies                                                       0.0170*             0.00158             -0.00972*            -0.00123              0.000313              -0.00794*
                                                           (0.0103)            (0.00102)            (0.00538)            (0.00145)            (0.000488)             (0.00475)
Ziguinchor                                                   0.0167             0.00162              -0.00902            -0.00166              0.000139               -0.00778
                                                           (0.0106)            (0.00105)            (0.00555)            (0.00150)            (0.000503)             (0.00490)
Constant                                                   0.158***            0.0157***           -0.0802***           -0.0199***             -0.000150            -0.0733***
                                                           (0.0233)            (0.00231)             (0.0122)            (0.00330)             (0.00111)              (0.0108)

Observations                                                 1,429                1,429               1,429                1,429                 1,429                1,429
R-squared                                                    0.092                0.091               0.092                0.083                 0.136                0.092
               Source: PSF survey, authors' calculations.
               Note: Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
               The reference category for urbanization and region is Dakar and for education level, it is no education. Household structure is described with the
               following series of dummies: Nb. cells=2: Head + oth equals 1 if the household is composed of 2 cells only, the second cell being headed by
               someone who isn't the spouse of the head; Nb. cells>2: Head + (n) spouses equals one for households composed of more than two cells, all of
               them being headed either by the household head or by one of his spouse(s); Nb. cells>2: head + (n) spouses + oth equals one for households
               composed of more than two cells, , that headed by the household head, at least one headed by a spouse of the head and at least one headed by
               someone not married to the household head. The reference category is the two cells household composed of the household head and his spouse.




                                                                                      57
