                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HETEROGENEOUS GLOBALIZATION:
                         OFFSHORING AND REORGANIZATION

                                     Andrew B. Bernard
                                       Teresa C. Fort
                                       Valerie Smeets
                                     Frederic Warzynski

                                     Working Paper 26854
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26854


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank Lindsay Oldenski, Doireann Fitzgerald, and Phillip Luck for helpful discussion
comments at the NBER ITI SI, Dallas Fed International Trade Conference, and AEA Annual
Meetings. We also thank Mary Amiti, Will Dobbie, James Harrigan, Rob Johnson, Fariha Kamal,
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Meredith Startz, Peter Schott, Felix Tintelnot and participants at the
AASLE, CCER, Center for Economic Studies, CMU, Drexel, EITI, Fed Board, Georgetown,
LMU/IFO, LSE, NYU-Columbia, Michigan State, NY Fed, Princeton, RIDGE, SAIS, SOLE,
UCLA, University of Michigan, UQAM, UVA, World Bank, and Yale for helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andrew B. Bernard, Teresa C. Fort, Valerie Smeets, and Frederic Warzynski. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneous Globalization: Offshoring and Reorganization
Andrew B. Bernard, Teresa C. Fort, Valerie Smeets, and Frederic Warzynski
NBER Working Paper No. 26854
March 2020
JEL No. F14,F16,F23,F61,L23,L25

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper exploits a unique offshoring survey to show that firms continue domestic production
of the same goods they offshore to low-wage countries. This shift towards "produced-good
imports" coincides with a reallocation of labor from physical production to innovation and
technology occupations, and an increase in domestically-produced varieties' unit values. These
responses suggest an additional, firm-level benefit of trade liberalization: the opportunity to
offshore production of low-quality varieties, thereby freeing up domestic resources for the
development, production, and marketing of higher-quality varieties. Firms' reactions also
motivate a new offshoring measure ­ produced- good imports ­ that is readily observed in most
firm-level datasets.

Andrew B. Bernard                              Valerie Smeets
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth           Aarhus University
100 Tuck Hall                                  Hermodsvej 22
Hanover, NH 03755                              8230 Århus
and CEPR                                       Denmark
and also NBER                                  vas@asb.dk
Andrew.B.Bernard@dartmouth.edu
                                               Frederic Warzynski
Teresa C. Fort                                 Aarhus University
Tuck School of Business                        fwa@asb.dk
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
teresa.fort@tuck.dartmouth.edu
1     Introduction
Increased imports from low-wage countries, and Chinese imports in particular, have reduced
manufacturing employment in developed economies.1 In addition to decreased manufactur-
ing employment, low-wage imports have been associated with lower wages, rising inequality,
worsening health, and political polarization.2 Even as manufacturing employment has de-
clined, however, the share of manufacturing value-added in GDP has been relatively flat. In
many of the same industries that experienced rising import penetration, notably computers
and electronics, US value-added growth has tracked overall GDP growth or risen even faster
(Fort et al., 2018).
    In the face of rising low-wage imports, some firms shrink or fail entirely, while others
respond by switching industries (Bernard et al., 2006; Bloom et al., 2019) or increasing
innovation (Bloom et al., 2016; Hombert and Matray, 2018; Guti´
                                                              errez and Philippon, 2017).
Existing research documents heterogeneous responses to import competition but centers on
firms changing their domestic activities to escape competition. From a domestic producer's
perspective, however, the rise of low-wage countries is not only a potential competitive
threat in the form of cheaper products, but also a potential opportunity to lower costs by
relocating parts of the production process.
    This paper studies firms' decisions to offshore production to low-wage countries, and the
impact of these decisions on domestic production and employment. We exploit a unique
Danish offshoring survey to show that firms increase their imports of the same detailed
goods they produce domestically after they offshore. Instead of ceasing domestic production
of the newly imported goods, however, offshoring firms continue producing them in the
home country. Offshorers reorient their domestic workforce towards technology-related
occupations, and increase the prices of ­ rather than cease to produce ­ domestic varieties.
The evidence suggests that offshoring allows firms to expand their product lines along a
quality dimension by exploiting low-cost production opportunities in low-wage countries
and shifting domestic workers into innovation and product-development activities.
    Policy makers and academics have long understood the tension between the potentially
harmful effects on competing domestic producers of low-wage imports and the positive,
productivity enhancing effects of imported inputs (e.g., Amiti and Konings, 2007). In this
paper, we identify a different dimension of import heterogeneity. From the perspective of a
goods-producing firm, imports under the control of other agents (e.g., Walmart importing
   1
     Autor et al. (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016) provide evidence for the US. Negative effects of Chinese
imports on employment are also documented by Mion and Zhu (2013) for Belgium, Ashournia et al. (2014)
and Utar (2018) for Denmark, Malgouyres (2017) for France, Balsvik et al. (2015) for Norway, and Thewissen
and van Vliet (2017) for the OECD.
   2
     For example, Autor et al. (2014), Pierce and Schott (forthcoming), Autor et al. (2017), and Che et al.
(2017).


                                                      1
from a Chinese producer) are potentially different from goods made both domestically and
abroad, and imported by the domestic producer itself (e.g., Cummings importing one line
of engines from China). Improvements in technology and reduced costs of trade increase
the ability of firms to fragment their production processes both inside and across country
borders (Fort, 2017; Bernard and Fort, 2015). The delocalization of production processes
means that newly integrated low-wage economies are a potential source for production
under the control of domestic firms, either through foreign direct investment or arms-length
transactions with foreign firms.
       Using a unique firm-level survey that covers the majority of manufacturing output of
the Danish economy, we identify firms that offshore their main activity between 2001 and
2006.3 The data indicate that about nine percent of Danish firms offshored during this
period, with Eastern Europe and China as the top two destinations. We link the survey
data to detailed import and production data to analyze precisely what firms do when they
offshore.
       As expected, offshoring firms disproportionately increase their imports from the offshore
location. In contrast to the common assumption that offshoring necessarily entails imports
of inputs, the data indicate that offshorers import the same detailed six-digit HS (HS6)
products that they also produce in Denmark. Imports of these "produced goods" grow
disproportionately for offshorers, while they are small and relatively flat at non-offshorers.
This fact underpins our first contribution: a firm-by-product level measure of offshoring
which we define as the share of a firm's produced-good imports from a region over its
total imports. This measure is available for all manufacturing firms, has both intensive and
extensive-margin variation, and can be constructed for any region or time period. Moreover,
it captures an important component of aggregate imports: the share of produced-good
imports in total Danish imports rose from just over 9 percent in 1998 to over 13.5 percent
in 2008.4
       The most surprising finding is that domestic production at these same offshoring firms
does not fall, even as their produced-good imports increase. The literature typically as-
sumes that when particular tasks or activities are offshored, they cease to be performed
domestically. Our second contribution is to show that offshorers' domestic production of
HS6 goods that they also import accounts for the majority of their domestic output and is
more resilient than production of goods that they do not import. The data indicate that
offshoring firms continue domestic production of goods, even as they increase imports of
   3
     The survey was conducted on a 2005 frame and the firms surveyed account for 80 percent of Danish
manufacturing production in that year.
   4
     Produced-good imports consist only of imported HS6 products that the importer also produces domes-
tically. These goods represent "final" goods from the firm's perspective, but we refer to them as produced
goods to avoid confusion with consumer products. For example, Grundfos manufactures pumps that are
inputs into other goods, but pumps are final products from Grudfos' perspective.


                                                    2
these goods from the offshoring destination. However, the imported varieties have lower
prices than their domestic counterparts, with systematically lower prices from lower-wage
countries. In addition, prices of the domestic varieties increase after offshoring begins. This
evidence suggests that firms have a set of capabilities in developing, producing, and sell-
ing particular products that they exploit by manufacturing different quality versions of the
same good in multiple locations.
      The fact that imports of produced goods are associated with offshoring highlights a
crucial point in research on the role of imports from low-wage countries. Typically, pa-
pers examining the consequences of rising low-wage imports use a single industry import
penetration measure (Autor et al., 2013, 2014). We show that rising low-wage import pen-
etration consists of two different types of imports: lower-price varieties under the control of
offshoring firms and those that represent a more direct, negative demand shock for domestic
producers. We conclude the paper by showing that only non-produced-good imports are
related to the well-known negative industry employment effects documented in the litera-
ture.
      Our third contribution is to show that offshoring leads firms to reorganize their domestic
activities by increasing their number and share of tech workers. We construct an instrument
to capture production cost savings opportunities for Danish firms in Eastern Europe, their
main offshoring location. The instrument exploits HS6 product-level variation in changes to
Eastern European countries' comparative advantage in those goods that firms produce prior
to offshoring. It allows us to identify how intensive and extensive margin changes in firms'
produced-good imports affect firm-level outcomes, even controlling for broad sector-level
trends. Although offshoring decreases firms' total employment via a reduction in production
workers, it does not "hollow out" the firm and transform it into a pure intermediary of
imported products. Using the detailed employer-employee data, we show that offshoring
leads both to hiring new tech workers and to shifting workers within the firm to tech
occupations.
      The changing composition of offshoring firms' employment is more easily understood
by considering the complete production process for goods. The range of activities involved
in the delivery of goods to a final customer entails more than just physical manufacturing
activities. Pre-production tasks can include R&D, product design, and engineering as well
as the development of production processes.5 Production itself involves transformation and
assembly of inputs and coordination of the various production stages. Post-production
activities include marketing, branding, and logistics. This holistic view shows that the
manufacturing and assembly of a good abroad is part of a larger production process. For
example, the Danish pump manufacturer Grundfos, opened two pump manufacturing plants
  5
      These activities are modeled as headquarter services in Antr`
                                                                  as and Helpman (2004).



                                                     3
in Hungary in 2000 and 2001, while focusing Danish workers on developing and producing
pumps with new digital monitoring systems.6
       This paper contributes to three distinct literatures. First, we build on a literature
documenting the causes and evolution of offshoring. Since the seminal paper by Feenstra
and Hanson (1999) and continuing through Hummels et al. (2018), researchers have equated
offshoring with imports of intermediate inputs.7 While we agree that imported inputs are an
important form of offshoring, this paper highlights the fact that imports of produced goods
are another, often-overlooked type of offshoring. Hummels et al. (2014) measure offshoring
as imports of the same four-digit HS industries that importers produce domestically as a way
to capture imported inputs. In contrast, we are the first to emphasize that imports of the
same goods produced domestically also constitute offshoring. With the aim of distinguishing
produced-goods from the imports of inputs, we narrow the scope to the same HS6 products
the firm produces at home, and show that these produced-good imports are a significant
and growing share of aggregate imports with different effects on industry-level employment.8
This measure can be applied to multiple countries and time periods to examine this form
of offshoring more broadly.
       The paper also contributes to a literature that studies the effect of offshoring on domestic
employment and productivity. Offshoring is generally modeled as a substitute for domestic
activities that raises firm productivity, either by replacing domestic inputs with foreign
inputs (Halpern et al., 2015; Blaum et al., 2018), or by serving multiple locations via
export platforms that each produce different products (Tintelnot, 2017). Grossman and
Rossi-Hansberg (2008) introduce the notion of a "substitution effect" in which domestic
employment shrinks as tasks are moved offshore versus a "productivity effect," in which
lower input costs lead an industry to expand. These forces are also present in firm-level
models of offshoring (Antr`
                          as et al., 2017; Boehm et al., 2019), but regardless of which one
dominates, firms source each input from the single, lowest-cost location. In contrast to
these views, we highlight a distinct type of offshoring in which firms produce the same
   6
     This information is based on publicly available information, see https://www.grundfos.com/about-us/
news-and-press/news/grundfos-opens-competence-centre-in-hungary.html.
   7
     Hummels et al. (2018) provide a comprehensive survey on offshoring. Early work focused on imported
inputs at the industry level (Hummels et al., 2001; Johnson and Noguera, 2017), while more recent papers
exploit firm-level imports by manufacturers. Another strand of literature measures offshoring using multi-
national firms' affiliate activities (Harrison and McMillan, 2009; Muendler and Becker, 2010; Kovak et al.,
2017). Yeats (2001) measures offshoring as imports of products with the words "parts" or "components."
Fort (2017) uses survey data on US manufacturing establishments' purchases of contract manufacturing
services. Monarch et al. (2017) use Trade Adjustment Assistance petitions to measure offshoring.
   8
     In Section 3.4 we document a positive and statistically significant relationship between growth in a
firm's produced-good imports and the relocation of its core activity, while there is no relationship between
changes in non-produced good imports and relocation. In Appendix Section A, we show that imports of
produced-goods and imports of inputs overlap at the HS4 industry level, and provide examples of why that
occurs. When feasible to distinguish imported inputs from produced-goods at the HS4 level, only the latter
grow for firms that report relocating their core activity in the survey.


                                                     4
detailed products in multiple locations. In this sense, the patterns we document are most
similar to the formation of international teams as in Antr`
                                                          as et al. (2006), with knowledge
production specializing in the home country. This specialization is reminiscent of Rodr´
                                                                                       iguez-
Clare (2010) and Arkolakis et al. (2018), though we find that firms do not cease domestic
production when they offshore, and instead increase the prices of their domestic varieties.
   The systematic price differences we document across locations suggest that offshoring
allows for quality ladders as first modeled in Grossman and Helpman (1991). Prior work
has found a relationship between low-wage imports and quality upgrading (Khandelwal,
2010; Amiti and Khandelwal, 2013). Our work is most closely related to Schott (2004) who
documents price differences across locations for the same detailed products, and Schott
(2008) who shows how unit values evolve within a location. Here we focus on within-firm
price differences across locations and over time to show that another response to the rise of
low-wage countries is to relocate production there and focus domestic production on higher
price varieties.
   Finally, we contribute to a more nascent body of work that studies the relationship
between offshoring and the reorganization of domestic activities. Hummels et al. (2014) use
the Danish data to document an increase in the skill premium for high-skill workers due
to offshoring as firms decrease employment of low-skill workers. We build on their work
by studying offshoring to a low-wage region, and identifying both intensive and extensive
margin changes, with the latter being particularly important for low-wage offshoring. A key
contribution we make relative to their work is to show that firms continue to produce, and
increase unit values of, the goods that they offshore. We also show that low-wage offshoring
opportunities lead firms to shed production workers but increase both the level and shares
of technology workers. Other work finds that tech workers are important predictors of firm
growth (Harrigan et al., 2018), and we show that their rise is associated with increased
R&D expenditure and unit values. In this sense, our paper is closely related to Bøler et
al. (2015) who document complementarities between input sourcing and innovation. While
their results are driven by a scale effect, our paper shows that offshoring also entails a
reallocation towards technology and innovation-related occupations.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe the new offshoring
survey and additional data on firm imports, output, and employment. Section 3 documents
the differences between offshoring and non-offshoring firms and establishes the link between
offshoring and produced-good imports. Section 4 introduces the identification strategy
that exploits productivity changes within destination countries to identify the effects of
offshoring. Section 5 explores the differences in unit values between domestic and imported
varieties at offshoring firms. In Section 6 we consider the implications of non-produced
versus produced-good imports on employment. The last section concludes.


                                             5
2         Data
In this section, we describe the new offshoring survey as well as other firm and worker
datasets.

2.1        Offshoring survey
We use a 2007 offshoring survey run by Statistics Denmark that asked firms about their
offshoring decisions between 2001 and 2006. Statistics Denmark surveyed all firms with
more than 50 employees that existed in 2005, and firms with 20-50 employees in selected
industries.9 The Danish survey achieved a response rate of approximately 98 percent, which
translates to 4,161 firms.
         The survey asked firms about their decisions to relocate, either in part or entirely, nine
different business functions: core activity; distribution and logistics; marketing; sales and
after sales services (including help desk and call center); ICT services; administrative and
management functions; engineering work and other technical services; R&D; facility man-
agement (cleaning, security, food, etc...); other functions. We focus on a firm's decision
to offshore its core business activity to a foreign location, the most prevalent form of off-
shoring.10 We emphasize that this offshoring definition includes only those functions that
were previously performed domestically, either by the firm itself or by another domestic
firm. The offshoring question specifically does not include other foreign activities that are
new to the firm, i.e. a foreign subsidiary in a new line of business, which are covered in a
separate part of the survey.
         The specific language in the survey asked firms whether they moved a particular activity
to one or more of seven distinct regions.11 These regions are "Old" EU countries (EU15),
which comprise the countries that belonged to the EU prior to 2004; New Member States
(NMS), which comprise the 12 countries that joined the EU in 2004 and 2007;12 other
European countries; China; India; other Asian countries and Oceania; US and Canada;
Central America; and Africa. Firms were also asked whether they offshored their core
activity within the same business group, or to separate firms.
         The survey therefore provides a direct measure of a firm's decision to begin offshoring
between 2001 and 2006 to a particular region or regions. We focus solely on the relocation of
the firm's core activity to a foreign country, regardless of whether this relocation occurred
    9
      Certain industries, such as government services were deemed less relevant for measuring offshoring.
    10
      See online Appendix Table A.1 for statistics on each activity. The survey instructions specify that a
firm's core activity corresponds to its primary industry classification.
   11
      The actual Danish language is "...udflytning...", which literally translates to "move out." The precise
question is presented in Figure A.1 in the online Appendix.
   12
      The 12 NMS countries are Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Romania, and Slovenia, and Slovakia.


                                                     6
within or outside the boundary of the firm. In practice, the survey suggests that both
integrated and outsourced offshoring are important. Approximately 44 percent of firms
that offshored their core activity did so to other foreign companies (with no ownership or
less than 50 percent ownership). The remaining offshored to a partner with an ownership
relationship.

2.2      Additional data sources
We combine the offshoring survey data with six different data sources on Danish firms and
workers. We use the Firm Statistics Register (FirmStat), which is based on Value-Added
Tax (VAT) administrative data, to gather information on firm sales, value-added, material
expenditures, capital, total employees, and industry (six-digit NACE). We use these data,
which are available for the population of Danish firms, to construct a firm-level panel from
1996 to 2008.13 This time frame and coverage allow us to analyze potential selection into
the offshoring survey, as well as any differential trends for offshoring versus non-offshoring
firms.
    We augment the VAT data with product-level information about the values and quanti-
ties of firm production from manufacturing production surveys (ProdCom). These surveys
are available beginning in 1995 and cover all manufacturing firms with at least ten employ-
ees. They provide information on the value of production by ten-digit product codes, the
first eight digits of which map to Combined Nomenclature (CN) product codes. The CN
classification system maps to the Harmonized System (HS) at the six-digit level.
    We also exploit a survey conducted by Statistics Denmark that collects manufacturing
firms' purchases of intermediate inputs. These data are available for manufacturing firms
with at least 50 employees. In principle these data are also available at the HS6 product
level, though in practice firms often report only at the more aggregated HS4 industry level.
    We link these data to the Danish Foreign Trade Statistics Register. The trade data
are based on Customs declarations and cover all international trade transactions of Danish
firms by product and destination/origin. A significant benefit of the Danish data is that
products in the trade data are classified using the same CN8 codes as the production data.
This facilitates comparisons of Danish firms' production and trade decisions.
    A critical element in our analysis is detailed information about the population of Danish
individuals over the period 1998 to 2008 from the matched employer-employee data in
the Integrated Database for Labor Market Research (IDA). These data cover the universe
of the Danish population aged 15-74, including the unemployed and those outside of the
labor force. They provide information on workers' gender, age, experience, tenure, wage,
 13
    Some of the firm-level data continues past 2008 but we have chosen to end the sample to avoid the Great
Recession, and because Danish occupation codes change dramatically in 2009.


                                                    7
education level, and occupation. Workers are linked to the plant and firm where they are
employed.
    We use the IDA data to define worker occupation groups. Following Bernard et al.
(2017), we exploit the detailed occupation codes to assign workers to five distinct occupa-
tional categories: managers; technology workers (R&D workers and technicians); support
activities; sales activities; and line workers. We further decompose line workers into two
separate categories: those involved in transport and warehousing ("other blue collar") and
production workers.14
    Finally, we merge in data from R&D surveys that span the period from 2000 to 2010.
The coverage of these surveys varies depending on the year. Firms surveyed are supposed
to represent the universe of potential innovators, which means in practice that specific
innovative sectors and firms above a certain size threshold are targeted. While the full set
of questions in each survey varies by year, we construct a panel of average R&D expenditure,
as well as the share of R&D workers in total employment.


3    Offshoring Firms
The availability of a direct survey measure of offshoring provides a unique opportunity to
analyze the differences between offshoring and non-offshoring firms, both before and after
they move their core activity abroad. This section provides summary statistics of this survey
measure of offshoring, and descriptive evidence on how it relates to changes in firms over
time. We focus on two aspects of firm behavior: employment and importing. We go beyond
studying the level of employment to examine how offshoring firms change their workforce
composition and the set of activities performed in the home country.
    Regarding importing, we study the types of goods imported by and (potentially) pro-
duced by offshoring firms. While the offshoring survey is specific to 2001 to 2006 in Den-
mark, we link it to production and trade data to shed new light on the kinds of goods that
firms import before and after offshoring. Prior work has associated total imports or imports
of intermediate inputs with offshoring. The new survey data indicate that offshoring is pre-
dominantly correlated with imports of goods produced by the firm rather than imports of
inputs. We exploit this fact to develop a new measure of offshoring that can be employed
more generally with data for other countries and time periods.
  14
     Section A.5 in the online Appendix explains how we clean the occupation data and map the detailed
ISCO codes to these aggregate categories.




                                                  8
                                       Figure 1: Industry shares of offshoring firms and workers

                  Distribution of Offshoring Firms Across Industries                                                       Share of Workers in Industry at Offshoring Firms




                                                                                                               .4
      .5
      .4




                                                                                                               .3
      .3




                                                                                                               .2
      .2




                                                                                                               .1
      .1
      0




                                                                                                               0
                 c.


                           ry


                                      re


                                              vs



                                                           s


                                                                    r


                                                                                il


                                                                                            s


                                                                                                       t




                                                                                                                          c.


                                                                                                                                    ry


                                                                                                                                               re


                                                                                                                                                       vs



                                                                                                                                                                    s


                                                                                                                                                                             r


                                                                                                                                                                                         il


                                                                                                                                                                                                     s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                    or




                                                                                                                                                                                                             or
                                                                    pe




                                                                                                                                                                             pe
                                                                             ta




                                                                                                                                                                                      ta
                                                        ic




                                                                                           ce




                                                                                                                                                                 ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                    ce
             et




                                                                                                                      et
                       ne




                                                                                                                                ne
                                 itu




                                                                                                                                          itu
                                            Be




                                                                                                                                                     Be
                                                                                                  sp




                                                                                                                                                                                                           sp
                                                        t




                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                          /re




                                                                                                                                                                                   /re
                                                                  pa




                                                                                                                                                                           pa
                                                     as




                                                                                                                                                              as
                                                                                          i




                                                                                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                       rv




                                                                                                                                                                                                rv
            s




                                                                                                                     s
                      hi


                                 rn




                                                                                                                               hi


                                                                                                                                          rn
                                                                                                  an




                                                                                                                                                                                                           an
           ile




                                                                                                                    ile
                                                                          le




                                                                                                                                                                                   le
                                           &




                                                                                                                                                    &
                                                       l




                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                      se




                                                                                                                                                                                               se
                      ac




                                                                                                                               ac
                                                    /p




                                                                                                                                                             /p
                                Fu




                                                               d,




                                                                                                                                         Fu




                                                                                                                                                                        d,
                                                                         sa




                                                                                                                                                                                  sa
                                                                                                Tr




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tr
        xt




                                                                                                                 xt
                                       od




                                                                                                                                                od
                                                    s




                                                                                                                                                             s
                                                             oo




                                                                                                                                                                      oo
                  M




                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                   s




                                                                                                                                                                                            s
                                                 al




                                                                                                                                                          al
      Te




                                                                                                               Te
                                                                     le




                                                                                                                                                                              le
                                                                                 es




                                                                                                                                                                                          es
                                      Fo




                                                                                                                                               Fo
                                                           W




                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                               ic




                                                                                                                                                        ic
                                                                    ho




                                                                                                                                                                             ho
                                                                                  n




                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                               m




                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                               si




                                                                                                                                                                                        si
                                                                   W




                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                            he




                                                                                                                                                     he
                                                                          Bu




                                                                                                                                                                                   Bu
                                           C




                                                                                                                                                    C
             (a) Offshoring Firms Across Sectors                                                                          (b) Worker Shares Within Sectors
Notes : The left panel shows how offshoring firm are distributed across sectors. More than half of all offshoring
firms are in the Machinery sector. The right panel plots the share of workers within an industry that work
at offshoring firms. The bars in the left panel do not sum to one, since only the top sectors are presented to
minimize disclosure concerns.



3.1        Offshoring firm characteristics
We first provide descriptive statistics on the number, characteristics, and industries of
offshoring firms. A total of 380 (9.1 percent) firms relocate some of their core activity to a
foreign country between 2001 and 2006. These firms are larger in terms of both employment
and sales. In simple "premia" regressions of the log firm employment (or sales) in 2000 on
an offshoring dummy and four-digit NACE industry fixed effects, we find that offshoring
firms are 57 and 62 log points larger than non-offshorers in terms of employment and sales,
respectively.
    The majority of offshoring firms are classified in manufacturing sectors. The left panel
of Figure 1 shows how offshoring firms are distributed across sectors, using a firm's industry
in 2001. Machinery is the largest broad manufacturing sector in Denmark and accounts for
more than half of all offshoring firms.15 The remaining offshoring firms are spread across
other manufacturing services, as well as Wholesale/Retail and Business services.
    The share of industry employment at offshoring firms is also highest in manufacturing.
The right panel of Figure 1 depicts the share of workers at firms that offshore within the
sector. About 40 percent of workers in the Machinery and Textile and Apparel sectors work
at offshoring firms. At the other extreme are the Business Services and Transport sectors,
where fewer than five percent of workers are employed by offshoring firms.
  15
     In later sections of the paper, we restrict our sample to firms with production, thereby increasing the
importance of the Machinery sector in our results.




                                                                                                           9
                                                  Figure 2: Employment differences by firms' offshore status

                                                Average Workers Per Firm                                                                 Technology Worker Share
                                                      By Firms' Offshore Status                                                               By Firms' Offshore Status
          250




                                                                                                        .22
 Avg workers per firm




                                                                                                        .2
              200




                                                                                                     .16 .18
                                                                                                       Share
   150




                                                                                                        .14
                                                                                                        .12
          100




                                        2000              2002           2004         2006   2008              1998             2000              2002           2004         2006   2008
                                                                  Year                                                                                    Year

                                                     Offshorers             Non-Offshorers                                                   Offshorers             Non-Offshorers
                        Notes: Balanced panel of firms.                                                         Notes: Balanced panel of firms.



                                  (a) Average Employment                                                                    (b) Tech Worker Share
Notes: The left panel presents the weighted average of employment at firms that offshore to new foreign locations
between 2001 to 2006 and those that do not. The right panel presents the weighted average of the share of tech
workers by firm offshore status. Sample is a balanced panel of firms in the offshoring survey that exist from 1998 to
2008.


3.2                         Employment responses at offshoring firms
As discussed earlier, a number of papers have used firm-level data to document negative
employment consequences of offshoring, particularly for low-skill workers. The left panel of
Figure 2 depicts the weighted average employment for a balanced panel of both offshoring
and non-offshoring firms from 1998 to 2008.16 As expected offshoring firms are much larger
than non-offshorers at all points in time. However, over the sample period, the offshoring
firms reduce their average employment while non-offshorers' average size trends upward,
confirming results from other studies including those on Danish manufacturing, see Hum-
mels et al. (2014).
                   The decline in total employment masks important differences in the levels and changes
of employment composition at offshoring versus non-offshoring firms. Table 1 presents
weighted average employment shares across seven occupation categories over the period 1998
to 2008. To control for industry compositional differences, we divide a firm's employment
share in a category by its industry average employment share. A value of 1.0 indicates that
the firm-level average is equal to the industry-level average.
                   There are three notable differences in employment composition between the two firm
types. First, offshorers start with relatively higher production worker and tech worker
shares of employment. They employ about a quarter more tech workers relative to their
  16
     In this subsection, the results are for a balanced panel of Danish firms from 1998 to 2008 that responded
to the offshoring survey. We focus on a balanced panel since the frame for the survey is based on firms that
survived until 2005, so that it is not feasible to analyze entry and exit. Throughout the paper, we weight
by firm employment in reporting averages and in the regression analysis.


                                                                                                10
                                 Table 1: Employment type

               Worker occupation shares by offshore status

                                                     1998    2001    2006    2008
               Panel A: Offshoring firms
                    Production workers               1.10    1.07    0.96    0.88
                    Other blue collar                0.83    0.89    0.71    0.73
                    Tech workers                     1.26    1.26    1.36    1.45
                    Support workers                  0.92    0.95    1.02    1.08
                    Sales workers                    0.92    0.93    0.99    0.98
                    Managers                         0.87    0.87    0.96    1.00
                    NEC                              0.78    0.72    0.78    0.70
               Panel B: Non-offshoring firms
                    Production workers               0.98    0.99    1.01    1.02
                    Other blue collar                1.03    1.02    1.05    1.04
                    Tech workers                     0.95    0.95    0.94    0.93
                    Support workers                  1.02    1.01    1.00    0.99
                    Sales workers                    1.01    1.01    1.00    1.00
                    Managers                         1.03    1.02    1.01    1.00
                    NEC                              1.04    1.05    1.04    1.05
               Notes: Table presents weighted average shares of firm employment
               by category divided by the weighted industry average of the em-
               ployment share in that category. Offshoring firms report relocat-
               ing their primary activity to new foreign locations between 2001 to
               2006, while non-offshorers do not. Sample is a balanced panel of
               firms in the offshoring survey that exist from 1998 to 2008.



industry average in 1998, while non-offshorers employ less than the average. Offshorers
are also more production worker-intensive than average, while non-offshorers are slightly
less. Second, the relative shares of these two types of workers evolve in opposite directions
over the offshoring period for offshorers versus non-offshorers. While offshorers increase
their shares of tech workers and decrease production workers, the relative shares move in
the opposite directions at non-offshoring firms. Finally, offshoring firms also increase their
shares of sales and support workers. Tech worker occupations are those explicitly aimed
at research, engineering, and technical work. Support workers include accountants and
lawyers. The employment composition changes at offshoring firms are thus consistent with
them re-orienting their domestic activities towards the pre-production and post-production
tasks related to manufacturing, as depicted in Figure 3.
   We plot the high and increasing share of tech workers at offshoring firms in Panel B of
Figure 2. Offshorers have an average of 16 percent of their workforce in tech occupations in

                                               11
                                Figure 3: From Idea to Customer




2001 and over 20 percent by 2006. This contrasts with firms that do not offshore, at which
there is only a slight increase in the share of tech workers over the same decade.17
       Since total employment at offshorers is falling, especially in relative terms, the rising
tech worker share could be due to a decreasing denominator. Figure 4, depicts the levels
of total employment and tech worker employment for the two categories of firms over the
period. While total employment declines at offshoring firms, the number of tech workers
at those firms rises, contributing to their large tech share increase. For firms that do not
offshore, both total employment and tech workers levels increase; the share of tech workers
at non-offshorers increases considerably less.
       We conclude this section with simple descriptive evidence on firms' research and devel-
opment (R&D) activities.18 Figure 5 shows (average) total R&D expenditures and R&D
worker shares for offshoring and non-offshoring firms from 1998 to 2008. Figure 5a plots
average R&D expenditure in thousands of Danish Kroner by firms' offshore status. Begin-
ning in 2004, there is a clear divergence in R&D spending trajectories, as offshoring firms
significantly increase their expenditures, both in level terms and relative to non-offshorers.19
A similar stark shift is seen in the share of R&D workers at offshoring firms in Figure 5b.
These results provide additional evidence that firms' shift in their workforce composition
towards technology workers is indeed related to changes in their innovative efforts.
       The evidence from the new survey suggests a role for offshoring in changing not just the
level of firm employment, but also its occupational composition. Offshoring is associated
  17
     The counterpart to Table 1 with non-normalized shares is in online Appendix Table A.4.
  18
     The R&D survey covers a rotating panel of approximately 4,300 firms per year. We match about 36
percent of the offshoring firms to the R&D survey.
  19
     The share of expenditures shows a comparable divergence starting in 2004, rising from just under 3 to
over 4 percent of total expenditures at offshorers.



                                                   12
                                                                                     Figure 4: Total tech workers by firm offshore status


                                               Total and Tech Workers at Offshoring Firms                                                                                                                  Total and Tech Workers at Non-Offshoring Firms




                                                                                                                                                                                            420
         70




                                                                                                                                   14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                   400
                 68




                                                                                                                                                     13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    55
                                                                                                                                   Tech Workers (000s)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tech Workers (000s)
  Workers (000s)




                                                                                                                                                                                    Workers (000s)
                                                                                                                                                                                             380
         66




                                                                                                                                            12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                                                     360
 64




                                                                                                                                     11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    45
                                                                                                                                                                                            340
         62




                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                            320
                      1998                                           2000           2002           2004          2006           2008                                                                     1998            2000               2002          2004        2006      2008
                                                                                           Year                                                                                                                                                    Year

                                                                            Total Workers                 Tech Workers                                                                                                           Total Workers                   Tech Workers
                       Notes: Balanced panel of firms.                                                                                                                                                    Notes: Balanced panel of firms.



                                                                            (a) Offshorers                                                                                                                                 (b) Non-Offshorers
Notes: The left panel presents the total employment and total tech workers at firms that offshore to new locations
between 2001 to 2006. The right panel presents the same measures at firms that do not offshore. Sample is a balanced
panel of firms in the offshoring survey that exist from 1998 to 2008.

                                                                                           Figure 5: Total R&D spending and R&D workers

                                                                                Average Total R&D Spending                                                                                                               R&D Worker Shares
                                                                                            By Offshore Status                                                                                                         By Offshore Status and Year
                         5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000




                                                                                                                                                                    .12     .1
                                                                                                                                                           Employment Share
                                    DKK (000s)




                                                                                                                                                              .06   .08
                                                                                                                                                                    .04
                                                                                                                                                                    .02




                                                              1998           2000           2002          2004           2006               2008                                 1998                        2000            2002             2004           2006        2008
                                                                                                   Year                                                                                                                               Year

                                                                                      Offshorers             Non-Offshorers                                                                                             Offshorers                 Non-Offshorers



                                                                            (a) Total R&D spending                                                                                                          (b) R&D worker share
Notes : Left panel plots the weighted average of R&D expenditure for firms in the offshoring and R&D
surveys. Right panel plots the share of R&D workers over total workers for firms in the offshoring and R&D
surveys. Offshoring firms are those that relocated their core activity to a foreign country between 2001 and
2006.



with declining total employment, especially of production workers, and rising levels of tech
workers. In Section 4 we examine the causal links between offshoring and the changing
nature of work within the firm. To do so, we first develop a novel product-level measure of
firm offshoring by linking the survey data to the import transactions data and the production
data.



                                                                                                                                                          13
                                 Table 2: Top offshoring destinations

                   Offshoring of core activity by detailed region
                   Region                                Firm count              Share
                   New Member States (NMS)                    139                 0.37
                   NMS & China                                66                  0.17
                   China                                      60                  0.16
                   Other                                      115                 0.30
                   Total Offshorers                           380                 1.00
                   Notes: Table presents the foreign locations to which firms relocated
                   their core activity between 2001 and 2006. "New Member States" count
                   includes all firms that relocate to the 12 NMS (countries that joined the
                   EU in 2004 or 2007), except those that also report relocating to China.
                   "NMS & China" includes all firms that relocate their core activity to
                   both NMS and China. "China" includes all firms that relocate to China,
                   but not to the NMS.




3.3       Produced-good imports reflect offshoring
We now examine how offshoring relates to changes in firms' domestic production and import
behavior. As discussed in the introduction, offshored activities are often assumed to be
substitutes for domestic production and to be captured by imports of intermediate inputs.
In much of the theoretical work on offshoring, there is a clear prediction that an offshored
task will cease to be performed domestically.20 The employment declines documented above
seem to be consistent with the view that offshoring replaces domestic production workers.
       We first assess the extent to which firms' offshoring decisions are reflected in their import
behavior. Table 2 breaks out offshoring by destination. Between 2001 to 2006, the majority
of offshoring firms relocate their core activity to low-wage countries. The main offshoring
destination (54 percent) is the 12 New Member States (NMS) that join the European Union
(EU) in 2004 or 2007. Approximately one third of these firms also offshore to China. An
additional 16 percent offshore to China, but not to the NMS. The primary region in "Other"
consists of the 14 countries besides Denmark that had previously joined the EU (see online
Appendix Table A.2).
       The shares in Table 2 highlight the importance of low-wage countries in firms' extensive
margin offshoring decisions from 2001 to 2006. To assess the extent to which these firms'
  20
    The net effects of offshoring on total firm size are theoretically ambiguous since they depend on the
relative size of the substitution effect (substituting domestic tasks for offshored tasks) versus the scale effect
(increase in firm size due to marginal cost reductions from offshoring), as well as on the increase in the
competitive environment due to the cost reductions (i.e., the fall in the aggregate price index). Existing
work models these opposing forces at the industry level (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008) and the firm
level (Antr`as et al., 2017; Boehm et al., 2019).


                                                       14
                              Figure 6: Domestic production by offshore status and good type

                                 Average Domestic Production                                          Offshoring Firms' Average Domestic Production
                                              By Offshore Status                                                            By Firm-Good Import Status




                                                                                         250
    300




                                                                                         200
     250
 MDKK




                                                                                        MDKK
                                                                                         150
    200




                                                                                         100
                                                                                         50
    150




           2000                 2002                   2004         2006       2008            2000                 2002                   2004          2006    2008
                                                       Year                                                                                Year

                                        Offshorers            Non-Offshorers                                                  Imported            Non-Imported
            Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.                                     Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.



            (a) Total Production by All Firms                                          (b) Production by Good Type by Offshorers
Notes: The left panel presents the weighted average of firms' total domestic production at firms that offshore to
new locations between 2001 to 2006 and those that do not. The right panel presents the weighted average of firms'
domestic production split out based on whether the firm imports the same HS6 product (solid line) or does not import
the same HS6 product (dashed line). Sample is a balanced panel of firms in the offshoring survey that exist from 1998
to 2008 and that report production in Prod Com in at least year over this period.



offshoring decisions are captured by their imports, we link the survey data to the firm
Customs transactions data. We find that the average growth rate of imports from NMS
or China over the offshoring period is 74.5 log points higher for offshorers to those regions
relative to non-offshorers.21
       We next investigate the extent to which offshoring firms' new imports replace their
production in Denmark. For this analysis, we are limited to manufacturing firms with
production data in the ProdCom survey. Figure 6a depicts the weighted average of domestic
production by firms' offshoring status. Both offshoring and non-offshoring firms increase
their domestic production over the period. This finding is surprising, particularly in light of
the falling total employment and falling production worker employment at offshoring firms.
       To understand why domestic production rises for offshorers, even as they grow their
imports, we split firms' domestic production and imports into three groups of detailed HS6
products: (1) produced-imported: goods that are produced by the firm domestically and
also imported in that year; (2) produced-only: goods that are produced domestically but
not imported in that year; and (3) imported-only: goods that are imported by the firm but
not produced domestically in that year.
       In Figure 6b, we split offshorers' domestic production of HS6 products into those that
are produced-imported and those that are produced-only. Two facts are apparent. First,
  21
     For the sample of offshoring firms, we regress the growth rate of imports to NMS or China by firm f
measured as (importsregion              region               region        region
                      f 2006 - importsf 2001 )/(0.5(importsf 2001 + importsf 2006 )) on a region fixed effect
and an indicator equal to one if the firm offshores to that region.



                                                                                  15
                                             Figure 7: Imports by offshore status and good type

                         Avgerage Imports of Produced Goods                                                Average Imports of Non-Produced Goods
                                             By Offshore Status                                                                   By Offshore Status
   60




                                                                                        60
   50




                                                                                        50
     40




                                                                                          40
  MDKK




                                                                                       MDKK
 30




                                                                                      30
   20




                                                                                        20
   10




                                                                                        10
          2000                 2002                   2004         2006       2008             2000                 2002                   2004         2006       2008
                                                      Year                                                                                 Year

                                       Offshorers            Non-Offshorers                                                 Offshorers            Non-Offshorers
           Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.                                      Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.



                          (a) Produced goods                                                             (b) Non-Produced Goods
Notes: The left panel presents the weighted average of firms' imports of HS6 products that the importing firm also
produced domestically in the same year, at firms that offshore to new locations between 2001 to 2006 (solid line) and
those that do not (dashed line). The right panel presents the weighted average of firms' imports of HS6 products that
the importing firm did not produce domestically in the same year, at firms that offshore to new locations between
2001 to 2006 (solid line) and those that do not (dashed line). Sample is a balanced panel of firms in the offshoring
survey that exist from 1998 to 2008 and that report production in ProdCom in at least year over this period.



the bulk of domestic production for offshoring firms is in detailed product categories that
are also imported by the same firm. This is consistent with the offshoring survey capturing
relocation of firms' main activities. It also shows that offshoring firms are both importing
and producing the same good. Second, the growth in domestic production at offshoring
firms is in these same products that they also import. Production of goods that are not
imported actually shrinks. In contrast, in online Appendix Figure A.3, we show that non-
offshorers' domestic production grows in both types of goods.
       We perform a comparable decomposition of firm imports in Figure 7. Figure 7a de-
picts imports of goods that are also produced by the importing firm, while Figure 7b shows
import-only goods, i.e., goods not produced domestically by the importer. Each panel
presents the weighted average of these import types by firms' offshore status. While both
types of firms increase their imports over the period, offshorers' import growth is concen-
trated in produced goods; non-produced good imports are essentially constant in levels. In
contrast, for non-offshoring firms, the levels and increases of produced-good imports are
quite small, but their non-produced good imports increase.22 In addition, the bulk of the
changes in imports for both types of firms occurs during the 2001 to 2006 offshoring period.
  22
    Figure 7a also shows that offshoring firms have higher initial levels of produced-good imports relative to
non-offshorers. In online Appendix Figure A.4, we show that this is because firms that relocate their core
activities to NMS and/or China during the offshoring period have higher shares of produced-good imports
from old EU countries. Firms that report relocating their core activity to NMS and/or China from 2001 to
2006 start with low levels of produced-good imports from those regions and increase them over the period.



                                                                                 16
       These findings reveal an important new way to think about offshoring. Rather than
being linked solely to imported inputs, offshoring is strongly associated with imports of
a firm's "final" or produced goods. There are numerous examples of firms focusing on
innovation in the domestic market while offshoring manufacturing activities to low-wage
countries, including phones and tablets by Apple, vacuum cleaners and hand dryers by
Dyson, and pumps by Grundfos. We develop a new measure of offshoring in the next
subsection based on these findings.

3.4      The measure of offshoring
In this section, we exploit the fact that offshoring is associated with imports of produced
goods to introduce a new measure of offshoring: the ratio of a firm's imports of "produced-
imported" HS6 goods from a region to total firm imports. As noted earlier, we do not
dispute that inputs or other types of imports constitute another type offshoring, instead we
focus here on a specific measure that aligns with the results from the offshoring survey, and
for which we develop a new identification strategy in the next section. Our aim is to make
the conceptual point that imports of goods that are considered final from the perspective
of a producing firm are another type of offshoring that has been relatively less studied, yet
is important in aggregate trade flows.
       This measure is similar to the one introduced by Hummels et al. (2014), who measure
"broad" offshoring as all imports by a manufacturing firm, and "narrow" offshoring as
imports of HS4 industries that the importer produces domestically. In order to distinguish
produced-good imports from other imports, we narrow the scope of what is "produced" by
using the more detailed HS6 product category.23 We also divide by the firm's total imports
to decrease the possibility that we are simply capturing a growing firm that imports more.
Appendix Figure B.1 shows that this measure increases dramatically for both NMS and
China offshorers between 2001 and 2006, while it does not change for firms that do not
offshore to those regions.
       In the next section, we exploit the detailed product-level measure to identify plausibly
exogenous variation in firms' produced-good import shares, even while controlling for broad
sector trends. Such an analysis is not possible with the aggregate, binary offshoring indicator
from the survey. To provide additional justification for the new measure, we estimate the
probability that changes in a firm's produced good import share from a region predict its
  23
    In Appendix Section A we use the material input survey to assess the extent to which offshoring firms
in the survey import inputs versus produced goods. Since the material survey collects information at the
HS4 industry level, we cannot distinguish inputs from produced goods as accurately (for example, because
an HS4 industry often contains one HS6 product labeled "Parts" along with other products). To the extent
that we can separate produced goods from inputs at the HS4 level, we find that firms that relocate their
core activity to the NMS and China increase their imports of produced goods relatively more than inputs.



                                                   17
response in the offshoring survey. Specifically, we estimate:

                                               NMS
                                                                                             P G ImportsN
                                                                                                        f
                                                                                                          MS
                                       P r(Of ff   = 1) =  + P G                                                                                   + s log (sales2001
                                                                                                                                                                 f    ) + Indf ,                  (1)
                                                                                                   Importsf

                                           P G ImportsN
                                                      f
                                                        MS
where                                          Importsf             is the change in the firm's produced-good import share from 2001
to 2006, Indf are 2-digit NACE fixed effects, and sales2001
                                                       f    is the firm's sales in 2001. We
present the results from estimating the probability of offshoring to the NMS as it is the
primary location to which Danish firms offshore, and our instrumental variable strategy
focuses on that region. Similar results for China are presented in Appendix Figure B.2.
                             Figure 8a reports the average marginal effects (AMEs) of changes in import shares on
predicted offshoring to the NMS from 2001 to 2006. The AMEs are positive and significant
across the entire range of firm sizes but strongest for the largest firms. Figure 8b depicts
the AMEs when the independent variable is the change in the import share of non-produced
goods from NMS. Increases in import shares of non-produced goods have no relationship
with the probability of offshoring.

                                                            Figure 8: Offshoring and Produced-Good Imports

                                       AMEs on Predicted Probability of Offshoring to NMS                                                       AMEs on Predicted Probability of Offshoring to NMS
                                         Change in Produced Good NMS Imports Over Total Imports                                                 Change in Non-Produced Good NMS Imports Over Total Imports
               1




                                                                                                                         1            .8
                             .8
   Effects on Pr(Offshoring)




                                                                                                            Effects on Pr(Offshoring)
                                                                                                                               .6
                   .6




                                                                                                                        .4
           .4




                                                                                                                 .2
 .2




                                                                                                                         0
               0




                                  10                    15                      20                25                                       10                    15                      20                  25
                                                          Log Firm Sales in 2001                                                                                   Log Firm Sales in 2001


                                   (a) Produced good import share                                                                  (b) Non-Produced good import share
Notes: The left panel presents the average marginal effects of changes from 2001 to 2006 in a firm's produced-good
imports from NMS over total imports on the probability that the firm reports relocating its core activity to NMS from
2001 to 2006, as a function of firm sales in 2001. The right panel presents the average marginal effects of changes from
2001 to 2006 in a firm's non-produced good imports from NMS over total imports on the probability that the firm
reports relocating its core activity to NMS from 2001 to 2006. Sample is a balanced panel of firms in the offshoring
survey that exist from 2001 to 2006 and that report production in ProdCom.


                             The attributes of the Danish offshoring survey allow us to develop a better understand-
ing of changes at offshoring firms. Our results on production and imports are surprising.
Instead of reducing domestic output and importing more intermediates, offshoring firms
maintain the value of domestic production but at the same time increase imports of goods
they produce domestically. These findings from the offshoring survey underpin a new mea-

                                                                                                       18
sure of offshoring based on the share of produced goods imported by the firm from the
offshoring region. This measure has the advantage that it can been constructed from firm-
level production and import data for many other countries, including all other EU member
states. In addition, for our purposes it allows us to study offshoring decisions and outcomes
at the product level for more firms in Denmark over a longer time horizon.


4     Causal Impact of Offshoring
In the previous section we show that offshoring firms disproportionately increase their im-
ports of produced goods. In this section, we develop an IV strategy to establish a causal link
between firm-specific offshoring opportunities and subsequent reorganization. Our approach
exploits the detailed firm-product variation in our new offshoring measure.

4.1   Identification strategy
We analyze the impact of offshoring on two aspects of firm reorganization. First, we ask
whether offshoring reduces firm employment and domestic output. The survey data show
falling employment and constant, or rising, output at offshoring firms but does not establish
the causality of those outcomes. The second focus is on the role of offshoring in changing the
composition of the domestic workforce. In particular, we assess whether offshoring plays a
role in increasing the tech worker share in employment and reducing the production worker
share, as seen in the survey results. Reorganization of this type suggests that the innovative
capabilities at offshorers are not reduced, and potentially enhanced, by a firm's ability to
move some activities out of the domestic market.
    We measure firm-level offshoring as the change in the share of produced-good imports
from a particular region in total imports and estimate its relationship with firm outcomes
according to

                                               P G ImportsN
                                                          ft
                                                            MS
               F irmAttributef t =  + P G                         + Indf t + f t ,        (2)
                                                  Importsf t

using two stacked five-year difference panels for 1998 to 2008. Indf t are two-digit NACE
fixed effects in the initial year of each panel. Since our aim in this section is to estimate
the causal impact of offshoring, we identify a firm's produced-good imports based on its
production in t - 1 and t for each panel. Firm attributes are firm size, occupation shares,
and growth rates. We weight the regressions by firm employment in the initial year of each
panel. A potential concern with using product-level shares rather than levels is that a high
initial import share may mean the offshoring of the product has already happened. Given
the importance of the extensive margin, however, this concern seems less problematic in

                                             19
our context, and it is more likely to bias our results down.
       Offshoring is an endogenous decision of the firm. Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates
of equation (2) may be biased up if a firm chooses to offshore because it aims to reorganize
its domestic workforce. Omitted variables may bias the OLS estimates in either direction.
For example, firms may offshore in response to competition, such as imports, (e.g., as in
Rodriguez-Lopez, 2014). Although we control directly for import competition in robustness
checks, other unobservable competition shocks might bias the OLS estimates.
       To identify changes in offshoring due to factors exogenous to the firm, we construct a
novel, firm-specific instrument based on the desirability of locating production in the New
Member States (NMS) of the EU by exploiting changes in NMS comparative advantage.
We focus on this region since it constitutes the main offshore location for Danish firms. The
NMS underwent significant reforms starting in the mid-1990s as they undertook necessary
changes to join the European Union (EU) in 2004 and 2007. These internal changes led to
large shifts in the composition of their exports which allow for a strong first stage in pre-
dicting changes in produced-good imports. An increase of the export share by NMS states
to the rest of the world (ROW), excluding Denmark, signals increasing NMS comparative
advantage.
       These export share changes are at the product-level, but we require a firm-level instru-
ment to predict changes in offshoring. In particular we aim to distinguish between offshoring
activities of different firms in the same broad industry. To capture the extent to which a
Danish firm may exploit lower production costs in the NMS, we use each firm's production
across HS6 products in an initial year to weight the product-level shocks. Specifically, we
aggregate the change in the export share in product p to the firm level according to:

                             NMS
                                                                      ExportsN
                                                                             p
                                                                               MS
                        Shockf   =             P rodSharef pt ×                     ,                        (3)
                                                                      ExportsW
                                                                             p
                                                                               orld
                                          pf
                                                                    NMS comparative

                                                                    advantage growth

                                                                                                  ExportsN
                                                                                                         p
                                                                                                           MS
where P rodSharef pt is a firm's initial HS6 production share in product p and                    Exportsp orld
                                                                                                         W

is the share of NMS exports in total world exports of product p. We exclude Denmark
as a destination from export shares and lag the export shares by two years to reduce the
possibility of Danish firms' offshoring decisions driving NMS export shares.24
       We assign the product-level shocks based on the firm's initial period production, as
  24
    We use the firm's production in t - 1 and t to calculate its initial production shares to minimize noise from
lumpy production. We are limited to lagging the export shares by two years due to a significant change in
the HS classification system in 1996. In online Appendix Figure C.2, we show that NMS exports to Denmark
are a tiny fraction of their exports to the ROW, suggesting that Denmark is relatively unimportant in NMS
aggregate activity.


                                                       20
opposed to its initial imports as has been done in prior studies. This allows us to capture
both intensive and extensive margin changes in offshoring, with the latter being particu-
larly important for offshoring to low-wage regions. For instance, in our balanced panel of
manufacturing firms, we find that about ten percent of firms begin offshoring to the NMS
over the 1998 to 2008 period.
       We follow Antr`
                     as et al. (2017) and use changes in NMS export shares rather than levels
to instrument for offshoring. This reduces the possibility that growth in the instrument
is driven by aggregate demand or technology shocks that increase exports of particular
products across all countries. The growth in NMS global market share corresponds more
closely to increasing comparative advantage for NMS countries in that product.
       One concern with this approach is that firms within industries may not differ in their
product mix. We find substantial product-share variation across firms within industries.
The average NMS offshoring firm produces 5.3 unique products, while the average non-
NMS offshorer produces 3.4 products. For all firms, the average of the firm-level median
product share is 0.48 for NMS offshorers and 0.57 for non-NMS offshorers.25
       Our IV strategy identifies firms that began offshoring to the NMS as a result of improved
NMS comparative advantage (relative export shares) in products relevant to the firm. The
key identifying assumption is that the common within-product component of the relative
increase in exports from an offshoring destination (NMS) is due to relative increases in the
destination's productivity and/or decreases in their external trade costs. The exclusion
restriction requires that the foreign region's increased productivity in the product only
affects a firm's domestic activities through its impact on the offshoring decision. By using
six-digit product variation, we are able to control for broad two-digit sector fixed effects.
We thus control for broad industry-level trends in a manner that is not feasible with more
aggregated industry-level measures of offshoring.
       One potential violation of the exclusion restriction is that improvements in NMS com-
parative advantage may also increase import competition from NMS into Denmark, and
that increased competition may directly affect firms' innovative activities and workforce
composition (e.g., as in Utar, 2014; Bloom et al., 2016). China's rise in world markets may
also be correlated with NMS changing market shares. We therefore construct two mea-
sures of firm-level import penetration, one for imports from the NMS and one for imports
from China. Using firm-product weights from production in the initial year, t, we measure
changes in import penetration as
  25
    As an example of the variation we exploit, consider a hypothetical firm in the two-digit NACE industry
"Manufacture of electrical equipment (27)." Potential HS6 products that firm could produce include: 850110
(Electric motors; of an output not exceeding 37.5W), 850151 (Electric motors; AC motors, multi-phase, of
an output not exceeding 750W), and 850161 (Generators; AC generators (alternators), of an output not
exceeding 75kVA).



                                                   21
                                                             ImportsSource
                                                                    DKp
         ImpP enSource
                f      =           P rodSharet
                                             fp ×                                    ,     (4)
                             pf
                                                     ImportsW orld
                                                            DKp + DomP rodDKp

where the source regions are NMS and China, respectively, ImportsDKp are imports of
product p into Denmark, and DomP rodDKp is Danish production of product p. We exclude
each firm's own imports and production when constructing its import penetration measure.
We show that controlling for these measures of import competition does not materially affect
our first stage estimates, and we present robustness analyses of the second stage estimates
with these controls in Section 4.3.

4.2    Results
Results from the first stage estimation for two stacked five-year differences for 1998 to 2008,

                    P G ImportsN
                               f
                                 MS
                                                       NMS
                                       =  + Shock Shockf   + Indf t + f ,
                        Importsf

are presented in Table 3. Changes in the firm's product-weighted NMS export shares are
positively and significantly correlated with changes in its share of produced-good imports
from the NMS. This relationship holds even after controlling for import penetration from
China and the NMS. Reassuringly, the coefficient estimate is relatively stable across all spec-
ifications, suggesting that import competition from the NMS into Denmark is sufficiently
different from Danish offshoring to NMS to identify its effect. Since the instrument is con-
structed from product-level shocks, we cluster the standard errors by two-digit HS sectors.
The Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic in our baseline specification (Column 1) is of reasonable
magnitude, at 9.03. To address potential concerns about weak instruments, we also report
the reduced-form estimates as well as the Anderson-Rubin Chi-squared statistic in all the
two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates.
   Table 4 contains the main results on the effects of offshoring on the organization of the
firm. We report results from estimating equation (2) via OLS and 2SLS, as well as the
reduced form, for total firm employment and production as well as the employment shares
of tech, support, and production workers. The results are largely consistent in sign and
significance across the OLS, reduced-form, and IV specifications although the magnitudes
of the coefficients vary.
   As found in the offshoring survey, the decision to relocate the main activity of the
firm to a low-wage region (i.e., the NMS), has a significant negative effect on total firm
employment. However, in line with the results from the offshoring survey presented above,
there is no significant reduction in domestic production. These results provide a potential



                                              22
                                       Table 3: First Stage

                                     (1)           (2)          (3)               (4)
           ExportShN
                   f
                     MS           0.359***     0.336***      0.362***         0.339***
                                   (0.118)      (0.116)       (0.119)          (0.118)
           ImpP enN
                  f
                    MS                         0.174**                         0.181**
                                                (0.077)                        (0.076)
           ImpP enChina
                  f                                            0.066            0.086
                                                              (0.174)          (0.172)
           KP-Fstat                  9.03         8.36         9.31              8.31
           Observations             5,160        5,160         5,160            5,160
           Notes: Two stacked five year differences for 1998 - 2008. Regressions are weighted
           by employment and include industry (NACE2) and year fixed effects. Standard
           errors clustered by HS2 sector. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01


explanation for the divergence between output and employment for the US and elsewhere
in industries with large import penetration increases, such as computers and electronics.
   The effects of offshoring on the reorganization the firm's domestic activities are even
more pronounced. Offshoring leads to increased shares of tech and support workers while
reducing the share of production workers. Focusing on the IV estimates, a ten percentage
point increase in the share of produced-good imports leads to a 2.2 point increase in the
share of tech workers. The average tech worker share increase over this period was only
0.01 points, so this is an economically large effect. That same increase in offshoring leads
to a 5.9 point decline in the production worker share, which is almost double the average
decline for firms in the sample. The offshoring firms are not merely shrinking at home,
they are changing what they do. These offshoring firms are reorganizing themselves to
focus on non-production aspects of value-added creation by focusing on pre-production and
post-production stages as shown in Figure 3.
   In Table 5, we examine growth rates of the three types of workers, rather than shares, to
ensure that the growth in non-production worker shares is not driven solely by falling total
                                                                                  (Occupf,t+5 -Occupf,t )
employment. The growth rates of the types of workers are defined as              0.5(Occupf,t+5 +Occupf,t )
to allow for extensive margin changes in firm employment across occupations. In both the
reduced-form and the IV estimates, the data indicate that offshoring results in relatively
higher tech worker growth, while production worker growth has a negative and significant
relationship. Both the levels and shares of tech and production workers are changing as a
result of offshoring to the NMS.
   The rise in the share and level of tech workers in offshoring firms is driven in part by
occupation switching within the firm. By tracking worker employment and occupation over
time, we calculate the extent to which the same workers switch into a tech occupation

                                                  23
      Table 4: Firm Outcomes - Output, Employment and Workforce Composition

                                  log         log                      Share of Workers in
 A: OLS
                                 Emp       Production          Tech      Support     Production
 P G ImpShN
          f
            MS                -0.214***        -0.034        0.020**    0.041***       -0.071***
                               (0.071)        (0.090)        (0.008)     (0.009)        (0.015)
 R2                              0.04          0.07            0.03        0.04           0.05
 B: Reduced Form
 ExportShNf
            MS                 -0.730**        -0.046        0.078**      0.088         -0.213**
                                (0.371)       (0.976)        (0.033)     (0.059)         (0.089)
 C: IV Estimates
 P G ImpShN
          f
            MS                  -2.031*        -0.129        0.216**     0.244*         -0.592**
                                (1.161)       (2.678)        (0.099)     (0.140)         (0.257)
 KP-Fstat                        9.303         9.303           9.303      9.303           9.303
 AR Chi-sq P-val                  0.05          0.96            0.02       0.13            0.02
 Observations                    5,160         5,160           5,160      5,160           5,160
 Notes: Two stacked five year differences for 1998 - 2008. Regressions are weighted by employment and
 include industry (NACE2) and year fixed effects. Standard errors in panels B and C clustered by HS2
 sector. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


within the firm. The final column shows that offshoring is positively associated with the
share of tech workers that come from other occupations in the same firm. Focusing on the
reduced-form estimates, which are the most precise, we find that a ten percentage point
increase in offshoring leads to 0.31 point increase in the share of tech switchers. Since the
average share at these switchers is only 0.0004, this is an economically large effect, and
highlights an important role for the firm in facilitating reallocation. Offshorers both hire
new tech workers and shift existing workers into tech occupations.

4.3   Robustness
In Table 6, we include additional controls to check the robustness of the results. As discussed
above, one concern is that our findings are being driven by import competition rather than
offshoring by the firm. Our IV approach views offshoring as a positive choice by the firm
to take advantage of changing comparative advantage in a destination country rather than
a negative response to increased competition in the home market. We therefore control for
import penetration from NMS and China.
   We also address concerns that the results are driven by foreign multinationals who are
shifting production across borders into NMS from Denmark and that initial firm size might
be driving the outcomes. Additional controls include a dummy for foreign ownership and


                                                24
                   Table 5: Firm Outcomes - Growth Rates and Switchers

                                     Growth Rate of Workers in                         Share
 A: OLS
                                    Tech   Support Production                      Tech Switchers
 P G ImpShN
          f
            MS                     0.014       0.039       -0.240***                      0.001
                                  (0.097)     (0.076)       (0.065)                      (0.003)
 R2                                 0.02        0.04          0.06                         0.05
 B: Reduced Form
 ExportShNf
            MS                    0.893**      0.028       -1.034***                    0.031**
                                  (0.400)     (0.476)       (0.385)                     (0.015)
 C: IV Estimates
 P G ImpShN f
              MS                  2.484*       0.078       -2.876**                      0.087*
                                  (1.431)     (1.301)       (1.286)                      (0.051)
 KP-Fstat                          9.303       9.303         9.303                        9.303
 AR Chi-sq P-val                    0.02        0.95          0.01                         0.04
 Observations                      5,160       5,160         5,160                        5,160
                                                                            (Occupf,t+5 -Occupf,t )
 Notes: Two stacked five year differences for 1998 - 2008. Growth rate is                             .
                                                                                                   Share
                                                                           0.5(Occupf,t+5 +Occupf,t )
 Tech Switchers is share of tech workers in year t+5 that changed occupation within firm. Regressions are
 weighted by initial employment and include industry (NACE2) and year fixed effects. Standard errors in
 panels B and C clustered by HS2 sector. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


the level of employment in the initial year to control for firm size.
    The results for the NMS offshoring variables are unchanged in sign, significance and
magnitude. Offshoring reduces firm employment with no effect on domestic production.
Within the firm, non-production workers including tech and support workers rise, while the
number and share of production workers falls.


5     Offshoring and Quality
The prior section documents the causal impact of produced good imports, a new measure of
offshoring, on firm employment, production, and the composition of workers across occupa-
tions. Although offshoring firms decrease domestic employment, the value of their domestic
production does not fall. Moreover, total employment declines are driven by a decrease in
production workers, as offshorers actually increase their employment of technology workers,
both via new hires and relatively greater switching of workers into tech occupations.
    The reorientation towards innovation-related occupations provides a potential expla-
nation for why offshoring firms' domestic production does not fall, even as they increase
imports of goods they produce domestically. Although offshorers produce and import the


                                                  25
                          Table 6: Robustness of the IV Estimates

                          log          log                  Share of Workers in
                         Emp        Production         Tech     Support    Production
P G ImpShN
         f
           MS          -2.299**        -0.031         0.239**      0.281**           -0.645**
                        (1.125)       (2.684)         (0.110)      (0.138)            (0.271)
ImpP enN
       f
         MS               -0.03         0.626         -0.053*       -0.026             0.107
                        (0.280)       (0.979)         (0.028)      (0.038)            (0.070)
ImpP enCN
       f                 -0.436         0.099           0.013        0.086             -0.181
                        (0.618)       (0.572)         (0.059)      (0.056)            (0.143)
MNC                      -0.001         0.069          -0.004       -0.004              0.001
                        (0.050)       (0.057)         (0.003)      (0.004)            (0.007)
log (empt
        f)                -0.02        0.007           0.001        0.003               0.00
                        (0.013)       (0.028)         (0.001)      (0.002)            (0.004)
AR Chi-sq P-val           0.01          0.99            0.01         0.07               0.01



                           Growth Rate of Workers in                              Share Tech
                         Tech     Support    Production                          Switchers
P G ImpShN
         f
           MS            2.422*         0.045         -3.321**                        0.086*
                        (1.448)       (1.218)          (1.345)                        (0.050)
ImpP enN
       f
         MS              -0.641        0.008             0.371                         -0.012
                        (0.506)       (0.351)          (0.289)                        (0.017)
ImpP enCN
       f                 -0.345         -0.34           -0.801                         0.009
                        (0.616)       (0.500)          (0.724)                        (0.018)
MNC                       0.023          0.01            0.023                          0.00
                        (0.045)       (0.042)          (0.062)                        (0.001)
log (empt
        f)              -0.031*        -0.002           -0.027                         -0.001
                        (0.016)       (0.015)          (0.017)                        (0.001)
AR Chi-sq P-val           0.03          0.97            0.00                            0.03
                                                                      (Occupf,t+5 -Occupf,t )
Notes: Two stacked five year differences for 1998 - 2008. Growth rate is                        .
                                                                                             Regressions
                                                                     0.5(Occupf,t+5 +Occupf,t )
weighted by initial employment and include industry (NACE2) and year fixed effects. Share Tech Switchers
is share of tech workers that change occupation w/in firm. Standard errors clustered by HS2 sector. *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                 26
same goods, they may focus on high quality versions domestically and source low quality
versions from lower wage countries. Existing work documents a strong relationship between
worker skill and quality (Verhoogen, 2008; Kugler and Verhoogen, 2012) that is consistent
with this mechanism.
       In this section, we assess the potential for quality differences between domestic and im-
ported products to explain our findings that offshoring induces firms to produce and import
the same goods and to change their occupation structure. We examine price differences be-
tween domestically produced and imported varieties of the same narrowly defined product.
In addition, we show that there are significant changes in the prices of domestic varieties
after offshoring to low-wage destinations.

5.1      Unit values for domestic and imported varieties
Offshoring may allow firms to focus their domestic production on high quality and innovative
versions of a product, while sourcing less sophisticated, lower quality versions from low-wage
locations. To assess the empirical support for this explanation, we compare the unit values of
the same CN8 product produced domestically and imported by the same firm in the same
year.26 Since we consider imports of produced goods offshoring, this sample effectively
includes all firms that offshore some activity. Specifically, we estimate

                           log (U Vf pct ) = t + f p + Domf pct + f pct ,                              (5)

where t are year fixed effects, f p are firm-product (CN8) fixed effects, Domf pct is an
indicator equal to one for the domestically-produced variety, and log (U Vf pct ) is the log of
the unit value of the product by production location c. Standard errors are clustered by
CN8 product.
       We limit the analysis to a sample of firm-CN8 products from 2000 to 2008 with both
production in Denmark and imports in the same year.27 In these regressions, we focus on
firms in the offshoring survey so that we can assess whether the differences in unit values also
vary systematically for firms that report relocating their core activity to a foreign region.
The firm-product fixed effects remove any firm-specific differences in costs, markups or
quality.
       Table 7 presents the results from estimating equation (5) via OLS. The coefficient on
  26
      Unit values are well-known to be a problematic proxy for quality. The problems include variation in
input costs across source countries and well as variation in markups. In this section, some of those issues
are resolved or mitigated by the fact that we compare products under control of the same firm and include
firm-product fixed effects.
   27
      The unit value for the domestic variety comes from the ProdCom survey and represents the domestic
factory gate price, while the unit value for the imported variety comes from the Danish customs data and
represents the imported price.


                                                    27
 Table 7: Unit value differences for domestically-produced varieties of the same product

          Dependent variable - the log unit value of a CN8 product
                                                    (1)          (2)                (3)
          Domestic variety                       0.596***     0.520***            0.566***
                                                  (0.096)      (0.093)             (0.117)
          Domestic × Offshorers                               0.268**               0.205*
                                                               (0.113)             (0.112)
          China                                                                  -0.423***
                                                                                   (0.066)
          NMS                                                                    -0.200***
                                                                                   (0.058)
          EU15                                                                     0.123**
                                                                                   (0.060)
          Constant                               3.966***     3.966***            3.946***
                                                  (0.039)      (0.039)             (0.067)
          R2                                       0.70         0.70                 0.70
          Year Fixed Effects                        Yes          Yes                 Yes
          Firm-by-Product Fixed Effects             Yes          Yes                 Yes
          Observations                            37,450       37,450               37,450
          Notes: The sample includes all firm-product-year combinations from 2001-2008 where
          there is both domestic production and importing of the same CN8 product by the firm
          in the same year. The dependent variable is the log of the unit value. "Domestic" is
          a dummy for whether the variety is produced domestically; "Offshorer" is a dummy for
          whether the firm offshored its core activity during 2001-2006; "China", "NMS" and `EU15"
          are dummies for whether the imported variety comes from China, the NMS, or the EU15
          respectively. Standard errors clustered by CN8 product. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


domestically-produced varieties is large, positive, and statistically significant. Column 1
suggests that, on average, domestic varieties' unit values are 60 log points higher than their
imported counterparts within the same firm and year. This large difference supports the
premise that firms offshore lower quality versions of the goods they produce domestically.
      A possible concern with the estimate in Column 1 is that the domestic and import
unit values come from different data sources, with the latter potentially excluding any
markups the offshoring firm may add between the port and sale to a customer in the
domestic market.28 Since there is no clear reason to suspect systematic variation in markups
across data sources for firms that report relocating their core activity, we examine the
extent to which this differential in domestic versus foreign unit values is larger for those
firms. Consistent with the premise that firms relocate their main activity to access cheaper
production costs, the interaction between the offshoring dummy from the survey and the
domestic unit value shows that the price gap is 27 log points higher for firms that report
 28
      The domestic unit value represents a factory-gate price and might also exclude markups.


                                                     28
relocating their core activity abroad (Column 2).
   The final column includes country or region-specific indicators for the imported varieties
for the top three offshore regions. Prices of imports from China are 42 log points lower than
than those for imports from all other locations, and NMS imports are 20 log points lower.
In contrast, import unit values from the 14 EU countries are 12 log points higher. These
patterns suggest quality differentiation within a detailed product category that differs sys-
tematically across countries (e.g., as in Schott, 2004, 2008), with firms offshoring production
of especially low-quality versions to China and NMS countries.

5.2   Evolution of domestic unit values after importing
If offshoring involves relocating production of low-quality versions of particular products
abroad, we would also expect to see the domestic unit value of those goods rise after firms
begin to import them. To assess the extent to which offshoring firms' domestic quality
changes in conjunction with its offshoring decision, we estimate how firms' domestic unit
values evolve in an event study setting. We focus on firms that produce the same detailed
product for at least 7 consecutive years, that also import the product during the period,
and for which we observe at least three years of pre-importing and three years of post
initial-importing domestic production. To address differences in units across unit values,
we normalize unit values to one within each firm-product in the firm's initial import year,
and estimate
                        log (U Vf pt ) = t +       k Impf p,t+k + f pt ,                    (6)
                                               k

where t denotes year fixed effects, Impf p,t+k is a series of indicators that identify the
firm's initial import year of the product, and (U Vf pt ) is the normalized domestic unit value.
We cluster the standard errors by CN8 product category. Figure 9 presents the event study
coefficients, and shows a clear increase in domestic unit values after firms begin offshoring
the good. This increase may reflect offshoring firms abandoning domestic production of
lower quality versions (e.g., as proposed in Schott, 2008), or quality upgrading of their
domestically-produced versions as they reallocate domestic resources towards innovation.
   The richness of these data provides novel evidence on the relationship between offshoring
and importing. While it has become common to equate a firm's decision to relocate produc-
tion to a foreign country with a decision to import intermediates, we show that offshorers
tend to import the same goods that they produce domestically. Perhaps most surpris-
ingly, firms' imports of goods that they produce are not associated with lower domestic
production. The unit values of domestically-produced goods are systematically higher and
rise after offshoring, however, suggesting a role for quality differentiation within the same
detailed product category. Offshoring firms' behavior is consistent with them leveraging


                                               29
                    Figure 9: Imports from offshoring region over total imports


                                                                     Event Study Estimates of Domestic Unit Values
                                                                         Firms with Produced Good Imports from NMS or China




                                                        .08
                     Log Normalized Domestic Unit Value
                       -.02   0     .02  .04     .06




                                                              -3              -2             -1            0           1           2                          3
                                                                                   Years Since Initial Importing from NMS or China
                                                              Domestic unit value normalized to 1 in initial import year. Balanced panel of pre and post years.




their capabilities in certain products by producing different quality versions across multiple
locations.


6         The aggregate importance of produced-good imports
Having established that offshoring firms reorganize their domestic employment by shifting
towards technology-related occupations and charging higher prices for their domestically-
produced goods, we now show how these firm-level decisions affect aggregate trade measures.
Figure 10 shows that products that had been, or continue to be, produced by firms in
Denmark constitute a rapidly rising segment of Danish imports, rising from just over 9
percent in 1998 to over 13.5 percent in 2008.29
         Given the growing importance of produced-good imports in the aggregate, we decom-
pose standard industry-level measures of import competition into flows of produced-good
versus non-produced good imports. We analyze how these measures differ, and document
which types of imports drive the well-established relationships between aggregate import
competition and employment. Distinguishing between these two types of flows yields new
insights into the mechanisms behind existing results on how and why imports affect domestic
activities.
    29
    In online Appendix Section B.1 we show that continuing or new products constitute the vast majority
of produced-good imports.




                                                                                                         30
                      Figure 10: Aggregate share of produced-good imports

                                                  Produced Good Import Share
                                                             All Danish Imports




                    .14
                    .13
                    .12
                    .11
                    .1
                    .09




                          1998             2000              2002               2004              2006   2008
                           Notes: Produced Goods are HS6 products made domestically by the importer.

                  Notes: Figure presents the share of produced-good imports over total imports.
                  Produced-good imports are imports of HS6 products that the importing firm
                  produces in Denmark in 1997 and/or 1998, and/or in the import year.



6.1      Comparing measures of industry import penetration
We first define a measure of import penetration similar to what is typically done in the lit-
erature, but where the numerator can vary by good-importer type. Specifically, we measure
the change in import penetration as

                                                                       ImportsR
                                   ImpP enR
                                          iT = 
                                                                               iT
                                                                                       ,                        (7)
                                                                  Importsi + DomP rodi

where R denotes region (China or NMS), i denotes a HS4 industry, and T denotes the
good-importer type. Product type T can be all imports, non-produced good imports, or
produced-good imports. For simplicity, produced-good imports are imports of HS6 products
that the importer also produces domestically in that year, while non-produced good imports
are all other products. Since our aim in this section is to provide new insights into prior
work that has focused on Chinese import competition, we consider ten year changes in these
import penetration measures from 1998 to 2008.30
       Changes in the standard measure of import penetration, based on all imports, are pos-
itively correlated with changes in both of the components for China and the NMS. For
  30
     This time frame captures China's WTO accession and the main surge in China's imports to developed
countries. Measures of import penetration often subtract exports from the denominator to capture total
domestic absorption. We follow Fort et al. (2018) and omit exports from the denominator since including
them results in import penetration measures much greater than one for some sectors. These large shares
likely reflect carry-along trade, as analyzed in Bernard et al. (2019).


                                                                     31
China, the change in the standard measure of import penetration has a correlation co-
efficient of 1.00 for changes in non-produced good import penetration, but only 0.24 for
produced-goods. For NMS, the standard measure has a correlation coefficient of 0.89 for
non-produced good imports and 0.62 for produced-good imports. In contrast the correla-
tion between changes in the two components are substantially lower. For China (NMS) the
correlation of changes in non-produced good and produced-good import penetration is 0.15
(0.19). Standard measures of import penetration capture both types of imports, but each
type captures a different aspect of import activity.
   It is also interesting to note that changes in the standard measure of Chinese and NMS
import penetration are negatively correlated, with a coefficient of -0.23. In contrast, changes
in produced-good import penetration from China and NMS are positively correlated, with
a coefficient of 0.11. Produced-good imports also grow relatively more for products that are
initially more tech-worker intensive and that have more dispersion in their unit values. These
patterns, presented in online Appendix Section B.2, are consistent with produced-good
imports capturing the formation of international teams in which offshoring firms leverage
Danish tech workers' capabilities across multiple low-wage production locations to expand
their product lines along a quality dimension.

6.2   Industry import penetration and employment
In this section, we revisit studies on the impact of industry-level import competition on
employment. An important contribution of this paper is to show that produced-good im-
ports capture firms' offshoring decisions, and that the effects of offshoring may differ from
other imports. We therefore examine the relationship between imports and employment
using changes in import penetration of produced versus non-produced goods separately.
Specifically, we estimate



      log (employmenti ) =  + M N P G ImpP enR                     R
                                             iN M P + M P G ImpP eniP G + i ,              (8)

where log (employmenti ) is the change in log employment in industry i from 1998 to
2008, ImpP enR
             iN P G is the change in import penetration from low-wage region R (China
or NMS) in industry i for non-produced goods over the same period, and ImpP enR
                                                                              iP G is
a comparable measure for produced-good imports. We aggregate imports and employment
to the HS4 level for 369 industries with positive production in Denmark.
   Table 8 presents the results from estimating equation (8) via OLS. Columns 1 and 3
present results for changes in a standard measure of import penetration for China and NMS
respectively. While import penetration from China is associated a decrease in employment,


                                              32
the estimate for NMS is statistically insignificant. Columns 2 and 4 decompose the stan-
dard measure into imports of produced and non-produced goods. For both China and NMS,
increases in non-produced good imports are associated with a large, and statistically signifi-
cant decline in manufacturing employment. In contrast, changes in produced-good imports
have a positive (though insignificant for China) relationship with industry employment.


        Table 8: OLS estimates of industry import penetration and employment

                                  Chinese Imports                   NMS Imports
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
           ImpP enR
                  i            -3.145***                        -1.669
                                (0.796)                        (1.295)
           ImpP enR
                  iN P G                     -3.547***                       -4.240***
                                              (0.817)                          (1.636)
           ImpP enR
                  iP G                         13.824                          4.605*
                                              (8.387)                          (2.786)
           Constant              0.152**     0.173***         0.240***        0.234***
                                 (0.059)       (0.06)          (0.056)         (0.056)
           Observations            369           369             369            369
           R-Squared              0.041         0.052           0.005          0.022
           Notes: Regression is a long difference from 1998 to 2008. Dependent variable is
           the log difference in industry employment. NPG is imports of goods not produced
           domestically by importer. PG is imports of HS6 goods produced domestically by
           the importer in that year. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




   The results in Table 8 show that the well-established negative relationship between
increased import competition and employment changes is driven by non-produced good
imports, supporting the premise that increased import competition in output markets is a
negative demand shock for firms. In contrast, increased industry offshoring of the products
made by a firm is not associated with decreasing employment at competing firms. A simple
comparison of columns (1) and (3) might have suggested that Chinese imports are inherently
different from NMS imports, and that the latter do not entail the same negative employment
consequences. A comparison of columns (2) and (4), however, shows similar relationships
of non-produced good import penetration with employment.
   It may seem surprising that increases in produced-good import penetration in a firm's
products do not affect its employment. A reasonable prior is that increased imports of any
type of good ­ produced or non-produced ­ both represent competition and would therefore
have the same negative employment effects on competing domestic firms. In Section 5, we

                                                 33
show that firms that import products they also produce domestically source lower unit
value versions from the offshore location. To the extent that offshoring firms import lower
price and quality products, those produced-good import flows are less likely to compete
with other domestic firms' production. This type of quality differentiation across locations
is consistent with the evidence in Section 5 and rationalizes the relationships between the
distinct measures of import penetration and employment presented in Table 8. It also
highlights the fact that, from the perspective of the firm, not all imports are created equal.


7    Conclusion
This paper exploits new information on Danish firms' offshoring activities to construct a
rich dataset on firms' global production choices. We use these data to analyze how firms'
decisions to relocate their primary activities to low-wage countries affect not only their
aggregate employment and output, but also their employment across activities. We find
that over time, offshoring firms change their employment composition significantly so that
they ultimately employ a much higher share of technology and research-related workers.
    We show that after firms relocate their main activity to a low-wage region, they increase
their imports from that region, but that these new imports are primarily in products pro-
duced domestically by the firm, rather than in intermediate inputs. This finding underpins
our creation of a new measure of firm offshoring by destination based on the change in
the share of produced-good imports by the firm. While offshorers increase imports of the
same domestically-produced goods, we find that they continue ­ rather than abandon ­ do-
mestic production of those goods. However, the imported varieties have lower prices than
their domestic counterparts and prices of the domestic varieties increase after offshoring
begins. These findings suggest that offshorers have product-specific capabilities and exploit
low-wage destinations to pursue a quality differentiation strategy.
    The rise of new low-wage production opportunities in developing countries allows off-
shoring firms to reorganize their domestic activities by increasing the number and share of
domestic tech workers at the firm. Although offshorers decrease their total employment by
shedding production workers, they do not "hollow out" the firm and transform into pure
intermediaries of imported products. In addition to maintaining their output and raising
the quality of domestically product varieties, they shift their workforce towards innovation-
related occupations.
    The results in this paper point to important long-term implications of offshoring. We
show that firms that relocate their main activities to a foreign low-wage country maintain
their domestic production by shifting to higher price varieties and are more likely to shift
their domestic workers into innovative activities. Since innovation is a major determinant of


                                             34
future performance, this shift has important potential implications for the long-term effects
of offshoring on productivity and growth.




                                             35
References
Amiti, Mary and Amit K. Khandelwal, "Import Competition and Quality Upgrading,"
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (2), 476­490.

   and Jozef Konings, "Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity:
  Evidence from Indonesia," American Economic Review, December 2007, 97 (5), 1611­
  1638.

Antr`
    as, Pol and Elhanan Helpman, "Global Sourcing," Journal of Political Economy,
 2004, 112 (31), 552­580.

  , Luis Garicano, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Offshoring in a Knowledge Econ-
  omy," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (1).

  , Teresa C. Fort, and Felix Tintelnot, "The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory
  and Evidence from US Firms," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2514­64.

Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Stephen
 Yeaple, "Innovation and Production in the Global Economy," American Economic Re-
 view, 2018, 108 (8), 2128­2173.

Ashournia, Damoun, Jakob Munch, and Daniel Nguyen, "The Impact of Chinese
 Import Penetration on Danish Firms and Workers," Technical Report 2014.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Jae Song, "Trade-Adjustment:
 Worker-Level Evidence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129, 1799­1860.

  , , Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi, "Importing Political Polarization? The
  Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure," mimeograph, MIT 2017.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, "The China Syndrome:
 Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition," American Economic Review, 2013,
 103 (6), 2121­2168.

Balsvik, Ragnhild, Sissel Jensen, and Kjell Gunnar Salvanes, "Made in China, sold
 in Norway: Local labor market effects of an import shock," Journal of Public Economics,
 2015, 127, 137­144.

Bernard, Andrew B. and Teresa C. Fort, "Factoryless Goods Producing Firms,"
 American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2015, 105 (5), 518­23.

  , Emily Blanchard, Ilke Van Beveren, and Hylke Vandenbussche, "Carry-Along
  Trade," Review of Economic Studies, July 2019, 86 (2), 526­63.

  , J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott, "Trade costs, firms and productivity,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53, 917­937.

  , Valerie Smeets, and Frederic Warzynski, "Rethinking Deindustrialization," Eco-
  nomic Policy, 2017.


                                          36
Blaum, Joaquin, Claire LeLarge, and Michael Peters, "The Gains from Input Trade
  with Heterogeneous Importers," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2018,
  10.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, "Trade Induced Technical
  Change: The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, Diffusion, and Productivity,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 83, 87­117.
Bloom, Nick, Kyle Handley, Andre Kurman, and Phillip Luck, "The Impact of
  Chinese Trade on US Employment: The Good, the Bad, and the Debatable," mimeo-
  graph, Stanford University 2019.
Bøler, Esther Ann, Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe, "R&D,
 International Sourcing and the Joint Impact on Firm Performance," American Economic
 Review, 2015.
Boehm, Christophe, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayer, "Multinationals,
 Offshoring, and the Decline of US Manufacturing Employment," Technical Report 25824,
 NBER Working Paper 2019.
Che, Yi, Yi Lu, Justin R. Pierce, Peter K. Schott, and Zhigang Tao, "Did Trade
 Liberalization with China Influence US Elections?," mimeograph, Yale University 2017.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, "The Impact of Outsourcing and High-
  Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the U.S., 1972-1990," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1999, 114, 907­940.
Fort, Teresa C., "Technology and Production Fragmentation: Domestic versus Foreign
  Sourcing," Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 84 (2), 650­687.
  , Justin R. Pierce, and Peter K. Schott, "New Perspectives on the Decline of US
  Manufacturing Employment," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2018, 32 (2), 47­72.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, "Quality Ladders in the Theory of
 Growth," Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58, 34­61.
  and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring," The
  American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1978­1997.
Guti´
    errez, Germ´  an and Thomas Philippon, "Declining Competition and Investment
 in the U.S.," mimeo, NYU 2017.
Halpern, L´aszl´
               o, Mikl´
                      os Koren, and Adam Szeidl, "Imported Inputs and Productiv-
 ity," American Economic Review, December 2015, 105 (12), 3660­3703.
Harrigan, James, Ariell Reshef, and Fabrid Toubal, "The March of the Techies:
 Technology, Trade, and Job Polarization in France, 1994-2007," Working Paper 22110,
 NBER 2018.
Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillan, "Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and US
 Manufacturing Employment," mimeograph, 2009.

                                          37
Hombert, Johan and Adrien Matray, "Can Innovation Help US Manufacturing Firms
 Escape Import Competition from China?," Journal of Finance, 2018, 73 (5), 2003­39.

Hummels, David, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang, "Offshoring and Labor Markets,"
 Journal of Economic Literature, 2018, 56, 981­1028.

  , Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, "The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
  World Trade," Journal of International Economics, 2001, 54 (1), 75­96.

  , Rasmus Jorgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang, "The Wage Effects of
  Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data," American Economic
  Review, 2014, 104, 1597­1629.

Johnson, Robert and Guillermo Noguera, "A Portrait of Trade in Value Added Over
  Four Decades," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2017, 99 (5), 896­911.

Khandelwal, Amit K., "The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders," Review of Economic
 Studies, 2010, 77, 1450­1476.

Kovak, Brian, Lindsay Oldenski, and Nicholas Sly, "The Labor Market Effects of
 Offshoring by US Multinational Firms: Evidence from Changes in Global Tax Policies,"
 Working Paper 23947, NBER 2017.

Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, "Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality,"
 Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79, 307­339.

Malgouyres, Clement, "The Impact of Chinese Import Competition on the Local Struc-
 ture of Employment and Wages: Evidence from France," Journal of Regional Science,
 2017, 57, 411­441.

Mion, Giordano and Linke Zhu, "Import competition from and offshoring to China: A
 curse or blessing for firms?," Journal of International Economics, 2013, 89 (1), 202­215.

Monarch, Ryan, Jooyoun Park, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, "Gains from offshoring?
 Evidence from TAA-linked US microdata," Journal of International Economics, 2017,
 105, 150­73.

Muendler, Marc A. and Sascha O. Becker, "Margins of Multinational Labor Substi-
 tution," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 1999­2030.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott, "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Man-
  ufacturing Employment," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7), 1632­1662.

   and , "Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from US Counties," American
  Economic Review: Insights, forthcoming.

Rodr´iguez-Clare, Andr´es, "Offshoring in a Ricardian World," American Economic Jour-
 nal: Macroeconomics, April 2010, 2 (2).

Rodriguez-Lopez, Antonio, "What Drives Offshoring Decisions: Selection and Escape-
 Competition Mechanisms," Technical Report, UC Irvine 2014.

                                           38
Schott, Peter K., "Across-Product Versus Within-Product Specialization in International
  Trade," Quarterly Journal Economics, 2004, 119 (2), 647­678.

  , "The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports," Economic Policy, 2008.

Thewissen, S and O van Vliet, "Competing With the Dragon: Employment Effects of
 Chinese Trade Competition in 17 Sectors Across 18 OECD Countries," Political Science
 Research and Methods, 2017.

Tintelnot, Felix, "Global Production with Export Platforms," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2017, 132 (1), 157­209.

Utar, Hale, "When the Floodgates Open: Northern Firms' Response to Removal of Trade
 Quotas on Chinese Goods," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2014,
 pp. 226­250.

  , "Workers Beneath the Floodgates: Impact of Low-Wage Import Competition and Work-
  ers' Adjustments," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018, 100 (4), 631­47.

Verhoogen, Eric, "Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Man-
 ufacturing Sector," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 489­530.

Yeats, Alexander J., "Just How Big is Global Production Sharing," in Sven W. Arndt
 and Henryk Kierzkowski, eds., New Production Patterns in the World Economy, Oxford
 University Press 2001, pp. 108­143.




                                          39
Appendices
A     Imports of produced goods versus intermediates
In this section, we use the input purchase data, which are generally available at the HS4
industry level, along with the Prodcom data at the HS4 industry level to assess the extent to
which firms that report offshoring in the survey import inputs versus domestically produced
goods. To do so, we exploit the input use survey to classify firm imports into three categories:
(1) produced-good imports of HS4 industries that the importer produces in Denmark but
does not purchase as inputs ("Produced Good"); (2) imports of HS4 industries that the
firm purchases as inputs but does not produce in Denmark ("Inputs"); and (3) imports of
HS4 industries that the firm both produces in Denmark and purchases as inputs ("Both").
Figure A.1 shows that firms that offshore to the NMS increase their share of produced-good
imports, as well as their share of imports of industries that they both produce and purchase
as inputs ("Both"). In contrast, their share of imported inputs of HS4 industries that they
do not produce domestically is low and fairly stable.

                                            Figure A1: NMS imports of inputs and produced goods


                                                             NMS Imports Over Total Imports
                                                          By Imported-Product Type and Offshore Status
                                                      EU12 Offshorers                                                            Non-Offshorers
                            .15




                                                                                                       .15
                NMS Imports/Total Imports




                                                                                           NMS Imports/Total Imports
                                  .1




                                                                                                             .1
                   .05




                                                                                              .05
                            0




                                                                                                       0




                                            2000   2002    2004    2006   2008   2010                                  2000   2002   2004    2006   2008   2010
                                                               year                                                                      year

                                                      Final Goods            Inputs                                              Final Goods           Inputs
                                                      Both                                                                       Both


              Inputs and final goods based on HS4 input use and production in 2000/2001.


Notes : Figure plots the share of imports from NMS of HS4 industries that are "Produced goods", "Purchased
inputs", or HS4 industries classified as "Both" produced goods and purchased inputs over total imports of
the firm.



   Given the lack of detail for firms' input purchases, we cannot rule out the possibility
that they are importing both inputs and produced goods. However, it is also possible
that HS6 product-level detail on inputs would lead to much smaller shares of imported

                                                                                      40
                                  Figure A2: Chinese imports of inputs and produced goods


                                                               China Imports Over Total Imports
                                                            By Imported-Product Type and Offshore Status
                                                       China Offshorers                                                              Non-Offshorers
                             .06




                                                                                                          .06
                China Imports/Total Imports




                                                                                             China Imports/Total Imports
                                  .04




                                                                                                               .04
                     .02




                                                                                                  .02
                             0




                                                                                                          0
                                              2000   2002    2004    2006   2008   2010                                    2000   2002   2004    2006   2008   2010
                                                                 year                                                                        year

                                                        Final Goods            Inputs                                                Final Goods           Inputs
                                                        Both                                                                         Both


              Inputs and final goods based on HS4 input use and production in 2000/2001.


Notes : Figure plots the share of imports from NMS of HS4 industries that are "Produced goods", "Purchased
inputs", or HS4 industries classified as "Both" produced goods and purchased inputs over total imports of
the firm.



inputs (whereas the main text shows that firms import the same detailed HS6 products
they produce). Table A.1 provides an example of why this might the case. Each of the HS4
industry codes 8414 and 8415 contains an HS6 product code that corresponds to "Parts".
    The low share and small changes for imported inputs suggests that the relocation of
a firm's core activity to a foreign region is more related to imports of produced goods
rather than inputs from that region. Figure A.2 presents similar patterns for firms that
offshore to China, though we are better able to distinguish inputs from produced-goods.
For firms that relocate their core activity to China, shares of produced-good imports grow
significantly more.




                                                                                        41
             Table A1: Four and six-digit HS product descriptions for 8414 and 8415

 Code         Description
              Air or vacuum pumps, air or other gas compressors and fans; ventilating or recycling hoods incorporating a fan,
 8414
              whether or not fitted with filters.
    841410    Vacuum pumps
    841420    Hand or foot-operated air pumps
    841430    Compressors of a kind used in refrigerating equipment
    841440    Air compressors mounted on a wheeled chassis for towing
    841451    Table, floor, wall, window, ceiling or roof fans, with a self-contained electric motor of an output not exceeding 125 W
    841459    Other
    841460    Hoods having a maximum horizontal side not exceeding 120 cm
    841480    Other
    841490    Parts
              Air conditioning machines, comprising a motor-driven fan and elements for changing the temperature and humidity,
 8415
              including those machines in which the humidity cannot be separately regulated.
    841510    Window or wall types, self- contained or split-system
    841520    Of a kind used for persons, in motor vehicles
    841581    Incorporating a refrigerating unit and a valve for reversal of the cooling/heat cycle (reversible heat pumps)
    841582    Other, incorporating a refrigerating unit
    841583    Not incorporating a refrigerating unit
    841590    Parts
 Notes: Table presents product descriptions for HS4 8414 and 8415 industries, along with all HS6 products under
 these HS4 industries.


B       Produced-good import shares
In this section we present figures of the weighted average of produced-good imports from
a low-wage region over total imports by firm offshore status from the survey. Figure B.1
shows that the share of produced-good imports from NMS grows dramatically for firms that
offshore to NMS (left panel), while the share of produced-good imports from China grows
dramatically for firms that offshore to China (right panel).
    Here we also present the results from estimating

             China
                                                 P G ImportsChina
                                                            f
     P r(Of ff              = 1) =  + P G                                + s log (sales2001
                                                                                       f    ) + Indf ,          (9)
                                                      Importsf

             P G ImportsChina
                        f
where            Importsf       is the change in the firm's produced-good import share from 2001
to 2006, Indf are two-digit NACE fixed effects, and log (sales2001    f    is the firm's sales in
2001. Figure B.2a reports the average marginal effects (AME) of changes in import shares
on predicted offshoring to China during 2001-2006. The AME is positive and significant
across the entire range of firm sizes but is strongest for the largest firms. Figure B.2b shows
AME effects when the RHS variable is the change in the import share of non-produced
goods from China. Non-produced good imports from China have a much smaller and less
precisely estimated relationship with the probability of offshoring.




                                                         42
                                              Figure B1: Produced-good imports from region over total imports

                               Produced Good Imports from NMS over Total Imports                                                         Produced Good Imports from China over Total Imports
                                                            By NMS Offshore Status                                                                                    By China Offshore Status
             .2




                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                       .08
             .15
 PG Share




                                                                                                             PG Share
                                                                                                                  .06
    .1




                                                                                                            .04
             .05




                                                                                                                       .02
             0




                                                                                                                       0
                             2000                 2002                   2004            2006     2008                                  2000                 2002                   2004            2006     2008
                                                                         year                                                                                                       year

                                                          Offshorers             Non-Offshorers                                                                      Offshorers             Non-Offshorers
                              Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.                                                            Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.



                                              (a) NMS Offshorers                                                                                        (b) China Offshorers
Notes: Sample is a balanced panel of firms in the offshoring survey that exist from 2000 to 2008 and that report
production in ProdCom in at least one year over this period.

                                                        Figure B2: China Offshoring and Produced-Good Imports

                                AMEs on Predicted Probability of Offshoring to China                                                       AMEs on Predicted Probability of Offshoring to China
                                    Change in Produced Good China Imports Over Total Imports                                                  Change in Non-Produced Good China Imports Over Total Imports
             1.6




                                                                                                                        1.6
             1.4




                                                                                                                        1.4
                   1 1.2




                                                                                                                              1 1.2
 Effects on Pr(Offshoring)




                                                                                                            Effects on Pr(Offshoring)
             .8




                                                                                                                        .8
       .6




                                                                                                                  .6
 .4




                                                                                                            .4
             .2




                                                                                                                        .2
             0




                                                                                                                        0




                              10                            15                      20            25                                     10                            15                      20            25
                                                              Log Firm Sales in 2001                                                                                     Log Firm Sales in 2001


                                (a) Produced good import share                                                                   (b) Non-Produced good import share
Notes: The left panel presents the average marginal effects as a function of firm sales in 2001 of changes from 2001
to 2006 in a firm's produced-good imports from China over total imports on the probability that the firm reports
relocating its core activity to China from 2001 to 2006. The right panel presents the average marginal effects of
changes from 2001 to 2006 in a firm's non-produced good imports from China over total imports on the probability
that the firm reports relocating its core activity to China from 2001 to 2006. Sample is a balanced panel of firms in
the offshoring survey that exist from 2001 to 2006 and that report production in ProdCom.



C                               Offshoring to China and firm outcomes
In this section we show that the relationship between offshoring and firm outcomes docu-
mented in the text using firms' produced-good imports from NMS are similar for offshoring
to China. Table C.1 presents the results from estimating equation (2) via OLS. Offshoring
to China is correlated with a decrease in firm employment, an increase in tech and support
worker shares, and an increase the level of tech workers.


                                                                                                       43
    We present only the OLS results here because changes in Chinese market share in the
ROW (the instrument we use for the NMS IV estimates) does not have a reasonable first-
stage over this period. Although we can generate a first-stage for China using ten year
changes from 1998 to 2008, for China the instrument is more correlated with non-produced
good imports rather than produced-good imports.

                         Table C1: OLS estimates of offshoring to China

                              log           log                       Share of Workers in
                             Emp         Production           Tech       Support      Production
 P G ImpShChina
          f                -0.228**         -0.222         0.037***        0.038***          -0.121***
                            (0.110)        (0.138)          (0.012)         (0.015)           (0.024)
 R2                          0.04           0.07              0.03           0.04              0.05
 Observations                5,160          5,160             5,160          5,160             5,160



                               Growth Rate of Workers in                                     Share
                             Tech     Support    Production                              Tech Switchers
 P G ImpShChina
          f                 0.306**         -0.059         -0.269***                           0.004
                            (0.149)        (0.117)          (0.101)                           (0.005)
 R2                          0.02           0.04              0.06                             0.05
 Observations                5,160          5,160             5,160                            5,160
                                                                              (Occup
                                                                                  f,t+5  -Occupf,t)
 Notes: Two stacked five year differences for 1998 - 2008. Growth rate is 0.5(Occup f,t+5 +Occupf,t )
                                                                                                      . Regressions
 weighted by initial employment and include industry (NACE2) and year fixed effects. Share Tech Switchers
 is share of tech workers that change occupation w/in firm. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




D     Industry measures of produced-good imports
D.1     Correlation coefficients across industry measures
In this subsection we present correlation coefficients across various industry measures of
changes in import penetration, as defined in equation (7).



D.2     IV estimates of aggregate Chinese import penetration and employ-
        ment
In this subsection, we instrument for industry-level measures of Chinese import penetration
using China's market gains in the rest of the world. Table D.2 presents the results from
estimating equation (8) via 2SLS. In Column (2) we instrument for non-produced good
import penetration while controlling for produced-good import penetration. In Column (3)


                                                      44
   Table D1: Correlation coefficients between changes in import penetration measures

                                 Chinese Imports                    NMS Imports
                                All      PG      NPG         All              PG
            Chinese PG          0.24
                                0.00

            Chinese NPG         1.00     0.15
                                0.00     0.00
            NMS All            -0.23     0.02    -0.24
                                0.00     0.77    0.00

            NMS PG             -0.31     0.11    -0.32       0.62
                                0.00     0.03    0.00        0.00

            NMS NPG            -0.11    -0.05    -0.11       0.89             0.19
                                0.03     0.37    0.04        0.00             0.00
           Notes: Table reports pairwise correlation coefficients across 369 HS4 industry
           measures of changes in import penetration from 1998 to 2008. All includes all
           imports in the numerator. PG includes imports of HS6 products that the importer
           also produces domestically in the import year. NPG is all imports of HS6 products
           that the importer does not produce in the import year.


we instrument for produced-good import penetration while controlling for non-produced
good import penetration.
    Across all specifications, non-produced good import penetration has a negative and
significant relationship with employment. The instrument has a first-stage F-statistic of
132 for non-produced good imports, but is quite weak at only 4.91 for produced-good
imports. It is thus not a valid instrument for produced-good imports from China so the
negative and very imprecisely estimated coefficient in Column (3) is uninformative. The
fact that the estimated coefficient on non-produced good imports is always negative and
significant, and that the produced-good import coefficient is positive and significant even
when instrumenting for non-produced goods provides reassuring evidence that the results
documented in Section 6.2 are not biased by endogeneity concerns.




                                                  45
Table D2: IV estimates of industry Chinese import penetration and employment

                                        All          NPG             PG
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)
         ImpP enR
                f                   -3.950***
                                     (1.488)
         ImpP enR
                fNP G                             -4.577***        -2.749*
                                                   (1.584)         (1.404)
         ImpP enR
                fP G                               15.407*          -41.00
                                                   (8.628)        (76.736)
         Constant                     0.125*       0.144**           0.09
                                      (0.073)      (0.071)         (0.132)
         Observations                   369          369             369
         First-stage F-Statistic      146.359      131.768          4.908
         Notes: Regression is a long difference from 1998 to 2008. Dependent
         variable is the log difference in industry employment. NPG is imports
         of goods not produced domestically by importer. PG is imports of HS6
         goods produced domestically by the importer in that year. Column (1)
         uses Chinese market share gains in the ROW to instrument for Chinese
         import penetration in Denmark in all goods. Columns (2) and (3) in-
         strument for NPG and PG import penetration, respectively. * p<0.10,
         ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                          46
For Online Publication Only: Online Data Appendix for Het-
erogeneous Globalization: Offshoring and Reorganization, by:
Bernard, Fort, Smeets, and Warzynski
This online Appendix for Bernard, Fort, Smeets, and Warzynski (2020) provides additional
details on the data construction and the empirical patterns documented in the paper.


A     Original survey
A.1   Offshoring survey question

                     Figure A1: Question on offshoring in Danish




   Figure A.1 presents the original survey question in Danish. The work "udflytning"
translates to "move out".




                                           1
A.2      Offshoring data details
Table A.1 presents the number of firms that relocate non-primary activities to other coun-
tries, broken out by whether they relocate their core activity or not. The bottom row
displays the total number of firms that relocate each activity. Offshoring of ICT services
is the most prevalent of these other activities, though the number of firms engaged in this
offshoring is still well below the 380 firms that relocate their core activity.

               Table A1: Offshoring of other activities, by core activity status

 Primary      Distribution     Marketing         ICT      Admin &        Engineering &
                                                                                           R&D   Other
 Activity     & Logistics       & Sales        services   Managmnt       Tech services
   No               71              76            145         84                77         61     40
   Yes              81              50             46         39                70         59      6
  Total            152              126           191        123               147         120    46
 Notes: 380 firms (9.1%) offshore their core activity.


    Table A.2 presents all the offshoring location regions to which Danish firms relocate
their core activities.
                         Table A2: Offshoring of core activity by region

                 Region                                      Firm count        Share
                 NMS                                               205          0.54
                 China                                             126          0.33
                 EU-15                                             109          0.29
                 Other Asian countries and Oceania                  60          0.16
                 Other European countries                           46          0.12
                 India                                              30          0.08
                 US and Canada                                      25          0.07
                 Total offshoring firms                            380         0.091
                 Notes: Table presents the foreign locations to which firms relocated
                 their core activity between 2001 to 2006. Firms may relocate their core
                 activity to more than one foreign locations, as shown in table A.3.




                                                     2
                            Table A3: Number of locations to which firms offshore core activity

                                                                                                                                            Total Firm
                                                                 No. of regions                                  Count                                     Percent
                                                                                    1                                    229                                     60.26
                                                                                    2                                     97                                     25.53
                                                                                    3                                     36                                      9.47
                                                                                   4+                                    18                                      4.74
                                                                 Notes: Table presents the number of foreign locations
                                                                 to which firms relocated their core activity between
                                                                 2001 to 2006.

                                                Figure A2: Industry shares of offshoring firms and workers

                                  Distribution of Offshoring Firms Across Industries                                                                              Share of Workers in Industry at Offshoring Firms




                                                                                                                                       .5
        .2




                                                                                                                                       .4
        .15




                                                                                                                                       .3
        .1




                                                                                                                                       .2
        .05




                                                                                                                                       .1
        0




                                                                                                                                       0
                       s




                                           cs




                                                            ip




                                                                               p




                                                                                              p




                                                                                                                     s




                                                                                                                                                      s




                                                                                                                                                                          cs




                                                                                                                                                                                         ip




                                                                                                                                                                                                            p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s
                       st




                                                                                                                  al




                                                                                                                                                      st




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              al
                                                                            ui




                                                                                             i




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ui




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                          qu




                                                                                          qu




                                                                                                                                                                                       qu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qu
                                         ni




                                                                                                                                                                        ni
                     in




                                                                                                               et




                                                                                                                                                    in




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           et
                                                                           eq




                                                                                                                                                                                                        eq
                                       ro




                                                                                                                                                                      ro
                                                       .e




                                                                                         te




                                                                                                                                                                                    .e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     te
                                                                                                           m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m
               on




                                                                                                                                              on
                                    ct




                                                                                                                                                                   ct
                                                                       &




                                                                                                                                                                                                    &
                                                      m




                                                                                        or




                                                                                                                                                                                   m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                                                           b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       b
                si




                                  le




                                                                                                                                               si




                                                                                                                                                                 le
                                                                       y




                                                                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                          Fa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fa
                                                  om




                                                                                                                                                                               om
                                                                                      sp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sp
              ci




                                                                      r




                                                                                                                                             ci




                                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                   ne




                                                                                                                                                                                                ne
                                p/




                                                                                                                                                               p/
            re




                                                                                                                                           re
                                                                                    an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                                  C




                                                                                                     &




                                                                                                                                                                               C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 &
                            om




                                                                  hi




                                                                                                                                                           om




                                                                                                                                                                                               hi
          /p




                                                                                                                                         /p
                                                                                    Tr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tr
                                                                                                      c




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
                                                                  ac




                                                                                                                                                                                               ac
        al




                                                                                                                                       al
                                                                                                    si




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                si
                            C




                                                                                                                                                           C
       ic




                                                                                                  Ba




                                                                                                                                     ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ba
                                                                 M




                                                                                                                                                                                              M
     ed




                                                                                                                                   ed
    M




                                                                                                                                   M




                 (a) Offshoring Firms Across Sectors                                                                                                 (b) Worker Shares Within Sectors
Notes : The left panel shows how offshoring firm are distributed across sectors. More than half of all offshoring
firms are in the Machinery sector. The right panel plots the share of workers within an industry that work
at offshoring firms. The bars in the left panel do not sum to one, since only the top sectors are presented to
minimize disclosure concerns.



A.3            Industry distribution of offshoring firms and workers
Here we present details on how offshoring firms are distributed across industries within the
machinery manufacturing sector, and on worker shares at offshoring firms within industries
in this sector.




                                                                                                                               3
A.4    Worker shares
Here we present the employment-weighted level shares of workers by broad occupation type
at offshoring versus non-offshoring firms. This is the counterpart to Table 1.

        Table A4: Weighted average of employment shares by firm offshore status

                Worker occupation shares by offshore status

                                            1998    2001   2006        2008
                Panel A: Offshoring firms
                     Managers               0.04    0.04    0.04       0.05
                     Production workers     0.54    0.54    0.44       0.39
                     Other blue collar      0.07    0.07    0.05       0.05
                     Tech workers           0.15    0.16    0.20       0.23
                     Support workers        0.14    0.13    0.16       0.18
                     Sales workers          0.05    0.05    0.07       0.08
                     NEC                    0.02    0.01    0.02       0.02
                Panel B: Non-offshoring firms
                     Managers               0.04    0.04    0.04       0.04
                     Production workers     0.30    0.31    0.26       0.24
                     Other blue collar      0.09    0.09    0.10       0.09
                     Tech workers           0.12    0.12    0.13       0.14
                     Support workers        0.29    0.28    0.26       0.26
                     Sales workers          0.12    0.13    0.16       0.19
                     NEC                    0.04    0.03    0.04       0.04
                Notes: Weighted average shares are relative to a firm's industry
                average.




A.5    Cleaning occupation codes
The occupation code data require significant cleaning prior to use. First, we follow doc-
umentation in Statistics Denmark to distinguish between occupation codes that are most
reliable versus those that are likely imputed.31 In effect, observations for which the pstill
variable has 1, 2, 4, or 10 are high quality. Second, we fill in missing occupation codes by
assigning a worker to the same occupation if that worker remains in the same firm and is
missing occupation information in a particular year.
    The occupation types are listed in a separate file available here: http://faculty.tuck.
dartmouth.edu/images/uploads/faculty/teresa-fort/occupation_list.pdf.



 31
     See http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/dokumentation/Times/personindkomst/discotyp.aspx for de-
tails.


                                               4
A.6             Summary statistics for regression variables

                               Table A5: Summary statistics for regression variables, Table 4

                                  P G ImportsN  MS
                                                                         NMS                                                           Change in firm
                                             ft                     Shockf
                                     Importsf t                                          log emp           log prod                  share tech share support                     share prod
 Mean                                    0.0067                          0.011               -0.058             0.18                      0.0068                  0.0048            -0.033
 Std. Dev                                 0.12                           0.025                0.48              0.68                      0.065                    0.091             0.13


                             Table A6: Summary statistics for regression variables, , Table 5

                                                            DHS tech          DHS support             DHS prod                     Switchers
                              Mean                           0.025               -0.048                   -0.11                         0.00042
                              Std. Dev                       0.92                 0.75                     0.52                          0.029



A.7             Domestic production by good type

                          Figure A3: Domestic production by offshore status and good type

                Offshoring Firms' Average Domestic Production                                              Non-Offshoring Firms' Average Domestic Production
                                      By Firm-Good Import Status                                                                     By Firm-Good Import Status
   250




                                                                                                  250
   200
 MDKK




                                                                                                 MDKK
  150




                                                                                                  150
   100
   50




                                                                                                  50




         2000                 2002                   2004            2006         2008                  2000                 2002                   2004          2006     2008
                                                     Year                                                                                           Year

                                        Imported               Non-Imported                                                            Imported            Non-Imported
          Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.                                                Notes: Balanced panel of firms ever in ProdCom.



                                (a) Offshorers                                                                           (b) Non-Offshorers
Notes: Figures present the weighted average of firms' domestic production split out based on whether the firm imports
the same HS6 product (solid line) or does not import the same HS6 product (dashed line). Sample is a balanced
panel of firms in the offshoring survey that exist from 1998 to 2008 and that report production in Prod Com in at
least year over this period.




A.8             Imports of produced goods by region
Figure 7 shows that offshoring firms grow their produced-good imports relatively more than
non-offshorers between 2001 to 2006. One notable feature in Figure 7 is that offshorers have


                                                                                         5
an initially higher value of produced-good imports. In this Appendix section, we show that
this is because firms that offshore to NMS and China tend to have higher initial shares of
produced-good imports from the other 14 original EU countries.
    We decompose firm imports by region of the imports, for firms that offshore to NMS
and China. The top, left panel of Figure A.4 shows that firms that offshore to the NMS
between 2001 to 2006 grow their produced-good imports from that region the most over the
period. It is also evident that NMS offshorers start with relatively high levels of average
produced-good imports from the old EU countries. The top right panel of Figure A.4 shows
similar patterns for firms that offshore to China, with even higher levels of produced good
imports from the old EU in 2001, and slight declines in those imports between 2001 to 2006.

                                 Figure A4: Average produced good imports by region and offshore status

                               Average Produced Good Imports by NMS Offshorers                                                            Average Produced Good Imports by Chinese Offshorers
                                                          By Import Region                                                                                             By Import Region
               25




                                                                                                                           30
    Avg PG Imports (MDKK)




                                                                                                               Avg PG Imports (MDKK)
                      20




                                                                                                                              20
          10    15




                                                                                                                    10
      5        0




                                                                                                                           0


                                   2000            2002            2004               2006          2008                                        2000            2002            2004               2006          2008
                                                                Year                                                                                                         Year

                                                           NMS                China                                                                                     NMS                China
                                                           Old EU             Other                                                                                     Old EU             Other
                             Notes: Balanced panel of firms. PG are HS6 prods made by firm in 1999/2000.                                  Notes: Balanced panel of firms. PG are HS6 prods made by firm in 1999/2000.



                                            (a) NMS Offshorers                                                                                          (b) China Offshorers

                            Average Produced Good Imports by NMS Only Offshorers                                                     Average Produced Good Imports by China Only Offshorers
                                                          By Import Region                                                                                             By Import Region
              15




                                                                                                                                     20
    Avg PG Imports (MDKK)




                                                                                                               Avg PG Imports (MDKK)
                                                                                                                               15
                   10




                                                                                                                        10
         5




                                                                                                                  5
              0




                                                                                                                          0




                                   2000            2002           2004                2006          2008                                        2000            2002           2004                2006          2008
                                                               Year                                                                                                         Year

                                                           NMS               China                                                                                      NMS               China
                                                           Old EU            Other                                                                                      Old EU            Other
                             Notes: Balanced panel of firms. PG are HS6 prods made by firm in 1999/2000.                                  Notes: Balanced panel of firms. PG are HS6 prods made by firm in 1999/2000.



                                       (c) NMS Only offshorers                                                                                     (d) China Only Offshorers
Notes: Figure presents weighted average of firms' produced-good imports by region, for firms that offshore to NMS
and/or China. Sample is a balanced panel of firms in the offshoring survey that exist from 1998 to 2008.


    To understand how firms' offshoring decisions may be interrelated across space, the
bottom panel of Figure A.4 presents similar figures for firms that offshore to NMS but not
China and for firms that offshore to China, but not the NMS countries. Here, the patterns
are more stark. While both sets of firms have high levels of produced good imports from
the old EU in 2001, the NMS offshorers grow those imports as they also increase their
produced good imports from the NMS countries. In contrast, firms that offshore to China

                                                                                                           6
but not the NMS see considerable declines in their average produced good imports from
the old EU. These figures not only show how closely produced-good imports match with an
explicit relocation of production as identified by firms, but also highlight the potential for
produced-good imports to show how global value chains are structured across space.

A.9                               Offshoring and exporting
Here we show that offshoring firms shift their exports somewhat towards offshore regions,
but that these changes and levels are considerably smaller than the comparable changes
observed for firm imports. Offshoring thus seems to entail imports from the offshore location
back to Denmark, without considerable exporting of inputs from Denmark to the offshore
location. Figure A.5 depicts these patterns.

                                                Figure A5: Exports to offshoring region over total exports

                                           NMS Exports over Total Exports                                                                 China Exports over Total Exports
                                                 By Firms' Offshore Status                                                                      By Firms' Offshore Status




                                                                                                                .06
                .1




                                                                                                  China Exports/Total Exports
   EU12 Exports/Total Exports
                       .08




                                                                                                                    .04
              .06




                                                                                                       .02
      .04       .02




                                                                                                                0




                                2000     2002       2004          2006        2008     2010                                     2000     2002      2004          2006        2008     2010
                                                           year                                                                                           year

                                       China         NMS             CN&NMS          None                                              China        NMS             CN&NMS          None



                                                  (a) NMS                                                                                        (b) China




                                                                                              7
B                       Aggregate produced good import penetration measures
B.1                         Produced-good imports by type
Figure 10 shows that produced-good imports grow from about nine percent of total Danish
imports in 1998 to almost 14 percent in 2008. In that figure, we define produced-good
imports as imports of HS6 products that the importer produced either in the first two years
of the sample, and/or in the year of import. The left panel in Figure B.1 plots the level
growth of produced and non-produced good imports in Denmark from 1998 to 2008.
    In the right panel of Figure B.1, we decompose those produced-good imports based
on their current year production status. The figure shows that the majority of the value
of produced-good imports is of HS6 products that firms produce initially and continue to
produce throughout the period, though the value of these imports is fairly constant over
time. The majority of the growth in produced-good imports over the period, by contrast, is
driven by imports of newly produced goods. While a common misconception of offshoring is
that firms replace domestic production with imports, Figure B.1 shows that these produced-
good imports constitute the smallest share of total produced-good imports over this period.
    The aggregate patterns depicted in Figure B.1 corroborate the firm-level evidence in
Section 4 that offshoring firms do not disproportionately reduce domestic production. They
also show that produced-good imports grow as offshoring firms begin domestic production of
new HS6 products. In Figure B.2, we show that these imports of newly-produced goods are
predominantly driven by firms that enter ProdCom, either because they begin to produce
for the first time or grow their employees to over 10. Produced-good imports are thus a
considerable and growing share of total Danish imports. Consistent with the micro-level
evidence presented in Section 4, they are largest for products that the firm continues or
starts to produce domestically, rather than for products that the firm offshores and ceases
to produce domestically.

                                                                 Figure B1: Danish Imports by Good Type

                                                  Total Danish Imports                                                                                 Imports of Produced Goods
                                     By Importer-Good Domestic Production Status                                                                           By Current Production Status
         400




                                                                                                                     25
               200




                                                                                                                           20
  Imports BDKK




                                                                                                              Imports BDKK
                                                                                                                       15
        100




                                                                                                                10
 50




                                                                                                                     5
         20




                                                                                                                     0




                     1998            2000              2002              2004             2006     2008                         1998            2000              2002              2004             2006       2008

                                        Produced Goods                      Never Produced Goods                                                      Continuing               Stopped                Started
                      Notes: Produced Goods are HS6 products made domestically by the importer.                                  Notes: Produced Goods are HS6 products made domestically by the importer.


Notes: Left panel presents total Danish imports by imported product type. Produced-good imports are imports of
HS6 products that the importing firm produces in Denmark in 1997 and/or in 1998 and/or in the import year. The
right panel decomposes produced-good imports into imports of products that the firm: (1) produced in 1997 and/or
1998 and is "Continuing" to produce in that year; (2) produced in 1997 and/or 1998 but has "Stopped producing" in
that year; or (3) did not produce in 1997 or 1998 but "Started" to produce subsequently.




                                                                                                          8
                                                         Figure B2: Imports of Newly Produced Goods

                                   Imports of Newly Produced Goods                                                                             Imports of Newly Produced Goods
                                                     By Firm Status                                                                                         By Firm Prodcom Status
       15




                                                                                                                  20    15
            10
 Imports BDKK




                                                                                                           Imports BDKK
                                                                                                                10
 5




                                                                                                                  5
       0




                                                                                                                  0
                 1998            2000              2002              2004             2006    2008                           1998            2000              2002              2004             2006           2008

                                            New Firms                    Continuing Firms                                                               New Prodcom                     New Products
                  Notes: Produced Goods are HS6 products made domestically by the importer.                                   Notes: Produced Goods are HS6 products made domestically by the importer.


Notes: Figure presents total imports of HS6 products that the firm did not produce in 1997 or 1998 but "Started"
to produce it subsequently. The left panel breaks apart the imports of these newly produced goods into imports by
"New Firms" that are born after 1998 versus "Continuing Firms" that existed prior to 1999. The right panel breaks
apart the imports of these newly produced goods into: (1) imports by "New ProdCom" that are firms that begin to
report positive production in ProdCom after 1998; versus (2) "New Products" that are imports by firms in ProdCom
prior to 1999 that report production of new HS6 products after 1998.



B.2                     Basic characteristics of produced good imports
We first define a measure of import penetration similar to what is typically done in the lit-
erature, but where the numerator can vary by good-importer type. Specifically, we measure
the change in import penetration as

                                                                                                         ImportsR
                                                                                                                pT
                                                              ImpP enR
                                                                     pT =                                                                               ,                                                 (10)
                                                                                              Importsp + DomP rodp

where R denotes region (China or NMS), p denotes HS6 product, and T denotes the good-
importer type. Product type T can be all imports, non-produced good imports, and
produced-good imports. Produced-good imports are imports of HS6 products that the
importer also produces domestically in that year, while non-produced good imports are all
other products. Since our aim in this section is to provide new insights into prior work that
has focused on Chinese import competition, we consider 10 year changes in these import
penetration measures from 1998 to 2008.32
    To assess differences across types of import penetration, we first calculate their correla-
tion coefficients within a region. For both China and NMS, the change in import penetration
based on all imports is highly correlated with the change in non-produced good import pen-
etration, with correlation coefficients of about 0.99. The change in produced-good import
penetration is also correlated with standard measures, but with lower correlation coeffi-
cients of 0.09 and 0.28 for China and NMS, respectively. In contrast, changes in produced
and non-produced good import penetration measures are uncorrelated, as reported in Table
B.2. Standard import penetration measures therefore capture both types of import flows,
even though produced and non-produced good flows are uncorrelated.
    32
    This timeframe captures China's WTO accession and the main surge in China's imports to developed
countries.


                                                                                                     9
    We also assess the extent to which these distinct measures of import penetration from
China are correlated with import penetration measures from NMS, reported in Table B.1.
There is a negative and significant relationship between increased import penetration from
China versus NMS for all imports (-.09) and for non-produced goods (-.08). Those prod-
ucts in which China gained market share in Denmark are thus different from the ones in
which NMS countries grew. In contrast, we document a positive and significant correla-
tion between changes in produced-good import penetration from NMS versus China (0.06).
Produced-good import flows therefore seem to be more similar across source countries, con-
sistent with the premise that produced good imports reflect Danish firms' leveraging certain
capabilities in particular products across different countries.
    To gain insight into the characteristics of produced versus non-produced good imports,
we assess how changes in import penetration measures relate to product-level measures
of tech worker intensity and price dispersion. We measure the importance of technology
workers in the production of a particular product as the share of tech workers used in
firms that make that product in 1998. We construct a measure of an HS6 product's price
dispersion based on the ratio of the 90th percentile of the product's domestic unit value
relative to the 10th percentile of the unit value. This measure is thus a proxy for the
potential to differentiate quality within a particular product, as studied by Khandelwal
(2010).
    Table B.3 presents the correlation coefficients between these product characteristics and
changes in import penetration. The top panel shows that although import penetration from
NMS increases relatively more in tech worker-intensive goods and in goods with more scope
for quality differentiation, these relationships are present only for produced-good imports.
In contrast, Chinese import penetration increases most in low tech worker-intensive goods,
but this pattern is accounted for only by non-produced good imports. Across both China
and NMS, it is thus the case that changes in produced good import penetration are higher
relative to non-produced good imports for tech worker-intensive goods. These patterns are
consistent with the premise that produced good imports occur in goods with more scope
for quality differentiation and in which tech workers are relatively more important.

          Table B1: Correlations of import penetration measures within source

                              ImpP enN
                                     pT
                                       MS                 ImpP enChina
                                                                 pT
                             All      NPG              All      NPG
                    NPG      0.9664***                 0.9974***
                    PG       0.2782***     0.022       0.0882***      0.0167
                    Notes: Table reports correlation coefficients between changes
                    in import penetration measures from 1998 to 2008. Import
                    penetration is defined according to equation (10). All, NPG,
                    and PG correspond to the numerator with all imports, non-
                    produced good imports, and produced good imports in the
                    numerator, respectively.




                                                 10
          Table B2: Correlations of import penetration measures across sources

                                      All             NPG                 PG
               NMS vs China        -0.091***     -0.0781***          0.0601***
               Notes: Changes in import penetration measures of All imports, non-
               produced good imports (NPG), and produced good imports (PG) from
               1998 to 2008.

    Table B3: Correlations of import penetration measures and product characteristics

               NMS                    All             NPG            PG
               Tech Sharep            0.0709*         0.0068         0.1161**
               Price Dispersionp      0.1083**        -0.0042        0.1905***
               China
               Tech Sharep            -0.2004***      -0.1975***     -0.0458
               Price Dispersionp      -0.0267         -0.0261        -0.0108
               Notes: Table reports correlation coefficients between HS6 product char-
               acteristics and changes in import penetration measures of All imports,
               non-produced good imports (NPG), and produced good imports (PG)
               from 1998 to 2008. Tech share is the share of tech workers used to
               produce a product. Price dispersion is the 90-10 ratio of the product's
               domestic unit values.


C     Danish Production data does not include repackaging
A potential concern with measuring produced-good imports is that firms may import a prod-
uct, repackage it in Denmark, and then report that same product as domestic production.
Figure C.1 presents the documentation from the Denmark's survey on production.
    We use the measure of "Own goods" for domestic production, which is available at the
HS6 product level. Products that are simply repackaged in Denmark are not included in
this measure, and instead are classified as "Commercial (resale) turnover." While we do find
that resales also grow disproportionately for offshoring firms, these sales are not available
at the HS6 product level, and we exclude them from our measure of production.




                                                 11
                                                    Figure C1: ProdCom definitions




Notes: Definition from Statistics Denmark "Documentation of statistics for Manufacturers' Sales of Goods 2017
Quarter 1."



C.1     Aggregate NMS exports
Here we present exports by NMS countries over time and by region. Figure C.2 shows that
Denmark is a relatively small player for NMS countries. Given its small size, we do not
expect Danish offshoring decisions to influence NMS ROW export shares.

                                       Figure C2: Aggregate exports by NMS countries

                                                              Exports of NMS countries
                                                                         By Destination
                           400   300
                    Billions USD
                          200
                           100
                           0




                                       1994         1997          2000         2003          2006          2009           2012

                                                                 EU14                 ROW                 DK
                                        European Assoc. Agreement 1994: HU PO 1995: BG CZ RO SK 1999: EE LT LV 1999: SI


                  Notes: Figure presents aggregate exports by destination of the New Member
                  States.




                                                                             12
