                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MEASURING THE COST OF REGULATION:
                             A TEXT-BASED APPROACH

                                     Charles W. Calomiris
                                      Harry Mamaysky
                                         Ruoke Yang

                                      Working Paper 26856
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26856


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank Roya Arab Loodaricheh for excellent research assistance. We thank the Data Science
Institute at Columbia University for funding this study. We also would like to express our thanks
to the seminar participants at the American Enterprise Institute for their comments on an earlier
draft from September 2019. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Charles W. Calomiris, Harry Mamaysky, and Ruoke Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Cost of Regulation: A Text-Based Approach
Charles W. Calomiris, Harry Mamaysky, and Ruoke Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 26856
March 2020
JEL No. G18,G38,K2,L51

                                          ABSTRACT

We derive a measure of firm-level regulatory costs from the text of corporate earnings calls. We
then use this measure to study the effect of regulation on companies' operating fundamentals and
cost of capital. We find that higher regulatory cost results in slower sales growth, an effect which
is mitigated for large firms. Furthermore, we find a one-standard deviation increase in our
preferred measure of regulatory cost is associated with an increase in firms' cost of capital of
close to 3% per year. These findings suggest that regulatory risk is a major cost to firms, but the
largest firms are able to manage that risk better.


Charles W. Calomiris                             Ruoke Yang
Columbia Business School                         Imperial College Business School
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall                  5.09A, 53 Prince's Gate
New York, NY 10027                               South Kensington Campus
and NBER                                         London, Lond SW7 2AZ
cc374@columbia.edu                               United Kingdom
                                                 ruoke.yang@imperial.ac.uk
Harry Mamaysky
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall, rm 803
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
hm2646@columbia.edu




Data page is available at www.measuringregulation.com
                      Measuring the Cost of Regulation:
                          A Text-Based Approach
                                        Charles W. Calomiris
                                            Harry Mamaysky
                                               Ruoke Yang 
                                        This version: February 2020


                                                    Abstract

        We derive a measure of firm-level regulatory costs from the text of corporate
        earnings calls. We then use this measure to study the effect of regulation on
        companies' operating fundamentals and cost of capital. We find that higher
        regulatory cost results in slower sales growth, an effect which is mitigated for large
        firms. Furthermore, we find a one-standard deviation increase in our preferred
        measure of regulatory cost is associated with an increase in firms' cost of capital of
        close to 3% per year. These findings suggest that regulatory risk is a major cost to
        firms, but the largest firms are able to manage that risk better.




1. Introduction

    Regulation is often justified by the gains to the public that come from outcomes such as

cleaner water and air, safer travel, less dangerous products, and more honest advertising. The

costs of regulation are borne by the firms that must comply with them. Costs can be roughly

categorized into two sets: operational costs and compliance risks. In the former category are the



  Calomiris: Columbia Business School, cc374@gsb.columbia.edu. Mamaysky: Columbia Business School,
hm2646@columbia.edu. Yang: Imperial College Business School, ruoke.yang@imperial.ac.uk. We thank Roya
Arab Loodaricheh for excellent research assistance. We thank the Data Science Institute at Columbia University for
financial support. We thank seminar participants at the American Enterprise Institute for their comments on an
earlier draft from September 2019.

                                                        1
direct costs related to regulation's mandated changes (relative to what firms would otherwise do)

in production, distribution or sales practices. In the latter category are the indirect costs of

bearing the uncertainties related to the way regulation is created and enforced. For example,

since the 1970s, a broad trend in regulation has been for regulators to increasingly rely on

"guidance" rather than formal rulemaking in setting regulatory standards (DeMuth 2016, Epstein

2016, Calomiris 2018), which has increased regulatory compliance risk. Guidance is attractive to

regulators because the absence of formal rules gives them greater flexibility in implementing

regulation, but of course, that same flexibility implies greater uncertainties for firms about how

regulation will evolve and precisely what they will be held accountable for doing or not doing.

Such uncertainty may in turn prevent firms from undertaking attractive investments due to the

fear of an unforeseen regulatory response.

    Although many observers often express the belief that regulation is costly to the firms subject

to regulation both through its operational burdens and its compliance risks, research has not

made much progress in measuring those costs. For example, although there is substantial

evidence that President Trump's first two years in office have resulted in a reduction in the flow

of new regulation and some deregulation (a summary is provided in Chapter 2 of the March 2019

Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers), precise measures of these changes remain

elusive. The Administration claims that deregulation has been an important contributor to the

acceleration of growth in the years since Trump's election, but there is no hard evidence to

quantify whether that is true, or if so, how much of that growth should be attributed to

deregulation. Furthermore, it is unclear whether whatever gains have come from less regulation

are a consequence of lower operational costs or of reduced compliance risks. The distinction is

important because, to the extent compliance risk is costly, important implications for regulatory


                                                   2
reform may follow ­ for example, the need to restore the importance of formal rulemaking in the

regulatory process.

    While regulation often has substantial benefits that can justify the costs borne by regulated

firms, compliance risk can be mitigated substantially at little cost to society by reducing the

unpredictability of regulation. From that perspective, intentional unpredictability can be seen as

the result of an agency problem. Regulators, like all humans, prefer the latitude that comes from

avoiding predictable behavior in accordance with adherence to clear rules, so they may choose

not to bind themselves to formal rules. But unpredictability may have major net economic costs

to society and to the nation as a whole if unfettered regulatory discretion reduces growth.

Furthermore, excessive regulatory discretion also erodes the rule of law and the ability of the

electorate to determine the laws under which they are governed, so excessive reliance on

guidance may impose social costs beyond reductions in growth. To understand the impact of

regulation on growth and on society more broadly, it is important to measure how much

regulation economic agents face, and to do so in a way that permits one to measure regulatory

risks, taking into account the effects of both formal rule making and guidance.

    Several recent studies have employed natural language processing (NLP) to measure the flow

of regulation. Some of those studies make use of the data produced by the Mercatus Center at

George Mason University (GMU), which tracks the word flow of the federal government's

formal rule making, and has devised a means of attributing the relevance of that word flow to at

the sectoral level in the economy.1 This approach results in a panel dataset, defined for each




1
 Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin (2017) have examined regulation (at the industry-year level) through the lens of the
amount of words published in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).

                                                        3
sector and each year, that measures regulatory flow, which can be used in empirical studies to

gauge how differences in the amount of regulation over time and across sectors affect firms.

   Although these data may be useful for many purposes, there are three major problems with

them as measures of regulatory costs to firms. First, the widespread use of regulatory guidance as

a tool is a major problem for this approach because guidance is not included in the Code of

Federal Regulation (CFR). Second, state-level regulation is not included in this measure. Third,

counting words ignores differences in the importance of regulatory word flow. This is especially

a problem for gauging changes over time related to attempts at regulatory reform. For example,

in the first year of the Trump Administration, the total growth in the amount of word flow as

measured by the GMU data was identical to the average for each year of the Obama

Administration. This may reflect a "bureaucrats-at-keyboards" phenomenon: a given number of

federal employees hired to write regulations will produce a constant amount of typed words per

year, irrespective of whether those words are important. In times of deregulation, but with a

constant growth of the bureaucratic workforce, the importance of regulatory word flow (on a per-

word basis) diminishes, and measures based on calculating the number of words will miss that

diminution.

   Measures that attempt to capture the importance of regulation ­ for example, the number of

regulations passed with high estimated compliance costs, compiled by George Washington

University, and reported as an aggregate time series ­ show a precipitous decline in regulation in

the first year of the Trump Administration. That suggests that the GMU method is particularly

prone to understate changes in importance that are due to sudden changes in Administration

philosophy. Clearly, measures of the total flow of regulation words and of the total number of

important regulations provide dramatically different pictures of regulatory change in 2017.

                                                4
   Simkovic and Zhang (2019) quantify regulation at the industry-year level by tallying up the

number of employees whose work has to do with regulatory compliance. Data limitations from

the Bureau of Labor Statistics restrict their measure to a three-year moving average, which

smooths away much of the variation across time. Davis (2017) is the most closely related study

to our paper. He uses mentions of "regulation" in firms' 10-Ks. But he does not construct a

measure analogous to ours that captures increases and decreases in regulation, rather than simply

its mention. Furthermore, 10-Ks are presentations of information by firms. If management

wishes to avoid inconvenient discussions relating to compliance problems, then those discussions

may be absent from 10-Ks.

   In this study, we take a new approach that uses NLP methods but applies them to a corpus

that inherently filters the word flow related to regulation on the basis of its importance.

Specifically, we undertake an NLP analysis of the transcripts of the Earnings Calls of publicly

traded corporations. Earnings Calls are the quarterly opportunities for stockholders to hear from

and question management about all the important influences on the values of companies.

Earnings Calls also permit investors to question management, which means that important

aspects of regulatory compliance costs that may be neglected in management's presentation can

be raised by investors in their questions. Given the limited duration of the Earnings Calls, if

management and investors use the scarce resource of time to discuss regulation, that is a reliable

indicator of its importance.

   We find that the flow of words related to regulation that appears in Earnings Calls ­ which

we measure using both an original approach and one that follows prior research ­ has important

implications for the future growth of firms, and for their future stock prices. These findings

indicate that more regulation has major negative implications for the growth of firms, and that

                                                  5
compliance risk is likely an important channel through which regulation affects growth. We also

find that regulation has less negative consequences for large firms than for small ones (see also

Davis 2017). This result is consistent with a large literature on the political economy of

regulation that sees regulation as less harmful to large firms because of economies of scale in

managing the operating costs and compliance risks associated with regulation, which imply

consequent competitive advantages of large firms over small firms that arise from greater

regulation.2

    We organize the remainder of our paper as follows. Section 2 reviews our data sources.

Section 3 describes our methodology for measuring regulation using the transcripts of Earnings

Calls. For each Earnings Call, we construct separate measures for the presentation given by

management, and for the question-and-answer (Q&A) part of the transcript. Our preferred

measure of regulation is labeled NetReg, which captures both mentions of regulation and the

direction of regulation. We also construct measures that capture the sentiment score of the

transcript, either in the sentence in which regulation is discussed (RegSent) or in the call as a

whole (AllSent). In Section 3, we provide plots of these measures over time and compare them to

one another. Section 4 presents our empirical findings, which connect our measures of regulation

for the two parts of the Earnings Call with firm performance measures, and stock returns. We

also consider the importance of firm size differences for regulatory costs and the potential

relevance of topical context for our NLP-related measures. In Section 4, we also devote

attention to the question of causality in explaining the association between regulation and firm

performance. We note that NetReg Granger causes the measures of firm performance we


2
 The literature is vast. Some important early contributions include Olson (1965), Stigler (1971), and Krueger
(1974). For a collection of some of the most influential essays on the political economy of regulation,
see Stigler (1988). For an example of a discussion specifically of the advantaged role of large firms in the
U.S. regulatory process in banking, see Calomiris and Haber (2014), Chapters 7-8.

                                                         6
examine, and is not Granger caused by them. The same cannot be said for sentiment-related

measures of regulation, which display more complex intertemporal mutual dependency with

measures of firm performance. Section 5 concludes by summarizing our results and pointing to

their implications.

    All our regulatory text measures can be downloaded at www.measuringregulation.com.


2. Data

    Our measures of regulation are derived from textual analyses of all the available quarterly

Earnings Calls of publicly traded firms from S&P Global's Transcripts Data for the period 2009-

2018. To examine the effects of regulation on firms, we merge these conference call data with

pricing and accounting information for U.S. firms from CRSP and Compustat for the period

2008-2018.3 Here, we require that observations found in S&P Global have valid CRSP

PERMNO and Compustat gvkey identifiers. From CRSP, we collect daily stock returns, daily

number of shares outstanding, and daily trading volume for firms publicly traded on the NYSE,

Nasdaq, and Amex. From Compustat, we obtain quarterly information on various accounting

characteristics and firm growth. We exclude the financial services industry as indicated by SIC

codes that begin with 6, because performance measures, such as sales growth, for financial

services firms tend to be non-comparable to other firms. The following table summarizes our

data sample:


     Firm-quarter observations from Compustat and SP Global                                      75,350
     Firm-quarter observations with an Earnings Call that mentions regulation                    27,893
     % firm-quarters for firms without any Earnings Call that mentions regulations               9.9%

3
  We use a mapping provided by SP Global which associates an earning call's company identifier, ciqCompanyID,
to Compustat's company identifier, gvkey. While there are instances where a gvkey is associated with multiple
ciqCompanyId's (this happens for 4% of all gvkey's), the gvkey-date to ciqCompanyId-date mapping is unique
(except for 4 firm-quarter observations which do not impact our results).

                                                      7
   Our primary measure of firm growth is annual sales growth, which is defined as the

percentage change of sales from the current quarter relative to sales from four quarters ago. We

also consider alternative measures. These include asset growth (i.e., the percentage change in

total assets) and operating income growth (i.e., the percentage change in operating income after

depreciation). To measure the size of the firm, we use log sales over the prior three months, with

sales measured in millions of dollars. Excluded from all of these firm performance regressions

are firm-quarters with missing values for total assets and missing or negative values for sales and

operating income. Industry-adjusted measures of regulation for the firm for a given quarter are

obtained by subtracting out its 2-digit SIC industry equally-weighted average in that quarter.

Because not all Earnings Calls discuss regulation, we introduce a NoRegulat dummy variable

that equals one for firms that have mentioned regulations in some Earnings Call in our sample,

but not in the present one, and is zero otherwise. Some firms in our sample never mention

regulations in any of their Earnings Calls; for such firms we introduce a dummy variable

NeverRegulat which is set to one for all of their firm-quarters. Our core analysis is a panel

regression with firm-quarter observations, where we study how future firm growth depends on

the discussion of regulation in the Earnings Call. These regressions control for numerous

potential influences on future growth, including lagged firm growth, size, industry-level

measures of firm regulation, and industry fixed effects.

   To study the implications of regulation for stock prices, we examine returns, both excess of

the risk-free rate (measured as the 1-month T-bill) and risk-adjusted (using the Fama-French 5-

factor plus momentum), over 1-, 5- , and 22-trading-day horizons following the Earnings Call.

These returns are measured from the closing price of day t (i.e., the date of the conference call)

for calls occurring prior to 4 PM U.S. Eastern Time and from the closing price of day t+1 (i.e.


                                                 8
the following trading day) for calls occurring at 4 PM U.S. Eastern Time or afterwards. The

loadings used to calculate risk-adjusted, or abnormal, returns and alphas are estimated over the

[-30, -252] trading day window. For our analysis of stock returns, we control for the log of

market equity (in millions), the log of the book-to-market (BM) ratio (i.e., the log of book equity

over market equity), standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) defined similarly to Bernard and

Thomas (1989) and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and Macskassy (2008), and log of share turnover,

defined as shares traded on the day of the event divided by shares outstanding. To mitigate the

influence of outliers, we winsorize SUE, log BM, and log turnover, as well as our measures of

firm growth, at the two percent level (which affects 4 percent of the observations).

    Table 4 summarizes the definitions of the above variables, and Table 5 provides summary

statistics.


3. Measuring regulation

    Our text analysis is performed on the Earnings Call data set obtained from S&P Global.

Before analyzing the calls we perform the following cleaning steps: convert all words to

lowercase; take out whitespace; remove stop words; tokenize and stem all words. For the

sentiment analysis described below, we also performed word negation, following the algorithm

suggested by Das and Chen (2007), which appends the string "_NEG" to all words in a sentence

which follow an English language negation word, such as "don't" or "not". Word negation was

performed prior to all other cleaning steps.

    In our NLP analysis of Earnings Call transcripts, we employ two measures of regulation. Our

primary measure is our original construct, which measures net regulation. This variable, which

we label NetReg, can be positive or negative. Negative values indicate reduced regulation


                                                 9
(deregulation) and positive values indicate more regulation. To construct this measure, we begin

by separately searching the presentation (Pres) part and the Q&A part of each quarterly transcript

for the word root "regulat," which identifies the words that indicate the presence of a discussion

of regulation (regulate, regulated, regulation, regulator, deregulate, etc.).

    To ensure that the context we are identifying is one in which regulation is being discussed in

the economic sense (as opposed to, for example, an engineering usage of the word, such as in a

discussion of an electricity or water flow regulator system) we identify a list of "Concept" words.

We only count an occurrence of regulat if one of those Concept words is also present in the same

sentence as regulat. In Table 1 we report the number of occurrences of regulat that coincide with

Concept words or not. The vast majority of occurrences coincide with Concept words. The list of

Concept words is provided in Table 2, in order of their frequency of occurrence. We identified

the words included in this list by examining all the words that co-occur with regulat in sentences

and using our judgment (prior to running any regressions) to identify words (based on our

reading of the sentences in which regulat is mentioned) that are associated with economic usages

of regulat. We refer to sentences containing regulat and a Concept word as regulatory sentences.

We restrict our regulatory tone analysis to sections of calls containing regulatory sentences.4

    To gauge whether the discussion is one of increasing or decreasing regulation, we use the

same approach to identify "Increasing" or "Decreasing" words that co-occur in the same

sentence as regulat and convey a sense of increasing or decreasing regulatory exposure,

respectively. These words are also listed in Table 2 in order of their frequency of occurrence.

Examples of sentences in which regulat is accompanied by Increasing or Decreasing words are


4
  The concept word filter applies to only NetReg and RegSent measures. That is, for a given section of a call, these
regulatory measures are set to missing if there are no concept words in that section of the call, even if there is a
mention of regulat. AllSent measures are unaffected because AllSent represents the overall sentiment of a section.

                                                         10
provided in Table 3. It was from reading the context of these, and many other, sentences that we

were able to judge whether words convey a sense of Increasing or Decreasing regulatory

exposure. For example, it is not clear on an a priori basis whether the word "adapt" should be

considered an Increasing word, a Decreasing word, or neither. By reading the transcripts one

discovers, however, that "adapts" is often used in sentences that include regulat to indicate the

need for a firm to adapt to an increase in regulation. Here are some of the examples that illustrate

the point:


   ·   "We are well prepared to adapt to the changing legislative, regulatory and economic

       environment."

   ·   "Because of our steady and consistent performance, we are well positioned to adapt to the

       coming industry changes required by financial reform legislation and regulators."

   ·   "Sales in India continue to be impacted as the marketplace adapts to the sweeping

       September 1 regulatory changes to unit-linked product."

   ·   "Of course we're adapting our business model to the reality of regulation as it exists

       through the FDA." (Note that FDA refers to the Food and Drug Administration.)

   ·   "On a global kind of view, are you seeing any change or starting to hear any changes on

       any regulatory front in terms of maybe the local regulators starting to adapt strategies for,

       not just changing cash-to-cash but anything, cash-to-mobile or any of those type

       solutions."

We emphasize that the choice of words indicating increasing or decreasing regulation was made

by us independently of the regression analysis that is described in Section 4. Our choice of these

words captures our subjective judgement of how the regulatory environment faced by firms

should best be codified algorithmically.

                                                11
   Our NetReg measure takes all regulatory sentences in the Pres and Q&A sections, calculates

the difference between the number of Increasing and Decreasing regulatory words occurring in

those sentences, and divides by the total number of words in these sentences (after stop words

have been removed), i.e.

                                           - 
                              =               .
                                             

Our filter isn't perfect: not all regulatory sentences that contain the word "adapt" are indicative

of increasing regulation from the firm's point of view, as the last sentence in the above list

demonstrates. Table 3 shows the NetReg measure associated with an alternative set of sample

sentences. But as these above sentences and those of Table 3 show, our simple filter does a

remarkable job of (a) identifying meaningful regulatory references in Earnings Calls, as well as

(b) identifying the directionality of the reference.

   We regard the use of subjective judgment in constructing the lists of Concept, Increasing, and

Decreasing words as unavoidable for a simple reason: in the context of measuring regulation's

impact, it is not possible to use alternative, machine-learning techniques to identify Concept,

Increasing or Decreasing words. For example, one such technique would be to infer Concept,

Increasing and Decreasing words by identifying combinations of words that tend to result in

positive or negative stock returns at the time of the Earnings Call. The problem with this

approach, however, is that there are many important high-frequency news influences on stock

prices other than regulation that are revealed in the Earnings Call, and regulation news is

generally a low-frequency phenomenon. Thus, the ability to discern relevant word combinations

from stock price reactions is not feasible for our purposes.




                                                  12
   In addition to our original measure of regulation, NetReg, we also construct two measures

based on the sentiment of the text in the Earnings Call. We use the Loughran and McDonald

(2011) sentiment dictionary to identify positive and negative sentiment words in the Earnings

Calls. We define two sentiment-related measures for each part (Pres and Q&A) of each call. The

first of these, RegSent measures the sentiment score for each sentence in which regulat appears.

We construct this as a possible alternative measure of the effect of regulation. The second

sentiment-related measure, AllSent, calculates the sentiment score for the entire Pres or Q&A

discussion in the Earnings Call. This does not capture the effect of regulation, but rather is useful

as a benchmark for the effects of sentiment in general, against which to compare the effects of

regulation captured in RegSent. The sentiment score is calculated as the difference between the

number of positive and negative sentiment words, divided by the total number of words (after

removal of stop words) that appear either in regulatory sentences (for RegSent) or in all

sentences (for AllSent) of the Pres or Q&A sections of each call.

3.1. Regulatory trends

   The upper panel of Figure 1 plots the time series paths of the NetRegP and NetRegQA, which

measure the value of NetReg for the Pres and Q&A segments of the Earnings Calls, respectively.

Each series is an equally-weighted average of individual call measures aggregated at the

quarterly level. It is interesting that the two time-series aggregate measures plotted in Figure 1

are not highly correlated (with a correlation of only 0.09). They do not even display common

low-frequency movements: NetRegP seems to trend down since 2010, while NetRegQA appears

to trend upward from 2010 to 2016, and then declines abruptly at the end of 2016. Apparently,

the circumstances that give rise to management discussion of regulatory issues in their formal

presentations are not the same as the circumstances that motivate investors to ask questions about


                                                 13
regulation. This highlights the advantage of considering their content separately. Presumably,

management may not have an incentive to highlight all problems or risks, including those related

to regulation, while investors' questions may be directed precisely at topics about problems or

risks that management seeks to avoid.

   The lower panel of Figure 1 displays the proportion of Earnings Calls in which regulat is

mentioned in an economically meaningful context (that is, along with a Concept word in the

same sentence). Here we see a clear, albeit small, upward trend. From 2010 to 2018 the

proportion of Earnings Calls in which regulation is discussed rises from about 37% of the Calls

to about 40% of them. The series has a large spike in 1Q2017, the quarter following the Trump

election.

   Figure 2 plots the four sentiment-related measures, which differ according to (a) whether

sentiment is measured only within the sentence in which regulation is discussed or in the entire

Earnings Call, and (b) whether they are constructed from the formal management presentations

(Pres) or the question and answer (Q&A) portion of the Earnings Calls. Some highly interesting

patterns emerge, which we believe are intuitively appealing, and which help to validate these

measures. First, note that sentiment scores for the presentation portions are higher than the

comparable sentiment scores for the Q&A portions (that is, AllSentP > AllSentQA, and RegSentP

> RegSentQA). Unsurprisingly, management tends to be more sanguine in its tone than are

investors during Earnings Calls. Second, the sentiment scores of sentences in which regulation is

the topic tend to be lower than the Earnings Calls as a whole (that is, AllSentP > RegSentP, and

AllSentQA > RegSentQA). In other words, compared with other topics discussed in Earnings

Calls, discussions of regulation, not surprisingly, tend to have more negative sentiment, whether

it is discussed by management or investors. Third, sentiment scores are rising over time (which

                                                14
makes sense if improvements in economic activity are reflected in more positive sentiment), and

similarly, there is some evidence that sentiment scores rose at the end of 2016 (the beginning of

an acceleration in economic growth) for all four measures.

   Figure 3 compares our two approaches to measuring regulation. The measures are negatively

correlated, as expected (NetRegP and RegSentP are correlated -0.62, and NetRegQA and

RegSentQA are correlated -0.31). Within the presentation section, the measures also follow

opposite trends (NetRegP trends downward while RegSentP trends upward), but for the Q&A

section, a somewhat different picture is visible. While NetRegQA is flat from 2010-2016 and

then falls dramatically at the end of 2016, RegSentQA begins to rise in 2013, and then rises

dramatically at the end of 2016. We summarize the definition of the text variables in Table 6,

and report summary statistics for all the variables in Table 7.

3.2. Topics of regulation

   We also investigated whether the importance of NLP measures of regulation varied

according to the specific regulatory topic being discussed, where specific topics are identified as

clusters of associated words. For example, it may be that when regulation is discussed in the

context of some topics (e.g., mergers and acquisitions) it may have more or less importance than

in the context of other topics (e.g., FDA approval of the company's experimental drug). After all,

management references to regulation can mean many different things: passing or repealing a new

regulation, beginning or ending an investigation or an enforcement action, approving or denying

a merger, approving or denying a drug's use, to name only a few. It is quite conceivable that

some of these topical contexts may be more important than others. In previous work, it has been

found that sentiment scores can have very different meaning depending on topical context

(Calomiris and Mamaysky 2019).

                                                 15
   In the social sciences, there have been two frequently used methods for identifying document

topics: word-network-based approaches (such as the Louvain method of finding co-occurring

words) and generative topic models (such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation, or LDA). A key

difference between the two methods is that in the Louvain method a word is affiliated with only

one of many clusters, so that each cluster consists of a list of words that only appear in that

cluster. In the LDA method (see Steyvers and Griffiths 2007 for a good primer), a word can

appear in multiple clusters, but with different probabilities. Each of the two clustering methods

has strengths and weaknesses. When the range of topics is broad (e.g., including topics as

different as news about government policy versus news about commodities markets, or news

about corporate prospects, or news about macroeconomic conditions) it has been found (e.g.,

Calomiris and Mamaysky 2019) that the results from using the Louvain method can be quite

similar to those from using the LDA method, and that the Louvain method can have distinct

advantages (including clearer interpretations of topical categories, and faster computational

speed). However, when the overall subject range is narrow (i.e., in the current study of

regulation), and the topics have substantial overlap in the words that naturally define each topical

category, the flexibility inherent in LDA can be quite useful. For that reason, we use the LDA

method to define topical categories, which we label based on our own subjective judgment of

how to think about each of the topical word clusters.

   We display and label the LDA topics in the Appendix in Tables A1 and A2. We estimate the

LDA model using document term matrixes obtained from 41-word windows centered on the

occurrences of regulat in either the Pres or Q&A sections of the Calls. We use these longer

windows (rather than confine windows to the sentence level) in order to have more context for

the LDA topic estimation. Table A3 gives a sense of how our topical categories are related to our


                                                 16
NetReg measure. For the Pres and Q&A sections of each call (the top and bottom panels of the

table respectively) for each topic category we find all calls whose topic allocation to that

category was above 50%.5 For such calls, we then calculate the average value of NetReg. For

example, calls whose presentation sections discuss regulation in the context of the FDA have a

very low NetReg score of -0.017, indicating a favorable regulatory environment. Whereas calls

that discuss regulation in in the Q&A section in the context of profit margins have a relatively

high NetReg score of 0.007, indicating an adverse regulatory environment. Interestingly

discussions of M&A in the context of regulation are associated with a very favorable regulatory

environment, as indicated by extremely low NetReg scores.

    In our empirical work, in addition to our findings for sentiment scores in general, we also

report results that consider the effect of three different topical areas on the importance of NLP

measures: (1) Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A), (2) FDA Approval (FDA), and (3) Regulatory

topics related to China (China). We find that these three topics displayed the greatest importance

of topical contexts as conditioning variables.


4. Empirical findings

    In this section, we divide our discussion into five parts. First, we present our baseline results,

which examine the effect of NetReg on sales growth and other measures of firm financial

performance, using a variety of control variables, and explore differences in those results for

large and small firms. Second, we show that NetReg is not forecasted by lagged measures of firm

performance (other than lagged sales growth) or by lagged stock returns. Third, we repeat the



5
  LDA assigns to each call's Pres and Q&A sections a topic distribution, which determines the probability that any
given word in the section belongs to a particular topic. We assign the Pres or Q&A section of a given call to topic i
if that section's topic distribution has more than 50% probability assigned to topic i,

                                                         17
analysis in the first two sub-sections using our sentiment-based measures (AllSent and RegSent)

rather than NetReg, and explore differences between the sentiment-based (RegSent) measure and

the use of NetReg to measure regulation. Fourth, we extend our analysis to take into account the

potential importance of topical context for our NLP measures. Fifth, we examine the effects of

all of our NLP measures of regulation on stock returns.

       In all specifications that interact firm size (measured as log sales in the prior three

months) with our regulatory sentiment measures, we demean log sales. In specifications that

involve one-year ahead firm performance measures, we cluster residuals by 2-digit SIC code to

control for potential serial correlation. We cannot cluster by firm because there are not sufficient

firm-level observations in many cases. For the return regressions, where the time-horizon of

returns is one-month ahead or less, we cluster by event dates to control for cross-sectional

correlations.

4.1. Effects of regulatory tone on sales growth

   Table 8 shows that, in both the presentation and Q&A sections, the two NetReg variables are

associated with large and highly statistically significant effects on one year-ahead sales growth.

The effect is robust to the inclusion of various controls. We begin with a discussion of the

specifications that do not allow the effects of NetReg to vary by firm size, and that do not

normalize for cross-industry differences. All the specifications include a NoRegulat and a

NeverRegulat dummy variable (see Table 6), which control for any selection bias associated with

the presence of any mention of regulation in the Earnings Call (in columns 7 and 8 we also

include the lagged value of the NoRegulat variable, which controls for the absence of regulat in




                                                  18
the Earnings Call from a year before, and also for the one-year lagged value of NetReg6). Using

the column (1) coefficient value of -0.30, a one standard deviation increase in NetRegP forecasts

a 1.5% reduction in sales (NetRegP has a standard deviation of 0.05, as shown in Table 7). The

comparable reduction in sales using the coefficient value for NetRegQA in column (2) is a 10.9%

reduction in sales. Note that the standard deviations used in these calculations are obtained only

from the sample of observations for which regulation is mentioned together with a regulatory

Concept word. We also control for the selectivity related to the absence of the mention of

regulation. As the negative coefficients on the No Regulat Dummy and the Never Regulat

Dummy indicate, companies whose Earnings Calls do not mention regulation tend to have lower

sales growth.

    Columns (3) and (4) explore differences in the sales growth consequences of NetReg that are

associated with firm size. In both the presentation and Q&A sections of the Earnings Calls, there

are significant positive coefficients on the interaction of firm size and NetReg. Using both the

simple coefficient values for NetReg and their interactions with size, at the mean of size, a one

standard deviation increase in NetRegP is associated with a 1.84% decline in sales growth, but at

the 75th percentile of size, the effect is a 1.45% decline in sales growth. For the largest firm in

our sample (with log sales of 11.8, which is 6.4 above the mean), there is a roughly zero effect of

a change in NetRegP on sales growth. At the 25th percentile of size the effect is a 2.2% decline in

sales growth. The comparable computation for NetRegQA results in a 1.1% decrease in sales

growth at the mean (in column 4). At the 75th percentile of size, the effect is a decline of 0.8%.

At the 25th percentile of size, the effect is a decline of 1.4%. As in the case of NetRegP, for the


6
  We control for NetReg from a year ago to see the extent to which the effect of NetReg in the present quarter on
future sales growth is a manifestation of regulation already found in the past. In Columns 7 and 8 of Table 8 (and
similarly in Tables 11 and 12), we find that past measures of NetReg have little bearing with respect to this effect as
our estimates remain largely the same.

                                                          19
largest firm in the sample, the effect of NetRegQA on sales growth is roughly zero. This confirms

the common view in the regulation literature that large firms enjoy an economy of scale in

dealing with the costs of regulation.

   Columns (5) and (6) measure NetReg in a way that adjusts for any cross-industry differences

at the two-digit SIC level, while also allowing its effect to vary by firm size. When one adjusts

for cross-industry differences in NetReg, the coefficient values on IndAdjNetRegP and

IndAdjNetRegQA (see Table 6) remain negative and highly statistically significant, and their

magnitudes are similar. For an average size firm, after taking out the industry-specific mean of

regulation, the implied reduction in sales from standard deviation increases in IndAdjNetRegP

and IndAdjNetRegQA are 1.6% and 0.9%, respectively. The industry average effects (Ind.

NetRegP and Ind. NetRegQA) are also very large and negative, but of lower statistical

significance. A standard deviation increase in Ind. NetRegP, (which is 0.014) reduces sales

growth for the firms in the industry, on average, by 0.8%. This industry effect is in addition to

any effects of firm-specific deviations from the industry mean (which are captured by Ind. Adj.

NetRegP and Ind. Adj. NetRegQA).

   In Table 9, we also report results for the effects of NetReg on the operating income margin

(operating income/sales). Additional measures of firm performance, including asset growth and

operating income growth are examined in the Appendix. We present comparable tables to Table

8 for each of those variables. Interestingly, results for the operating income margin tend to be

small and statistically insignificant. The same is true for operating income growth. Operating

income margin and operating income growth responses should reflect expense-related

consequences of regulation.




                                                20
   The relative absence of effects on these variables from NetReg indicates that the costs of

regulation that are captured by our measures are less related to operational costs than to

reductions in growth related to compliance risk. We return to this point in our discussion of stock

returns. In the case where we employ asset growth as the dependent variable, results are similar

to those for sales growth, but impacts on asset growth are sometimes less significant statistically.

This may reflect more protracted lags in the response of capital accumulation. Sales growth can

slow simply by holding off the expansion of operations, even if investment in plant, property and

equipment does not adjust immediately.

   It seems natural that conversations between firms and their stockholders that revolve around

questions of firms' strategies and prospects should focus on compliance risk rather than

operational costs. Operational costs tend to change at low frequency and may have limited

strategic implications. In contrast, compliance risk can be a major high-frequency strategic

consideration potentially affecting investment decisions, the introduction of new products or

other decisions likely to be discussed by firms at Earnings Calls. It may be that operational costs

are better measured by an approach that focuses on the allocation of resources to compliance

staff and other physical operational costs, as in Simkovic and Zhang (2019).

4.2. Are regulatory effects on sales growth persistent?

    Our empirical findings focus on one-year-ahead forecasts of sales growth. Does an increase

in NetReg produce further declines in growth in the next year, or perhaps a leveling off of the

growth effect on sales, or perhaps reversion in the second year? To address that question, we use

the local projections method of Jorda (2005) to calculate the impulse response of cumulative

sales growth to a one standard deviation shock in NetReg. This method offers the benefit of

robustness to data generating process misspecification and accommodation of potential

                                                 21
nonlinearities. As the graph in Figure 4 shows, after two to three years the effect on sales growth

flattens. We conclude that NetReg has a one-time effect on the level of sales rather than a

continuing negative effect on growth. In a set of unreported results, we also examine the

persistence of the effects of RegSent and AllSent on sales growth. For these sentiment-based

measures, their positive effects on sales growth also level off, but much earlier (after year one).

4.3. Is regulatory tone forecastable by other variables?

   Next, we examine the question of whether NetReg itself is forecasted by other variables.

These results are presented in Table 10. The adjusted R-squareds in all the specifications are

between eight and nine percent for NetRegP and about three percent for NetRegQA. The

regulatory tone from the presentation section is much more forecastable than the unscripted

regulatory tone from the Q&A section. NetRegP and NetRegQA are predicted positively by their

own lagged values, and NetRetP is predicted negatively by firm size, which is a control in all our

specifications. The lagged one-month abnormal return has no forecasting power for NetReg. This

is an important finding because it addresses the concern that discussion about regulation may be

influenced by recent performance in the stock market leading up to the conference call (e.g., poor

stock market performance prompting shareholders to talk more about regulation).

   Generally, the firm operating performance measures do not forecast NetRegP or NetRegQA.

The exception is lagged asset growth in column (2) although the effect disappears in column (4)

once other operating characteristics, such as sales and operating income growth, are introduced

as controls. The specification in column (4) also controls for one- and two-year lags of all the

other performance variables, none of which enters significantly. One-year-lagged sales growth

does not forecast NetRegQA, although two-year lagged sales growth does. Note that NetReg

negatively predicts sales growth, but is positively predicted by sales growth. Therefore, the

                                                 22
negative prediction of NetReg for sales growth cannot be attributed to the possibility that NetReg

simply proxies for an autoregressive sales growth factor. Again, once all controls are included,

the effect loses significance in column (8).

    In summary, NetRegQA and NetRegP are mainly forecastable by their own past and NetRegP

is also forecastable by firm size. Adjusted R-squareds are small. Other variables related to firm

income measures or past stock returns have little forecasting power for NetRegP or NetRegQA.

However, NetRegP and NetRegQA forecast sales growth (Table 8) and asset growth (Table A4)

even in the presence of all controls. In this sense, NetReg Granger causes (some) firm

fundamentals, but is not Granger caused by them.

4.4. Effects of sentiment on sales growth

    How does our sentiment-based measure of regulation (RegSent) compare with NetReg in its

usefulness for forecasting sales growth and other measures? And to what extent is this sentiment-

based measures forecastable by lagged firm performance?

    Table 11 reports results for RegSent's effects on sales growth. RegSentQA displays a positive

and statistically significant effect only in column (4). Other coefficient estimates in Table 11 are

small and statistically insignificantly positive or negative. Firm size interactions are not

statistically significant. In column (4), a one standard deviation decrease in RegSentQA produces

a 0.5% decline in sales growth.

    We examine AllSent as a means of differentiating sentiment effects that are specific to the

regulatory context from general sentiment effects. Table 12 displays large positive effects on

sales growth for both AllSentP and AllSentQA. Adjusting for firm size, however, results in a

positive size effect (when the size interaction is statistically significant), which indicates that the


                                                  23
effect of positive sentiment on sales growth is larger for larger firms. This is contrary to what we

observed for NetReg (where large firms saw mitigated effects) and RegSent (where there was no

significant size interaction). Size adjustment and industry adjustment matter for AllSentQA, but

not for AllSentP.

   With respect to the predictability of RegSent, Table 13 shows that RegSentP is forecasted

positively by recent sales growth, and RegSentQA is forecasted positively by operating income

growth. As with NetReg, RegSent is more forecastable from the presentation section (R-squareds

in the 16% range) than in the Q&A section (R-squareds in the 2-3% range). AllSent is much

more forecastable than RegSent, as shown in Table 14. The adjusted R-squared is much higher

for AllSent and many more variables are statistically significant for forecasting it, though again,

the forecastability of AllSent in the presentation section (in the 33% range) is much higher than

in the Q&A section (13% range). This shows that sentiment related to regulation is much less

(and even less so for NetReg) a predictable consequence of firm performance than is sentiment in

general.

4.5. Effects of topical context on sales growth

   Using the LDA method for identifying topics related to regulation, we explore whether

sentiment effects on sales growth are different across topical categories. A summary of the topics

we identified, the labels we attached to them, and the variation in their presence over time are

provided in the Appendix (see Figures A1 and A2, and Tables A1 and A2). The three topical

categories that proved to have value for conditioning the informational content of sentiment were

M&A, FDA, and China. In our topic-specific specifications for each of these we add the section-

topic probability, a measure of the amount to which the topical category is present in a given

section of the Earnings Call, as an explanatory variable. For example, in Table 15, we add the

                                                  24
probabilities that a word in the Pres and Q&A sections belongs to the M&A topic as a right-hand

side variable (labeled "M&A (Pres)" and "M&A (QA)" in the table). We then check how the

topic frequency measure, as well as its interaction with sentiment, affect forecasted sales growth.

   In the case of M&A (where, most of the time, the news is favorable, as most mergers are not

opposed by regulators), the effect of the topic's appearance in the presentation section is positive

for sales growth. NetReg interactions with the M&A topic in both the presentation and Q&A

sections are particularly negative for sales growth. The RegSent coefficients are positive in the

presence of the M&A indicator variable, but the interaction between M&A and RegSent is

negative, and marginally significant for RegSentP. It is surprising that positive sentiment in the

part of the call that discusses M&A-related regulations forecasts sales growth negatively.

   In the case of the FDA topic area, the interaction of RegSentQA and the FDA topic in Table

16 is positive, indicating that positive sentiment is particularly positive for sales growth when the

topic is related to the FDA. The sign remains the same (negative) for NetRegP and NetRegQA

and their interactions with the FDA topic are insignificant.

   In the case of the China topic, in Table 17, interactions of the topic with NetReg are positive,

and with RegSentQA are negative. In other words, in contrast with the other topical categories,

when the topical context is China, the average effects of NetRegP, NetRegQA and RegSentQA

are typically lessened by the topical interaction term.

4.6. Effects of regulatory tone on excess stock returns

   We now turn to an examination of the role of our NLP measures as forecasters of stock

returns. We explored results for three different time intervals around the date of the Earnings

Call: the abnormal return on the day following the call (or the day after, if the call begins after 4


                                                 25
PM), the cumulative abnormal return over a five trading day window (ending five or six trading

days after the call depending on whether it starts pre- or post-4PM), or the cumulative abnormal

return over a twenty two trading day window (ending 22 or 23 trading days after the call).

However, we found that the effects of our Earnings Call measures were most-pronounced for the

22-day period, and these results are reported in Table 18.7 We analyze returns in excess of the

risk-free rate (Excess Ret), as well as abnormal returns relative to the Fama-French five-factor

model augmented with the momentum factor (FF6 Ret).

    We find that all our NLP measures contain information that is useful for forecasting future

stock returns and excess returns. As the table shows, all three -- NetReg, RegSent and AllSent --

have positive coefficients. Interestingly, for NetReg and RegSent it is only the information from

the Q&A portions of the Earnings Calls that elicit statistically significant return reactions in the

market. The more muted response from the market with regards to measures based on the

presentation section of the Earnings Call can be attributed to the relatively sanitized nature of the

presentation section, which is less likely to produce information that is interesting or isn't

already baked into prices.8 With regard to excess returns, the effect of a one standard deviation

increase in NetRegQA is 2.9% per year (0.045 × 0.053 × 12), a very large effect.9


    There are two ways to interpret any of these coefficients: either as a delayed market price

response to value-relevant news contained in the Earnings Call, or as compensation for a risk that

the text-based measure helps forecast. In the lagged-response-to-news case, we would expect



7
  The one- and five-day results are available from the authors. The full results of the 22-day regressions are shown in
the Appendix.
8
  Much of the information from the presentation section is released in firms' 10-Qs and 10-Ks, which also helps to
explain the muted response. See Price, Doran, Peterson, and Bliss (2012).
9
  We also considered size interactions to test whether there are significant size-related differences in excess returns
responses to our measures. Given the noisiness of the returns data, we were not able to find robust significant results
relating to size differences.

                                                          26
positive coefficients on RegSent and AllSent but negative coefficients on NetReg. In the proxy-

for-future-risk case, we would expect the opposite: negative coefficients for RegSent and AllSent

­ as these potentially proxy for lower future risks ­ but positive coefficients on NetReg, which

potentially forecasts higher future compliance risks. In the case of AllSent, its positive coefficient

can be seen as indicative of a generally positive relationship between sentiment scores in

Earnings Calls and earnings news (see Price, Doran, Peterson, and Bliss 2012). The positive

coefficient on RegSent has a similar interpretation, although it is possible that in the context of a

regulatory discussion, positive sentiment could signal reduced risk and, therefore, reduced

expected returns (especially when examining the 22-day window).

   One piece of evidence consistent with the interpretation of the positive coefficient of 22-day

ahead returns on AllSent as indicating an underreaction to value-relevant information is the fact

that AllSent is a strong positive predictor of sales growth over the ensuing 12-months (Table 12).

Similarly, the fact that NetReg negatively predicts sales growth (Table 8) but positively forecasts

22-day ahead returns supports the interpretation of this effect as a compensation for risk.

   These findings that NetReg matters positively for expected returns suggest that regulatory

news positively affects market perceptions of risk, confirming the evidence from sales growth

and operating margins regressions that compliance risk (because NetReg depresses growth),

rather than operational costs related to regulation (because NetReg does not impact margins), is

the more important aspect of regulatory cost. The difference in the future return outcomes for

NetReg versus RegSent and AllSent indicates that the information about regulatory risk contained

in NetReg elicits a risk premium from the market, whereas and the information content of

RegSent and AllSent appears to enter prices with a lag, potentially reflecting informational or

microstructure effects (see Glasserman, Li, and Mamaysky 2020).

                                                 27
5. Conclusions

        We study new ways to measure regulation and its effects on firm performance, and stock

returns. We construct two measures of regulation, one (NetReg) using "tone" (defined by

contexts that indicate increasing or decreasing regulation), and another (RegSent) using more

standard sentiment-based measures of regulatory context. We compare these to AllSent which

measures the tone of the entire presentation and Q&A section of Earnings Calls.

        Our preferred measure (NetReg) implies substantial negative effects on sales growth from

regulation in both the presentation and Q&A sections of Earnings Calls, while the more

traditional, sentiment-based measure is only relevant for the Q&A sections, and represents a

weaker effect. We do not find that any measure of regulation affects operating cost margins. That

suggests that regulatory costs that are identified in Earnings Calls mainly reflect compliance

risks, and not operational costs that would depress margins. Our interpretation is that regulatory

risk, in contrast to regulatory operational costs, tends to have more high-frequency strategic

implications, which makes regulatory risk more relevant for Earnings Call discussions.

        Effects of regulation (using NetReg as the measure of regulation) are smaller for large

firms, indicating substantial economies of scale in managing the costs of regulation. Sentiment

effects in general (i.e. AllSent, which is not specific to the regulatory context), have opposite

size-related effects, and are larger for large firms. There is no size-related interaction effect for

RegSent.

    Evidence of regulatory effects on excess stock returns confirm the view that the regulatory

costs we capture are related to risk, but provides a somewhat mixed picture on how regulatory

risk is priced in the market, depending on which measure of regulation is used. For our preferred



                                                  28
measure, NetReg, its effect on excess returns is positive and large, indicating that the news

contained in this measure is a priced risk. For RegSent, we find positive effects on future excess

returns, indicating that good news contained in positive sentiment in the context of regulation

predicts positive expected returns. One possible explanation is that RegSent is capturing a

delayed market reaction rather than a priced risk. That interpretation is consistent with other

findings related to sentiment, both from other studies (e.g., Calomiris and Mamaysky 2019), and

from the effect we find for AllSent, which displays much larger effects on excess expected

returns.




                                                 29
6. References

Al-Ubaydli, Omar, and Patrick A. McLaughlin. 2017. "RegData: A Numerical Database on
   Industry-specific Regulations for All United States Industries and Federal Regulations,
   1997­2012." Regulation and Governance 11, 109-123.
Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas. 1989. "Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift: Delayed
   Price Response or Risk Premium," Journal of Accounting Research 27, 1-36.
Calomiris, Charles W. 2018. "Restoring the Rule of Law in Financial Regulation," Cato Journal
   38, 701-719.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Stephen H. Haber. 2014. Fragile By Design: The Political Origins of
   Banking Crises and Scarce Credit, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Harry Mamaysky. 2019. "How News and Its Context Drive Risk and
   Returns Around the World." Journal of Financial Economics 133, 299-336.
Das, S. and M, Chen, 2007, "Yahoo! for Amazon: Sentiment extraction from small talk on the
   web," Management Science, 53 (9), 1375--1388.
Davis, Steven J. 2017. "Regulatory Complexity and Policy Uncertainty: Headwinds of Our Own
   Making." Working paper.
DeMuth, Christopher. 2016. "Can the Administrative State Be Tamed," Working Paper, Hoover
  Institution Initiative on Regulation and the Rule of Law.
Epstein, Richard A. 2016. "The Role of Guidances in Modern Adminstrative Procedures,"
   Working Paper, Hoover Institutions Initiative on Regulation and the Rule of Law.
Glasserman, Paul, Fulin Li, and Harry Mamaysky. 2020. "Time Variation in the News- Returns
   Relationship," Working paper.
Jorda, O., 2005, "Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projection," American
    Economic Review, 95 (1), 161-182.
Krueger, Anne O. 1974. "The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society,"American
   Economic Review 64, 291-303.
Linnainmaa, J. and C. Zhang, 2019, "The earnings announcement return cycle," Working paper.
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald, 2011, ``When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
   dictionaries, and 10-Ks,'' Journal of Finance, 66, 35--65.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.
   Cambrige, MA: Harvard University Press.
Price, S, J. Doran, D. Peterson, and B. Bliss, 2012, "Earnings conference calls and stock returns:
    The incremental informativeness of textual tone," Journal of Banking & Finance, 36, 992-
    1011.
Simkovic, Michael, and Miao B. Zhang. 2019. "Measuring Regulation." Working paper.


                                                30
Steyvers, M. and T. Griffiths, 2007, "Probabilistic topic models," in: In T. Landauer, D
   McNamara, S. Dennis, and W. Kintsch (eds), Latent Semantic Analysis: A Road to Meaning,
   Laurence Erlbaum.
Stigler, George J. 1971. "The Theory of Economic Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics and
    Management Science 2, 3-18.
Stigler, George J. (Ed.). 1988. Chicago Studies in Political Economy. Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press.
Tetlock, Paul C., Maytal Saar-Tsechansky, and Sofus Macskassy. 2008. "More Than Words:
    Quantifying Language to Measure Firms' Fundamentals," Journal of Finance 63, 1437- 1467.




                                              31
                                                               Regulatory trends




                                      0.01
                                                                                          NetRegP
                                                                                          NetRegQA
                                                                                          Corr = 0.093




                                      0.00
                                      -0.01
                  Regulatory trends

                                      -0.02
                                      -0.03
                                      -0.04




                                              2010      2012       2014        2016           2018


                                                Fraction of calls with regulat and concept words

                                                                                      17-Q1
                                      0.44




                                                                                          18-Q1
                                      0.42




                                                                     14-Q1                       19-Q1
                                      0.40




                                                                               16-Q3
                                                                                 16-Q4 18-Q2
                                                                                         18-Q3
                                                   10-Q3 12-Q1 13-Q1         16-Q1
                                                                                            19-Q2
                                                      11-Q1                               18-Q4
                                                    10-Q4     12-Q4
                                                                        15-Q1 16-Q2 17-Q4
                                                                      14-Q3 15-Q4
                                      0.38




                                                                 13-Q3              17-Q3
                                                         11-Q4         14-Q4       17-Q2
                                                       11-Q2
                                                 10-Q1          13-Q214-Q2 15-Q3
                                                  10-Q2                  15-Q2
                                                            12-Q2 13-Q4
                                                09-Q4   11-Q312-Q3
                                      0.36




                                               09-Q3

                                              2010      2012      2014       2016      2018




Figure 1: The top panel shows our net regulatory trends measure in earnings call sentences
that match our regulatory filter in the presentation (RegSentP ) and Q&A (RegSentQA)
portions of earnings calls. The bottom panel shows the percentage of all earnings calls in
the SP Global data set which contain at least one sentence in either the presentation or the
Q&A portion of the call that satisfies our regulatory filter.


                                                                    32
                                        Call sentiment
                 0.020
                 0.015
                 0.010
Call sentiment

                 0.005
                 0.000
                 -0.005




                                                    allSentP           regSentP
                 -0.015




                                                    allSentQA          regSentQA

                          2010   2012      2014        2016          2018




Figure 2: Sentiment series using the Loughran-McDonald dictionary in sentences matching
our regulatory filter in the presentation (RegSentP ) and Q&A (RegSentQA) portions of the
earnings calls. Also shown are the Loughran-McDonald sentiment in the entire presentation
(AllSentP ) and Q&A (AllSentQA) portions of the earnings call. Date shown at a quarterly
frequency.




                                            33
                                              Regulatory trends
                   Trends in Presentation section                           Trends in QA section
                            corr=-0.616                                         corr=-0.308




                                                            0.00
                                                            -0.01
        0.00
  Presentation




                                                          -0.02
     -0.01




                                                          QA
                                                            -0.03
        -0.02




                                                            -0.04
        -0.03




                 2010   2012   2014   2016   2018                   2010    2012    2014   2016    2018

                                                                           (Inc-Dec)/Tot    Sent (scaled)


Figure 3: For the presentation portion of earnings call, the left panel shows the net regulatory
trends measure N etRegP (in blue) against a scaled version of the Loughran-McDonald
sentiment in sentences matching our regulatory filter RegSentP (dotted, red line). The
right panel shows N etRegQA and RegSentQA for the Q&A portion of the earnings calls.
The correlation between the regulatory trends series and the sentence-level sentiment series
is shown at the top of each panel.




                                                     34
Figure 4: The response of sales growth to the measures of regulation in the presentation
section (NetRegP) and Q&A section (NetRegQA). We use the local projection methods of
Jorda (2005) to calculate these impulse response. The impulse responses assume that the
NetReg shock is orthogonal to all other influences.

                                          35
Table 1: For a sentence that mentions "regulat" to pass our regulatory filter, we require that
one of the concept words listed in Table 2 is also present. For example, a sentence referring
to "regulatory compliance" would count while the sentence "We do not expect this trial to
materially affect the overall timing of the regulatory submission process for SPN-810" would
not. Applying this filter to our data results in the following numbers of calls which pass our
regulatory filter in their presentation and Q&A sections respectively. The column labeled
"No concept" is the number of sentences mentioning "regulat" but that do not contain a
concept word from Tab;e 2 and hence do not pass our regulatory filter.
                 Number of earnings calls passing regulatory filter
                                    Concept No concept
                               Pres 48,136  1,770
                                QA 37,070   3,399




                                             36
Table 2: Shown are stemmed modifying (concept, increasing, or decreasing) words. The
number of times each stemmed word occurs in the presentation and Q&A portion of the calls
is shown next to each word. Words are arranged in decreasing order of occurrence. Stemmed
Concept words also include their negated versions, e.g. "adjust" and "adjust NEG".
                        Regulatory concept and directionality word lists
Category
Concept
regulatori 128165, market 24012, approv 21109, chang 20204, busi 20036, capit 16205, requir 14343, cost 13757, financi 12454,
impact 11811, risk 11247, develop 10847, environ 10746, regulatori NEG 10474, file 8686, issu 7430, measur 7394, state 7099,
complianc 6059, effect 5953, govern 5868, tax 5862, author 5589, expens 5560, review 5200, uncertainti 5085, secur 4786,
ratio 4711, condit 4496, side 4330, initi 4232, demand 4036, strategi 3963, progress 3938, rule 3794, fda 3779, agenc 3689, sec
3614, decis 3413, acquisit 3351, challeng 3263, chang NEG 3113, direct 3098, legal 3080, propos 2991, adjust 2898, pressur
2766, standard 2697, environment 2661, perspect 2520, feder 2504, legisl 2435, limit 2413, law 2316, fee 2289, spend 2280,
structur 2225, peopl 2156, market NEG 2084, leverag 1873, approv NEG 1831, delay 1818, financ 1800, loss 1798, busi NEG
1754, submit 1733, impact NEG 1731, tariff 1685, sector 1655, unregul 1594, item 1546, requir NEG 1537, limit NEG 1510,
capit NEG 1503, commit 1484, polit 1454, deregul 1448, standpoint 1396, institut 1270, litig 1249, minimum 1240, nonregul
1232, administr 1195, risk NEG 1169, headwind 1157, jurisdict 1099, clearanc 1081, issu NEG 1065, restrict 1035, regim 995,
entiti 994, cost NEG 991, settlement 932, financi NEG 890, environ NEG 869, epa 848, guidelin 843, develop NEG 777, hurdl
777, enforc 771, compliant 753, mandat 718, govern NEG 684, file NEG 678, effect NEG 675, constraint 672, condit NEG 669,
burden 667, state NEG 611, scrutini 600, oversight 570, tax NEG 527, wind 513, author NEG 486, rule NEG 449, law NEG
422, secur NEG 413, demand NEG 409, side NEG 383, complianc NEG 369, agenc NEG 367, uncertainti NEG 361, decis NEG
358, barrier 355, review NEG 333, legal NEG 329, sensit 313, fda NEG 311, complic 310, pressur NEG 298, direct NEG 297,
standard NEG 294, perspect NEG 293, consent 282, antitrust 278, ratio NEG 277, acquisit NEG 274, peopl NEG 274, cms 269,
strategi NEG 269, expens NEG 250, structur NEG 249, initi NEG 245, legisl NEG 245, privaci 230, propos NEG 226, provinci
222, feder NEG 222, cfpb 217, spend NEG 214, sec NEG 208, penalti 207, environment NEG 206, delay NEG 203, challeng NEG
196, loss NEG 191, standpoint NEG 189, politician 188, litig NEG 179, progress NEG 175, policymak 174, financ NEG 174,
adjust NEG 171, prohibit 168, upregul 168, pollut 164, promulg 161, reregul 159, polit NEG 158, restrict NEG 158, minist
154, tariff NEG 150, measur NEG 148, supervis 145, enforc NEG 142, fee NEG 142, item NEG 138, notifi 136, permiss 136,
leverag NEG 134, parliament 133, sector NEG 133, institut NEG 131, discret 128, hurdl NEG 127, constraint NEG 123, usda
121, regim NEG 120, deregul NEG 118, docket 117, disallow 114, compliant NEG 112, commit NEG 111, entiti NEG 107, finra
105, ftc 100, disposit 99, mandat NEG 98, jurisdict NEG 95, administr NEG 94, clearanc NEG 93, unregul NEG 91, unintend
88, supervisori 85, settlement NEG 84, submit NEG 84, supervisor 79, legislatur 78, cftc 77, monopoli 75, burden NEG 75,
dysregul 73, rulemak 72, minimum NEG 72, headwind NEG 72, sox 70, guidelin NEG 66, resubmiss 64, naic 64, oversight NEG
56, scrutini NEG 55, repeal 50, nonregul NEG 50, epa NEG 49, accreditor 48, superintend 48, congression 47, burdensom
44, lawmak 43, esma 41, barrier NEG 40, downregul 38, complic NEG 38, osha 35, sensit NEG 35, overregul 35, deregulatori
34, crime 32, wind NEG 32, politician NEG 31, licensur 30, penalti NEG 30, reregul NEG 29, permiss NEG 28, overturn 28,
resubmit 26, fsoc 26, cfpb NEG 25, prohibit NEG 25, ministeri 24, upheld 24, autoregul 24, consent NEG 21, bureaucrat
21, privaci NEG 19, unintend NEG 19, antitrust NEG 19, promulg NEG 19, preapprov 18, provinci NEG 18, disposit NEG
17, pollut NEG 17, supervisor NEG 17, iosco 16, redress 15, parliament NEG 15, discret NEG 15, cms NEG 15, minist NEG
15, supervis NEG 14, monopoli NEG 14, codifi 14, usda NEG 13, icc 11, disallow NEG 11, crackdown 11, parliamentari 10,
upregul NEG 10, notifi NEG 9, litigi 9, legislatur NEG 9, supervisori NEG 7, ftc NEG 7, overregul NEG 7, finra NEG 7,
esma NEG 7, cftc NEG 6, sox NEG 5, accreditor NEG 5, resubmiss NEG 4, resubmit NEG 4, congression NEG 4, docket NEG
4, fsoc NEG 4, licensur NEG 3, rulemak NEG 3, naic NEG 3, repeal NEG 3, lawmak NEG 3, redress NEG 3, bureaucrat NEG
3, dysregul NEG 3, upheld NEG 2, burdensom NEG 2, deregulatori NEG 2, ministeri NEG 2, downregul NEG 2, crime NEG
1, autoregul NEG 1, overturn NEG 1, boatload 1, policymak NEG 1, iosco NEG 1, litigi NEG 1, preapprov NEG 1, osha NEG
1
Increasing
increas 15229, growth 10282, addit 8280, uncertainti 5085, higher 4839, high 4228, grow 3158, pressur 2766, concern 2651, negat
1746, difficult 1365, add 1229, ad 1178, restrict 1035, hard 973, strengthen 811, hurdl 777, adapt 721, strength 717, burden 667,
stringent 652, stress 638, rise 563, incur 562, aggress 486, uncertain 479, strict 441, heavili 367, complic 310, heavi 303, bad 275,
penalti 207, caution 200, adher 196, poor 108, violat 80, fear 76, penal 73, wors 71, prolifer 64, disproportion 35, litigi 9
Decreasing
approv 21109, posit 7835, improv 4768, clear 4435, good 4045, benefit 3995, progress 3938, lower 3799, reduc 2966, construct
2421, better 2189, reduct 2006, declin 1975, low 1859, less 1811, decreas 1749, unregul 1594, deregul 1448, favor 1402, nonregul
1232, stabl 1172, clariti 1115, permit 1112, attract 833, stabil 777, flexibl 745, optim 722, fall 536, relief 456, optimist 400, happi
358, friend 185, overcom 174, permiss 136, fewer 131, fell 106, shrink 77, diminish 62, congratul 38, deregulatori 34, happili 5,
congrat 5

                                                              37
Table 3: Sample sentences that satisfy our regulatory filter from the presentation and Q&A
portions of earnings calls. Each sentence is shown along with its Increasing, Decreasing and
Concept words.
                                        Sample sentences
      Sentences
 1    Market's been deregulated. [dec: deregul 1] [inc: ] [concept: deregul 1, market 1]
 2    And we have less regulatory measures there and also more attractive margins, which is good.
      [dec: good 1, less 1, attract 1] [inc: ] [concept: measur 1, regulatori 1]
 3    The regulatory approval process is progressing very well. [dec: approv 1, progress 1] [inc: ]
      [concept: regulatori 1, approv 1, progress 1]
 4    We continue to work on regulatory approvals and permitting. [dec: approv 1, permit 1] [inc:
      ] [concept: regulatori 1, approv 1]
 5    As a result of deregulation of petrol and diesel, this is very attractive. [dec: attract 1, deregul
      1] [inc: ] [concept: deregul 1]
 6    There are regulatory pressures as you grow and as an industry matures, that's absolutely
      normal and we have to adapt to it. [dec: ] [inc: pressur 1, adapt 1, grow 1] [concept:
      regulatori 1, pressur 1]
 7    Competition, pricing and regulatory pressure have increased and are increasingly having an
      impact on our revenue. [dec: ] [inc: pressur 1, increas 2] [concept: impact 1, regulatori 1,
      pressur 1]
 8    There could well be an increased regulatory burden. [dec: ] [inc: increas 1, burden 1]
      [concept: regulatori 1, burden 1]
 9    We did this to serve a highly stressed industry pressured by increased regulatory burdens,
      growing transactional volumes and emerging payment technologies. [dec: ] [inc: stress 1,
      high 1, pressur 1, burden 1, increas 1, grow 1] [concept: regulatori 1, pressur 1, burden 1]
 10   This continues to be of particular importance as the regulatory burden grows dispropor-
      tionately. [dec: ] [inc: disproportion 1, burden 1, grow 1] [concept: regulatori 1, burden
      1]
 11    A We have all regulatory approvals for construction. [dec: approv 1, construct 1] [inc: ]
      [concept: regulatori 1, approv 1]
 12    Q Congrats on the regulatory progress. [dec: progress 1, congrat 1] [inc: ] [concept:
      regulatori 1, progress 1]
 13    A And those are very friendly, deregulated markets. [dec: deregul 1, friend 1] [inc: ]
      [concept: market 1, deregul 1]
 14    A And again, it's just regulatory approvals. [dec: approv 1] [inc: ] [concept: regulatori 1,
      approv 1]
 15    A And only about 1/3 of those were for regulatory approvals. [dec: approv 1] [inc: ]
      [concept: regulatori 1, approv 1]
 16    A It's highly regulated, so the barriers to entry are high. [dec: ] [inc: high 2] [concept:
      barrier 1]
 17    A And what are the regulatory hurdles? [dec: ] [inc: hurdl 1] [concept: regulatori 1, hurdl
      1]
 18    Q Is this because of regulatory pressure? [dec: ] [inc: pressur 1] [concept: regulatori 1,
      pressur 1]
 19    A Now we're being faced with some of the additional regulatory pressures. [dec: ] [inc:
      addit 1, pressur 1] [concept: regulatori 1, pressur 1]
 20    Q Is it regulatory hurdles? [dec: ] [inc: hurdl 1] [concept: regulatori 1, hurdl 1]
                                                   38
   Table 4: This tables describes the data series involving firm fundamental characteristics, and
   market returns.
                 Description of firm-level fundamental and market data
Variable Name               Description
Sales growth                Percentage growth in sales (e.g. from quarter t-4 to quarter t);
                            expressed in decimals not % points
Asset growth                Percentage growth in total assets (e.g. from quarter t-4 to quarter
                            t; expressed in decimals not % points)
Operating income growth     Percentage growth in operating income after depreciation (e.g. from
                            quarter t-4 to quarter t; expressed in decimals not % points)
Operating income over sales Operating income after depreciation divided by sales
Excess Ret                  Stock return in excess of the risk-free rate; expressed in decimals
                            not (%). Note: Returns are measured from the close of day t (i.e.
                            the earnings reporting date) for calls occurring prior to 4PM New
                            York time, and from the close) of day t + 1 (the next business day)
                            for calls occurringe after 4PM New York time.
FF6 Ret                     Excess stock return with respect to the Fama-French (2015) 5-factor
                            model augmented with the momentum factor; expressed in decimals
                            not % points Note: Returns are measured from the close of day t
                            (i.e. the earnings reporting date) for calls occurring prior to 4PM
                            New York time, and from the close) of day t + 1 (the next business
                            day) for calls occurring after 4PM New York time.
FF6 Alpha                   The alpha estimated from the FF6 model over the window [-252,-31]
Vol. Excess Return          Std. dev. of Excess Ret
Vol. FF6 return             Std. dev. of FF6 Ret
Size                        log sales over the prior three months
log(ME)                     log(closing price times shares outstanding)
log(BM)                     log(book value of common equity divided by market equity)
SUE                         Standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) follow the construction in
                            Bernard and Thomas (1989) and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, Mac-
                            skassy (2008). SUE is equal to unexpected earnings (UE) minus
                            mean of UE across the previous 20 quarters divided the std. dev.
                            of UE across the previous 20 quarters. UE is defined as earnings
                            (i.e. income before extraordinary items) in quarter t minus earn-
                            ings in quarter t - 4. We set the mean of UE to zero if firms have
                            fewer than 16 quarters of earnings data. For the std. dev., firms
                            must have at least 5 quarters of earnings data; otherwise we treat
                            the std. dev. as missing.
log(share turnover)         log(share turnover) is defined as log of shares traded divided by
                            shares outstanding



                                                39
       Table 5: Summary statistics for firm-level operating characteristics and returns.
            Summary statistics for operating characteristics and returns

Statistic                             N      Mean     St. Dev.    Min      Pctl(25)   Pctl(75)    Max
Sales Growth                        73,780    0.113    0.360     -0.688    -0.031     0.179       2.004
Investment Growth                   74,751    0.134    0.392     -0.438    -0.028     0.155       2.428
Operating Income Growth             53,667    0.284    0.964     -0.833    -0.114     0.327       5.348
Operating Margin                    58,021    0.132    0.099       0.007   0.059      0.179       0.458
Size (Log Sales)                    75,303    5.410    2.005       0.000   4.204      6.723      11.822
Excess Ret (22-day)                 68,074    0.015    0.137     -0.932    -0.053     0.072       3.955
FF6 Ret (22-day)                    65,702    0.002    0.124     -0.929    -0.056     0.050       4.381
Vol. Excess Ret (22-day)            68,074    0.025    0.017       0.001    0.015      0.030      0.746
Vol. FF6 Ret (22-day)               65,701    0.021    0.016       0.003    0.012      0.026      0.745
Downside Vol. Excess Ret (22-day)   68,074   0.015     0.011     0.00000   0.008      0.018      0.253
Downside Vol. FF6 Ret (22-day)      65,677   0.013     0.011      0.0002   0.006      0.016      0.254
Drawdown Excess Ret (22-day)        68,074   0.068     0.078       0.000   0.009      0.098       0.932
Drawdown FF6 Ret (22-day)           65,701    0.063    0.073       0.000   0.010      0.089      0.929
Excess Ret (Call Day)               65,591    0.015    0.151     -0.801    -0.062     0.084       6.459
FF6 Ret (Call Day)                  65,591    0.001    0.078     -0.723    -0.033     0.035       3.430
Log Share Turnover                  68,293   -4.341    1.094     -7.131    -4.995     -3.596     -2.148
SUE                                 40,341   -2.920    2.675     -10.521   -4.229     -1.115      2.464
Log Book-to-Market                  68,396   -0.993    0.831     -3.192    -1.479     -0.410      0.754
Log Market Equity                   72,049    7.113    1.891       0.317   5.835      8.319      13.886




                                                40
Table 6: This table describes the data series derived from the SP Global earnings calls data.
                     Description of firm-level earnings call data
 Variable Name           Description
 NetRegP                 Net difference of increasing words and decreasing words within the vicinity
                         of 'regulat' scaled by total words within that window for the presentation
                         section
 NetRegQA                Net difference of increasing words and decreasing words within the vicinity
                         of 'regulat' scaled by total words within that window for the Q&A section
 RegSentP                Net difference of positive tone words and negative words, based on Loughran
                         and Mcdonald (2011), within the vicinity of 'regulat' scaled by total words
                         within that window for the presentation section
 RegSentQA               Net difference of positive tone words and negative words, based on Loughran
                         and Mcdonald (2011), within the vicinity of 'regulat' scaled by total words
                         within that window for the Q&A section
 AllSentP                Net difference of positive tone words and negative words, based on Loughran
                         and Mcdonald (2011), scaled by total words for the presentation section
 AllSentQA               Net difference of positive tone words and negative words, based on Loughran
                         and Mcdonald (2011), scaled by total words for the Q&A section
 Ind. NetRegP            2-digit SIC yearly industry average of NetRegP
 Ind. NetRegQA           2-digit SIC yearly industry average of NetRegQA
 Ind. RegSentP           2-digit SIC yearly industry average of RegSentP
 Ind. RegSentQA          2-digit SIC yearly industry average of RegSentQA
 Ind. AllSentP           2-digit SIC yearly industry average of AllSentP
 Ind. AllSentQA          2-digit SIC yearly industry average of AllSentQA
 Ind. Adj. NetRegP       NetRegP minus Ind. NetRegP
 Ind. Adj. NetRegQA      NetRegQA minus Ind. NetRegQA
 Ind. Adj. RegSentP      RegSentP minus Ind. RegSentP
 Ind. Adj. RegSentQA     RegSentQA minus Ind. RegSentQA
 Ind. Adj. AllSentP      AllSentP minus Ind. AllSentP
 Ind. Adj. AllSentQA     AllSentQA minus Ind. AllSentQA
 FDA (Pres.)             The fraction of the presentation section discussing regulation in context of
                         FDA
 FDA (Q&A)               The fraction of the Q&A section discussing regulation in context of FDA
 M&A (Pres.)             The fraction of the presentation section discussing regulation in context of
                         M&A
 M&A (Q&A)               The fraction of the Q&A section discussing regulation in context of M&A
 China (Pres.)           The fraction of the presentation section discussing regulation in context of
                         China
 China (Q&A)             The fraction of the Q&A section discussing regulation in context of China
 NoRegulat Dummy         No Regulat Dummy (e.g. for quarter t-4) equals to 1 if the conference call
                         (e.g. from 4 quarters ago) had no mention of "regulat" but if some earning
                         call for this company has mentioned "regulat", and equals to 0 otherwise.
 NeverRegulat Dummy      Set to one for companies that have never mentioned "regulat" in any of
                         their conference calls.


                                              41
            Table 7: Summary statistics for regulatory and sentiment measures.
            Summary statistics for call regulatory tone and sentiment

Statistic                  N      Mean     St. Dev.    Min     Pctl(25)   Pctl(75)    Max
IncP                     21,488    0.978    1.724      0.000    0.000      1.000     50.000
DecP                     21,488    1.111   1.903       0.000   0.000      1.000      37.000
TotP                     21,488   45.568   48.251      2.000   17.000     55.000     897.000
NetRegP                  21,488   -0.004   0.050      -0.333   -0.021     0.011       0.429
IncQA                    15,250    0.431   0.872       0.000   0.000      1.000      15.000
DecQA                    15,250    0.652    1.201      0.000   0.000       1.000     42.000
TotQA                    15,250   32.188   33.506      1.000   12.000     40.000     947.000
NetRegQA                 15,250   -0.007   0.053      -0.667   -0.020     0.000       0.500
RegSentP                 20,709    0.002    0.062     -0.500   -0.024     0.034       0.375
RegSentQA                14,029   -0.005   0.059      -0.500   -0.026     0.010       0.500
AllSentP                 27,893    0.017   0.013      -0.048    0.009      0.026      0.075
AllSentQA                27,730    0.010   0.012      -0.091    0.002      0.017      0.143
Legalese (Pres.)         21,488   0.137     0.293     0.0001    0.002     0.052       0.986
FDA (Pres.)              21,488    0.172    0.298     0.0001    0.003     0.195       0.996
Fins (Pres.)             21,488    0.024   0.074      0.0001   0.002      0.004       0.971
Client (Pres.)           21,488    0.148   0.259      0.0001   0.003      0.175       0.991
Margins (Pres.)          21,488    0.086   0.174      0.0001   0.003      0.072       0.986
Euro (Pres.)             21,488    0.027    0.080     0.0001    0.002     0.004       0.981
Utilities (Pres.)        21,488   0.098    0.216      0.0002    0.002     0.040       0.999
Legalese2 (Pres.)        21,488    0.096   0.215      0.0001   0.002      0.046       0.979
M&A (Pres.)              21,488    0.087    0.186     0.0001    0.002     0.054       0.985
China (Pres.)            21,488    0.126    0.238     0.0001    0.002     0.115       0.992
FDA (QA)                 15,250    0.176   0.298      0.0001    0.003     0.217       0.995
Client (QA)              15,250    0.160   0.255      0.0001   0.003      0.243       0.992
EuroCompetition (QA)     15,250   0.042    0.105      0.0001    0.002     0.011       0.962
M&A (QA)                 15,250    0.111   0.204      0.0002    0.003     0.119       0.974
China (QA)               15,250    0.144   0.240      0.0002    0.003     0.197       0.983
CorpFin (QA)             15,250    0.054    0.132     0.0002    0.002     0.022       0.971
Fins (QA)                15,250    0.025   0.073      0.0001   0.002      0.006       0.969
Utilities (QA)           15,250    0.126   0.230      0.0002   0.003      0.127       0.993
Margins (QA)             15,250    0.082   0.164      0.0001   0.002      0.071       0.985
Neg (QA)                 15,250    0.080   0.145      0.0002    0.003     0.100       0.961
Ind. NetRegP             27,861   -0.004   0.014      -0.140   -0.012     0.004       0.143
Ind. RegSentP            27,853    0.001    0.018     -0.261   -0.006     0.014       0.167
Ind. AllSentP            27,894    0.018   0.004      -0.004    0.016      0.020      0.053
Ind. Adj. NetRegP        21,488   -0.000   0.049      -0.341   -0.018     0.019       0.417
Ind. Adj. RegSentP       20,709   -0.000   0.059      -0.373   -0.023     0.029       0.365
Ind. Adj. AllSentP       27,893   -0.001   0.013      -0.065   -0.009     0.008       0.055
Ind. NetRegQA            27,832   -0.007   0.014      -0.167   -0.013     0.000       0.118
Ind. RegSentQA           27,777   -0.005   0.015      -0.182   -0.011     0.003       0.167
Ind. AllSentQA           27,894   0.010     0.004     -0.005    0.008      0.013      0.034
Ind. Adj. NetRegQA       15,250   -0.000   0.051      -0.646   -0.014     0.015       0.496
Ind. Adj. RegSentQA      14,029   -0.000   0.058      -0.426   -0.020     0.022       0.495
Ind. Adj. AllSentQA      27,730   -0.001   0.011      -0.101   -0.007     0.006       0.132
No Regulat               75,350    0.531    0.499        0        0          1          1
Never Regulat            75,350    0.099    0.298        0        0          0          1


                                             42
Table 8: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead sales growth on our net
regulatory trends, as well as other control variables. Control variables include company size
(log sales), a dummy variable to indicate whether the respective section of a given call had a
regulatory mention, a decomposition of sales growth into a company-specific and industry-
specific (2 digit SIC code) component, as well as lags and interactions of the above variables.
Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported in parentheses.
                                      Effects of N etReg on sales growth

                                                                    Sales Growthi
                                                                                t+4

                                (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)               (7)             (8)
NetRegPi
       t                     -0.301   
                                                    -0.368   
                                                                                                        -0.244     

                              (0.065)                (0.081)                                             (0.068)
NetRegQAi
        t                                -0.173                   -0.224                                                  -0.164
                                          (0.042)                  (0.043)                                                 (0.062)
Ind. Adj. NetRegPi
                 t                                                           -0.336
                                                                              (0.083)
Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi
                  t                                                                     -0.177
                                                                                         (0.045)
NetRegPi
       t-4                                                                                               -0.237
                                                                                                         (0.162)
NetRegQAi
        t-4                                                                                                                 0.059
                                                                                                                           (0.050)
Sizei
    t                        -0.030      -0.030     -0.030        -0.030     -0.030     -0.030          -0.026            -0.025
                              (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)       (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.004)
Ind. NetRegPi
            t                                                                 -0.606
                                                                              (0.370)
Ind. NetRegQAi
             t                                                                          -0.698
                                                                                        (0.358)
Sales Growthi
            t                  0.035      0.042       0.035        0.042       0.035     0.042           0.037             0.052
                              (0.029)    (0.028)     (0.029)      (0.028)     (0.029)   (0.028)         (0.026)            (0.029)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t             -0.005     -0.019      -0.005       -0.019      -0.005    -0.016          -0.011            -0.025
                              (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.007)      (0.008)     (0.007)   (0.007)         (0.006)            (0.008)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t-4                                                                                      0.008              0.006
                                                                                                        (0.011)            (0.011)
Never Regulat Dummyi
                   t         -0.039      -0.053     -0.039        -0.052     -0.038     -0.050          -0.035            -0.050
                              (0.013)     (0.014)    (0.013)       (0.014)    (0.012)    (0.012)        (0.016)            (0.020)
NetRegPi      i
       t *Sizet                                      0.060
                                                     (0.032)
NetRegQAi      i
        t *Sizet                                                   0.045
                                                                   (0.020)
Ind. Adj. NetRegPi      i
                 t *Sizet                                                      0.050
                                                                              (0.032)
Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi      i
                  t *Sizet                                                               0.029
                                                                                         (0.017)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?            Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes
Observations                  56,979      52,196     56,979        52,196     56,979     52,196          40,337            35,996
R2                             0.045       0.047      0.045         0.047     0.045       0.047          0.042              0.043
Adjusted R2                    0.044       0.046      0.044         0.046     0.044       0.046          0.040              0.041
                                                                                                                          
Note:                                                                                               p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                             43
Table 9: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead operating margin
levelss on our net regulatory measures, as well as other control variables. Control variables
include company size (log sales), a dummy variable to indicate whether the respective section
of a given call had a regulatory mention, a decomposition of operating margin levelss into
a company-specific and industry-specific (2 digit SIC code) component, as well as lags and
interactions of the above variables. Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported
in parentheses.
                               Effects of N etReg on operating margins

                                                               Sales Growthi
                                                                           t+4

                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)            (7)           (8)
  NetRegPi
         t                      -0.006               0.001                                      -0.005
                                (0.014)             (0.020)                                     (0.011)
  NetRegQAi
          t                               -0.006              -0.014                                         -0.001
                                          (0.016)             (0.024)                                        (0.018)
  Ind. Adj. NetRegPi
                   t                                                     0.002
                                                                        (0.020)
  Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi
                    t                                                             -0.019
                                                                                  (0.025)
  NetRegPi
         t-4                                                                                    -0.012
                                                                                                (0.016)
  NetRegQAi
          t-4                                                                                                -0.023
                                                                                                             (0.011)
  Sizei
      t                         0.001     0.001     0.001     0.001     0.001     0.001         0.002        0.002
                                (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
  Ind. NetRegPi
              t                                                         -0.028
                                                                        (0.077)
  Ind. NetRegQAi
               t                                                                   0.014
                                                                                  (0.061)
  Sales Growthi
              t                 0.761     0.755     0.761     0.755     0.761     0.755         0.786        0.776
                                (0.035)   (0.037)   (0.035)   (0.037)   (0.035)   (0.037)       (0.032)      (0.036)
  No Regulat Dummyi
                  t             -0.002    -0.003    -0.002    -0.003    -0.002    -0.003        -0.002       -0.001
                                (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
  No Regulat Dummyi
                  t-4                                                                            0.0003      -0.002
                                                                                                (0.001)      (0.001)
  Never Regulat Dummyi
                     t          -0.003    -0.004    -0.003    -0.004    -0.003    -0.004        -0.002       -0.004
                                (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)
  NetRegPi      i
         t *Sizet                                   -0.004
                                                    (0.005)
  NetRegQAi      i
          t *Sizet                                             0.005
                                                              (0.007)
  Ind. Adj. NetRegPi      i
                   t *Sizet                                             -0.004
                                                                        (0.005)
  Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi      i
                    t *Sizet                                                       0.007
                                                                                  (0.008)
  2-digit SIC Ind. FE?            Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes
  Observations                  42,137    39,202    42,137    39,202    42,137    39,202        30,359       27,714
  R2                             0.748    0.750     0.748      0.750    0.748     0.750         0.765        0.769
  Adjusted R2                    0.747    0.749     0.747      0.749    0.747     0.749         0.764        0.769
                                                                                                             
  Note:                                                                                p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                        44
Table 10: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead N etReg on our firm-
level operating fundamentals, as well as on lagged N etReg . Other control variables include
lagged abnormal returns and company size (log sales). Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit
SIC, are reported in parentheses.
               Dependence of N etReg on lagged N etReg and other drivers

                                        NetRegPi
                                               t                                   NetRegQAi
                                                                                           t

                           (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
NetRegPi
       t-4               0.207
                                    0.209
                                               0.191          
                                                          0.191
                         (0.027)    (0.026)    (0.031)    (0.031)
NetRegQAi
        t-4                                                          0.039      0.037          0.024        0.023
                                                                     (0.017)    (0.017)       (0.016)      (0.016)
Lag Month FF6 Ret         -0.003     -0.003    -0.0003    -0.001    -0.0003     -0.002        -0.005       -0.005
                          (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.005)    (0.005)       (0.013)      (0.013)
Sizei
    t                    -0.0004    -0.0003    -0.001     -0.001     0.0003     0.0004        -0.001       -0.002
                         (0.0002)   (0.0002)   (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)       (0.001)      (0.001)
Sales Growthi
            t-4;t          0.001                           0.003     -0.001                                 0.007
                          (0.001)                         (0.003)    (0.003)                               (0.009)
Sales Growthi
            t-8;t-4       -0.001                           0.003     0.002                                  0.005
                          (0.001)                         (0.003)    (0.001)                               (0.005)
Asset Growthi
            t-4;t                   0.003                 -0.003               -0.001                      -0.006
                                    (0.001)               (0.003)              (0.002)                     (0.004)
Asset Growthi
            t-8;t-4                 -0.0003               -0.001               -0.001                      -0.003
                                    (0.001)               (0.002)              (0.001)                     (0.003)
Op. Inc. Growthi
               t-4;t                            0.001     0.0003                              -0.002       -0.003
                                               (0.001)    (0.001)                             (0.002)      (0.003)
Op. Inc. Growthi
               t-8;t-4                         0.0001     -0.0002                              0.001        0.001
                                               (0.001)    (0.001)                             (0.001)      (0.001)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Observations              8,231      8,577      5,192      5,192     3,937        4,111        2,665       2,665
R2                        0.096      0.098      0.092      0.093     0.039        0.039        0.050       0.051
Adjusted R2               0.089      0.091      0.082      0.081     0.025        0.025        0.029       0.028
                                                                                                        
Note:                                                                             p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                     45
Table 11: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead sales growth on
our Loughran-McDonald regulatory sentence sentiment, as well as other control variables.
Control variables include company size (log sales), a dummy variable to indicate whether
the respective section of a given call had a regulatory mention, a decomposition of sales
growth into a company-specific and industry-specific (2 digit SIC code) component, as well
as lags and interactions of the above variables. Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC,
are reported in parentheses.
                                   Effects of RegSent on sales growth

                                                                 Sales Growthi
                                                                             t+4

                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)               (7)             (8)
RegSentPi
        t                      -0.042                -0.003                                           -0.070
                               (0.052)               (0.064)                                          (0.053)
RegSentQAi
         t                                 0.067                0.086                                                    0.036
                                          (0.044)               (0.044)                                                 (0.053)
Ind. Adj. RegSentPi
                  t                                                        -0.024
                                                                           (0.065)
Ind. Adj. RegSentQAi
                   t                                                                   0.062
                                                                                      (0.045)
RegSentPi
        t-4                                                                                            0.108
                                                                                                      (0.143)
RegSentQAi
         t-4                                                                                                            0.075
                                                                                                                        (0.036)
Sizei
    t                         -0.030     -0.030     -0.030     -0.030     -0.030     -0.030          -0.026            -0.025
                               (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.004)
Ind. RegSentPi
             t                                                              0.037
                                                                           (0.293)
Ind. RegSentQAi
              t                                                                        0.304
                                                                                      (0.267)
Sales Growthi
            t                   0.037     0.042       0.037     0.042       0.037      0.042          0.038             0.053
                               (0.028)   (0.028)     (0.028)   (0.028)     (0.028)    (0.028)        (0.026)            (0.029)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t              -0.006    -0.022      -0.006    -0.021      -0.006    -0.023          -0.010            -0.027
                               (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.008)        (0.007)            (0.008)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t-4                                                                                   0.008              0.005
                                                                                                     (0.013)            (0.012)
Never Regulat Dummyi
                   t          -0.039     -0.056     -0.039     -0.056     -0.039     -0.057          -0.034            -0.054
                               (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)        (0.017)            (0.021)
RegSentPi      i
        t *Sizet                                     -0.036
                                                     (0.024)
RegSentQAi      i
         t *Sizet                                               -0.018
                                                                (0.012)
Ind. Adj. RegSentPi      i
                  t *Sizet                                                 -0.022
                                                                           (0.022)
Ind. Adj. RegSentQAi      i
                   t *Sizet                                                           -0.008
                                                                                      (0.009)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?            Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes             Yes               Yes
Observations                   56,366     51,182     56,366     51,182     56,366     51,182          39,621            34,759
R2                             0.044       0.047     0.045       0.047     0.045      0.047           0.041             0.042
Adjusted R2                    0.043       0.046     0.043       0.046     0.043      0.046           0.040             0.041
                                                                                                                       
Note:                                                                                            p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                         46
Table 12: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead sales growth on our
Loughran-McDonald earnings call sentiment, as well as other control variables. Control vari-
ables include company size (log sales), a dummy variable to indicate whether the respective
section of a given call had a regulatory mention, a decomposition of sales growth into a
company-specific and industry-specific (2 digit SIC code) component, as well as lags and
interactions of the above variables. Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported
in parentheses.
                                       Effects of AllSent on sales growth

                                                                     Sales Growthi
                                                                                 t+4

                                 (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)               (7)             (8)
AllSentPi
        t                     0.975                   1.179                                               1.194
                              (0.354)                 (0.545)                                             (0.396)
AllSentQAi
         t                                 0.706                    0.595                                                  0.845
                                           (0.295)                  (0.266)                                                (0.228)
Ind. Adj. AllSentPi
                  t                                                            0.987
                                                                               (0.596)
Ind. Adj. AllSentQAi
                   t                                                                       0.443
                                                                                          (0.285)
AllSentPi
        t-4                                                                                                0.068
                                                                                                          (0.212)
AllSentQAi
         t-4                                                                                                                -0.216
                                                                                                                            (0.474)
Sizei
    t                         -0.030      -0.030     -0.029        -0.031     -0.030     -0.030          -0.026            -0.025
                               (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.004)       (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)
Ind. AllSentPi
             t                                                                3.065
                                                                               (1.053)
Ind. AllSentQAi
              t                                                                           2.961
                                                                                          (1.467)
Sales Growthi
            t                   0.035       0.037      0.035         0.037      0.034      0.037           0.039             0.041
                               (0.029)     (0.028)    (0.029)       (0.028)    (0.029)    (0.028)         (0.028)           (0.027)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t               0.008      -0.002      0.009        -0.001     0.046       0.022           0.007            -0.006
                               (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.008)       (0.009)    (0.020)    (0.018)         (0.008)           (0.006)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t-4                                                                                        0.011             0.008
                                                                                                          (0.011)           (0.013)
Never Regulat Dummyi
                   t          -0.025      -0.035     -0.024        -0.035       0.013     -0.010          -0.014            -0.029
                              (0.012)     (0.015)    (0.012)       (0.015)     (0.022)    (0.021)         (0.013)           (0.020)
AllSentPi      i
        t *Sizet                                     -0.155
                                                     (0.204)
AllSentQAi      i
         t *Sizet                                                   0.191
                                                                    (0.095)
Ind. Adj. AllSentPi      i
                  t *Sizet                                                     -0.150
                                                                               (0.274)
Ind. Adj. AllSentQAi      i
                   t *Sizet                                                              0.245
                                                                                         (0.089)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?            Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes             Yes               Yes
Observations                   62,317      62,204     62,317        62,204     62,317     62,204          47,978            47,849
R2                             0.044        0.044     0.045         0.044       0.045      0.045           0.041             0.040
Adjusted R2                    0.043        0.043     0.044         0.043       0.044      0.044           0.039             0.039
                                                                                                                           
Note:                                                                                                p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                              47
Table 13: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead RegSent on our firm-
level operating fundamentals, as well as on lagged RegSent. Other control variables include
lagged abnormal returns and company size (log sales). Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit
SIC, are reported in parentheses.
              Dependence of RegSent on lagged RegSent and other drivers

                                        RegSentPi
                                                t                                 RegSentQAi
                                                                                           t

                           (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)             (7)           (8)
RegSentPi
        t-4              0.330
                                    0.328
                                               0.323         
                                                         0.323
                         (0.029)    (0.029)    (0.026)   (0.026)
RegSentQAi
         t-4                                                        -0.002      0.004        -0.011       -0.011
                                                                    (0.012)    (0.013)       (0.021)      (0.021)
Lag Month FF6 Ret        -0.0003      0.001     0.003     0.003     -0.011     -0.008        -0.024       -0.025
                          (0.002)    (0.001)   (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.007)       (0.019)      (0.018)
Sizei
    t                    -0.0001    -0.00001   -0.0003   -0.0003   -0.0004    -0.0005        0.0002        0.0002
                         (0.0004)   (0.0004)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.0003)   (0.0003)       (0.001)      (0.001)
Sales Growthi
            t-4;t         0.002                          -0.0003     0.001                                -0.002
                          (0.001)                        (0.008)    (0.001)                               (0.006)
Sales Growthi
            t-8;t-4        0.001                          0.003     -0.001                                -0.006
                          (0.001)                        (0.004)    (0.001)                               (0.008)
Asset Growthi
            t-4;t                    0.001                0.001                0.001                       0.001
                                    (0.002)              (0.005)              (0.001)                     (0.004)
Asset Growthi
            t-8;t-4                 0.0002               -0.003               -0.002                      -0.0005
                                    (0.001)              (0.002)              (0.001)                     (0.006)
Op. Inc. Growthi
               t-4;t                           -0.0004   -0.0004                         0.005            0.005
                                               (0.002)   (0.001)                          (0.001)         (0.001)
Op. Inc. Growthi
               t-8;t-4                          0.001     0.001                          -0.00005           0.001
                                               (0.001)   (0.001)                          (0.001)         (0.002)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes
Observations              7,779      8,120      4,885     4,885     3,435      3,595         2,316           2,316
R2                        0.169      0.166      0.174     0.174     0.040      0.040         0.057           0.057
Adjusted R2               0.163      0.160      0.163     0.163     0.023      0.023         0.032           0.031
                                                                                                          
Note:                                                                               p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                    48
     Table 14: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead AllSent on our firm-level operating fundamentals, as
     well as on lagged AllSent. Other control variables include lagged abnormal returns and company size (log sales). Standard
     errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported in parentheses.
                                       Dependence of AllSent on lagged AllSent and other drivers

                                                           AllSentPi
                                                                   t                                       AllSentQAi
                                                                                                                    t

                                           (1)       (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)              (7)                 (8)
              AllSentPi
                      t-4                0.502     0.500         0.523       0.525
                                         (0.011)   (0.011)       (0.011)     (0.012)
              AllSentQAi
                       t-4                                                              0.292       0.290            0.305          0.305
                                                                                         (0.008)    (0.008)          (0.013)         (0.013)
              Lag Month FF6 Ret          0.006     0.006         0.009       0.008      0.005       0.005           0.008           0.008
                                         (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)          (0.001)         (0.001)
              Sizei
                  t                     0.001      0.001         0.001       0.001      0.0003     0.0003           0.0004         0.0004
                                        (0.0001)   (0.0001)      (0.0001)    (0.0001)   (0.0001)   (0.0001)         (0.0001)        (0.0001)
49




              Sales Growthi
                          t-4;t         0.003                                0.005       0.001                                      0.002
                                         (0.001)                              (0.001)    (0.001)                                     (0.001)
              Sales Growthi
                          t-8;t-4       -0.002                              -0.002      -0.001                                     -0.002
                                         (0.001)                              (0.001)   (0.0003)                                    (0.0005)
              Asset Growthi
                          t-4;t                    0.0005                   -0.003                 -0.0001                         -0.001
                                                   (0.0002)                   (0.001)              (0.0002)                         (0.0002)
              Asset Growthi
                          t-8;t-4                  -0.001                   -0.001                 -0.001                           -0.0003
                                                   (0.0003)                  (0.0003)              (0.0002)                         (0.0002)
              Op. Inc. Growthi
                             t-4;t                              0.002        0.002                                  0.001           0.001
                                                                (0.0002)     (0.0002)                               (0.0001)        (0.0001)
              Op. Inc. Growthi
                             t-8;t-4                            -0.001      -0.0004                                -0.0005         -0.0003
                                                                (0.0001)     (0.0001)                               (0.0001)        (0.0001)
              2-digit SIC Ind. FE?        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes              Yes               Yes
              Observations               51,681     52,276        36,600     36,600      51,142     51,733           36,297            36,297
              R2                         0.318      0.316         0.336      0.341       0.126      0.127            0.139             0.141
              Adjusted R2                0.318      0.315         0.335      0.340       0.125      0.126            0.138             0.140
                                                                                                                                       
              Note:                                                                                              p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01
Table 15: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead sales growth on
our regulatory measures interacted with the call's M&A topic allocation, as well as other
control variables. Control variables include company size (log sales) and lagged sales growth.
Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported in parentheses.
                   Effects of M&A-regulatory topic on sales growth

                                                       Sales Growthi
                                                                   t+4

                             (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)               (5)             (6)
M&A     (Pres.)i
               t           0.157                     0.152                       0.127
                           (0.030)                   (0.035)                     (0.030)
M&A (QA)i
        t                              0.035                      0.038                             0.015
                                      (0.029)                    (0.030)                           (0.031)
RegSentPi
        t                                             0.112
                                                      (0.056)
RegSentQAi
         t                                                       0.113
                                                                 (0.055)
NetRegPi
       t                                                                         -0.095
                                                                                 (0.088)
NetRegQAi
        t                                                                                          -0.061
                                                                                                   (0.050)
Sizei
    t                     -0.030     -0.030          -0.030     -0.030          -0.030            -0.030
                           (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)
Sales Growthi
            t               0.035      0.042           0.037      0.042           0.035             0.042
                           (0.028)    (0.028)         (0.028)    (0.028)         (0.028)           (0.028)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t           0.009     -0.016           0.010     -0.017           0.008            -0.016
                           (0.009)    (0.010)         (0.009)    (0.010)         (0.009)           (0.010)
Never Regulat Dummyi
                   t      -0.025     -0.050          -0.025     -0.051          -0.027            -0.050
                           (0.014)    (0.016)         (0.014)    (0.016)         (0.014)           (0.016)
M&A (Pres.)i          i
           t *RegSentPt                              -0.409
                                                      (0.241)
M&A (QA)i           i
        t *RegSentQAt                                            -0.338
                                                                 (0.355)
M&A (Pres.)i         i
           t *NetRegPt                                                          -0.438
                                                                                 (0.145)
M&A (QA)i          i
        t *NetRegQAt                                                                              -0.621
                                                                                                  (0.310)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?         Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes                Yes
Observations               56,979      52,196         56,366     51,182          56,979            52,196
R2                          0.046       0.047          0.047      0.047          0.047              0.047
Adjusted R2                 0.045       0.046          0.046      0.046          0.045              0.046
                                                                                                  
Note:                                                                       p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                50
Table 16: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead sales growth on
our regulatory measures interacted with the call's FDA topic allocation, as well as other
control variables. Control variables include company size (log sales) and lagged sales growth.
Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported in parentheses.
                    Effects of FDA-regulatory topic on sales growth

                                                        Sales Growthi
                                                                    t+4

                             (1)        (2)             (3)         (4)               (5)             (6)
 FDA     (Pres.)i
                t          0.077                      0.079                       0.071
                           (0.011)                    (0.008)                     (0.010)
 FDA (QA)i
         t                            0.091                      0.089                             0.091
                                      (0.016)                    (0.015)                           (0.016)
 RegSentPi
         t                                            -0.104
                                                      (0.057)
 RegSentQAi
          t                                                        0.009
                                                                  (0.045)
 NetRegPi
        t                                                                        -0.268
                                                                                  (0.075)
 NetRegQAi
         t                                                                                         -0.164
                                                                                                    (0.048)
 Sizei
     t                     -0.029     -0.029          -0.029     -0.029          -0.029            -0.029
                            (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.005)    (0.004)         (0.005)           (0.005)
 Sales Growthi
             t               0.033      0.040           0.035      0.040           0.033             0.040
                            (0.029)    (0.029)         (0.029)    (0.029)         (0.029)           (0.029)
 No Regulat Dummyi
                 t           0.003     -0.008           0.004     -0.009           0.003            -0.007
                            (0.007)    (0.007)         (0.007)    (0.007)         (0.007)           (0.007)
 Never Regulat Dummyi
                    t      -0.030     -0.041          -0.029     -0.043          -0.031            -0.041
                            (0.011)    (0.011)         (0.011)    (0.011)         (0.011)           (0.011)
 FDA (Pres.)i          i
            t *RegSentPt                                0.245
                                                       (0.239)
 FDA (QA)i           i
         t *RegSentQAt                                            0.272
                                                                  (0.119)
 FDA (Pres.)i         i
            t *NetRegPt                                                            0.041
                                                                                  (0.179)
 FDA (QA)i          i
         t *NetRegQAt                                                                                0.114
                                                                                                    (0.125)
 2-digit SIC Ind. FE?         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes
 Observations               56,979     52,196          56,366     51,182          56,979            52,196
 R2                          0.045      0.048          0.046       0.048          0.045              0.048
 Adjusted R2                 0.044      0.047          0.044       0.047          0.044              0.047
                                                                                                   
 Note:                                                                       p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                 51
Table 17: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead sales growth on
our regulatory measures interacted with the call's China topic allocation, as well as other
control variables. Control variables include company size (log sales) and lagged sales growth.
Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported in parentheses.
                   Effects of China-regulatory topic on sales growth

                                                        Sales Growthi
                                                                    t+4

                              (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)               (5)             (6)
China   (Pres.)i
               t            -0.050                    -0.050                     -0.052
                            (0.025)                   (0.026)                    (0.024)
China (QA)i
          t                            -0.057                    -0.068                            -0.055
                                       (0.025)                   (0.027)                           (0.024)
RegSentPi
        t                                              -0.036
                                                       (0.061)
RegSentQAi
         t                                                       0.121
                                                                 (0.041)
NetRegPi
       t                                                                         -0.452
                                                                                  (0.082)
NetRegQAi
        t                                                                                          -0.229
                                                                                                    (0.054)
Sizei
    t                       -0.029     -0.030         -0.029     -0.030          -0.030            -0.030
                             (0.005)    (0.005)        (0.005)    (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)
Sales Growthi
            t                 0.035      0.042          0.037      0.042           0.035             0.042
                             (0.029)    (0.028)        (0.029)    (0.028)         (0.029)           (0.028)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t            -0.013    -0.029          -0.013    -0.032           -0.012           -0.027
                             (0.011)    (0.012)        (0.011)    (0.012)         (0.010)           (0.011)
Never Regulat Dummyi
                   t        -0.046     -0.063         -0.046     -0.066          -0.045            -0.061
                             (0.016)    (0.017)        (0.016)    (0.017)         (0.015)           (0.016)
China (Pres.)i          i
             t *RegSentPt                              -0.024
                                                       (0.167)
China (QA)i           i
          t *RegSentQAt                                          -0.342
                                                                  (0.086)
China (Pres.)i         i
             t *NetRegPt                                                          0.888
                                                                                  (0.193)
China (QA)i          i
          t *NetRegQAt                                                                              0.421
                                                                                                    (0.177)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?          Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes               Yes
Observations                 56,979     52,196         56,366     51,182          56,979            52,196
R2                           0.044      0.047          0.045      0.047           0.046             0.047
Adjusted R2                  0.043      0.046          0.044      0.046           0.044             0.046
                                                                                                   
Note:                                                                        p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                 52
Table 18: This table shows the results of regressing one-month (i.e. 22-trading day) returns
on lagged N etReg , RegSent, and AllSent (for the presentation and the Q&A sections), as
well as control variables, which include SU E , log market equity, log book-to-market ratio,
log share turnover. SU E measures the standardized unexpected earnings following the
construct found in Bernard and Thomas (1989) and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, Macskassy
(2008). Returns are measured from the close of day t (i.e. the earnings reporting date) for
calls occurring prior to 4PM New York time, and from the close of day t +1 (the next business
day) for calls occurring after 4PM New York time. Excess returns refer to the stock return
in excess of the risk-free rate and F F 6 Ret refers to abnormal excess returns relative to
the Fama-French five factor model augmented with the momentum factor. Standard errors,
clustered on conference call event dates, are reported in parentheses.
                 Effects of regulatory tone and sentiment on returns

       Returns
                            Excess Reti
                                      t,t+22;t+1,t+23           FF6 Reti
                                                                       t,t+22;t+1,t+23

                           (1)         (2)           (3)     (4)            (5)          (6)
       NetRegPi
              t;t+1       0.005                   0.026    -0.006                     0.003
                         (0.019)                 (0.029)   (0.016)                   (0.025)
       NetRegQAi
               t;t+1                0.045         0.039                  0.031        0.021
                                    (0.020)      (0.032)                (0.017)      (0.028)
       No Regulat       -0.0005      0.001        0.001    0.0001       -0.0001       0.002
                        (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)   (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)
       Never Regulat     0.004      0.006        0.006      0.004        0.004       0.005
                        (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)
       Observations      25,975     24,590       21,628    25,975       24,590       21,628
       RegSentPi
               t;t+1      0.017                  0.052      0.002                    0.039
                         (0.016)                 (0.026)   (0.014)                   (0.022)
       RegSentQAi
                t;t+1               0.050        0.061                   0.029        0.039
                                    (0.019)      (0.029)                (0.016)      (0.025)
       No Regulat        -0.001      0.0003       0.001    0.00002      -0.0003       0.002
                         (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.002)   (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)
       Never Regulat      0.004      0.005       0.006       0.004       0.003       0.006
                         (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)
       Observations      25,677      24,097      21,348     25,677      24,097       21,348
       AllSentPi
               t;t+1      0.107                 -0.002     0.172                       0.089
                         (0.066)                (0.075)    (0.057)                   (0.063)
       AllSentQAi
                t;t+1               0.335       0.336                   0.299        0.255
                                    (0.088)     (0.099)                 (0.079)      (0.088)
       No Regulat         0.002     0.003        0.003     0.003        0.003        0.004
                         (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.002)
       Never Regulat     0.006      0.008       0.008      0.007        0.006        0.008
                         (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
       Observations      28,937      28,879      28,879    28,937        28,879       28,879
                                                                                     
       Note:                                                   p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01

                                                53
APPENDIX

1     Notes
We note that the alpha coefficients in the return regressions for 22-day ahead returns in
Tables A6, A7, and A8 are roughly between -1 and -2 and are all statistically significant. The
average alpha in our factor model regressions is 1.5 basis points, with a standard deviation
of 17.7 basis points. The average 22-day FF6 abnormal (excess) return is 17 (150) basis
points with a standard deviation of 1,240 (1,370) basis points (see Table 5). So the economic
effect of lagged alphas on future 22-day returns is very small despite the significant coefficient
estimates.




                                               A1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wordcloud for Presentation
                                                                                                                                                                                                  competit                                                                                                                                          support segment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bank




                                                                                          section
                                                 legalese wt good
                                                              = 0.1011                                                                                                                    client wt support
                                                                                                                                                                                                    = 0.1635                                                                                                                                  util wt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pipelin     = 0.07197
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     return  discuss                                                                                                                                                 region europ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  china   wt = 0.1098




                                                                                        accord
                                                                  within                                                                                                               system  mani     cost                                                                                                                                                compani complet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         challeng
                                                                                                    refer oper                                                                                grow help                                                                                                                                  system state
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        environment recent



                                                                      form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             activ due develop capac




                                                                                  investor
                                                                                                                                                                                       consum                                                                                       team




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   support
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         electr long




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 custom
                                                                                                    presid secur




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  turn
                                                                                                                                vice




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            posit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              water growth                                                                                                                                                driven posit price
                                                       join                                                                                                                                                 complianc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          improv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      transmiss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     distribut infrastructur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  strategi




                                                                                                                                                                                data platform




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   key
                                                                                                                                                                                                 increas futur
                                                                                                    compani




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  commiss
                                             factor




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tax
                                                                                             sec




                                                                                                                                           everyon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    addit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             increas
                                                                                                                          risk                                                                                   industri                                                                                                                                          energi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             order coal
                                                                      statement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  import




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             global




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       industri
                                                  compar
                                                                                                    call reconcili




                                                                                                                                                                                          invest opportun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                servic                                                                                    cost
                                                              discuss




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  market
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   util




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              demand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     state




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         china
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            financi clear




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               volum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            revenu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       opportun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            custom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  requir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            million




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             govern
                                                                                                            confer
                                       measur press




                                                                                                                                                                                                            revenu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             allow financi
                                execut


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   servic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           emiss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               strong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vehicl
                                 addit


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             product




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             remain strong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      govern impact




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    project
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             gas                                                                                                                                                                                                              safeti




                                                                                                                                                                              deliv
                                       financi file certain                                                                                                                                                          market                                                 requir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            invest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              manufactur
                                                    morn                                                                                                                                                                                                                   strong                                                                      capit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    final construct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                increas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 plant
                                turn
                                       gaap forward                                                                                                                                                                         busi riskoper                                                                                      cost earn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           remain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         posit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      client                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    grow




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     case
                            defin                                                                                                                                             offer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      billion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      global
                                            websit found                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fuel                                    high




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   manag
                                  earn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  file busi
                                        adjust




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 busi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    improv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 growth




                                                                                                                                                                                  process




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       project
                                                     avail                         non releas direct                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         north
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 power
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                power oper




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    develop
                                                      chief                                   com
                                                                                       inform result                                                                                                                 environ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     custom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           care
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              solut
                                                 materi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             environ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                addit result generat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    energi
                                                                                                                                                                                                  technolog                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  technolog




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     compani
                                                 contain           present offic relat                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         signific
                                                                  note requir report canadian                                                                                                     signific high                                                               health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        signific asset share  updat                                                                                                                                                                          suppli system gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               area
                                                                statement_NEG disclosur                                                                                                            remain                                          valu                                                                                       improv approv natur                                                                                                                                                       impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               america
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     long                                                                                                                            current                                                                                                                                                          segment standard
                                                                   updat_NEG webcast                                                                                                                                                              recent                                                                                   opportun benefit decis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              guidanc

                                                       team                                           submit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               certain                   annual
                         key                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                general
                                                             applic




                                    forward discuss diseas                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     compani_NEG
                                 fda   wtsubmiss
                                          = 0.1109                                                                                                                                            wt = 0.07919
                                                                                                                                                                                      margins segment                                                                                                                                      legalese2   wt = limit_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0863




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  forward
                                   indic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         subject
                      support mileston success




                                  result progress process                                                                                                                                                                        full period legal                                                                                                                  competit                                potenti




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  decreas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        busi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        futur_NEG
                             review                   meet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             project law inform                                                      discuss




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         market_NEG product_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    current risk_NEG
                                                                                        develop




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            materi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       expens
                                                      europ                                                                                                                                                                    offset      addit partial




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             financi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    caus
                               turn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        compani



                                                                                                                                                                                     approxim charg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lower                       primarili




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    technolog
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      exchang
                                           complet potenti
             design




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 report call capit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           futur
                                                                                                           addit import



                                                                                                                                                                                              servic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     result                           higher
                                                         market phase

                                                                                     approv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fiscal                                                                                avail form



                                                                                                                                                                                      benefit item




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oper
                                                                       patient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  incom                                oper earn gross




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  result
                                                                                      clinic




                                                                                                           commerci
                                                                                                                                                                                acquisit reduct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 net cost                              tax third prior
                                                                                                                                           line




                                                                                                                                                                                         basi
                                                                                                           trial file                                                                                                 million                                                                                                                                statement
                                                                                                                                          cell




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   guidanc fee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               impact




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              manag
            cancer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               driven adjust
                                                                                                           studi posit
                                                                                                                             iii




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      increas                                                                                                                                      busi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              risk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             factor




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               due




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 affect
                                                                                                           fda data                                                                        reflect                   revenu relat                                                                                                                     secur file                                     differ
                                                                                                                                              half




                                                                                                    call                                                                                          fourth compar rate total




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         abil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            develop                               condit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                market
                                                                                                                          receiv                                                                  declin sale                                                                                                                                                                                                            econom
                                                                                   product                                                                                                                    share growth
                                                                       initi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              relat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     result_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                   invest
            partner




                                                                                                                          advanc                                                                account cash margin                                                                                                                                          uncertainti                                                    impact




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         made
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        exclud loss associ                                                                                                                                                                                   price
                                                   author launch activ signific
                                     current




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           compani improv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              regulatori_NEG
                                                    updat drug treatment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               govern regul_NEG
                                                          recent          medic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               event detail
                                                     manufactur  european                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           statement_NEG assumpt


                                                                                                                                                                                                      spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                     group  custom distribut
                                                                   wt = 0.09698
                                                              fins mortgag                                                                                                                        euro      = 0.08033
                                                                                                                                                                                                        wtlevel                                                                                                                                            m&a    wtapproxim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            proceed  = 0.09994
                                                                                                                                                                                                           good declin account
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           commiss




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               million
                                                                                                                                                                                                 reduct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            half




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              remain
                                                                     debt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  market                                        deal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    billion gbp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                progress
                                                          insur basel result                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      comment updat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    period
                                                                                                                                                                       compar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     review
                                                                             excess                                                                                                         invest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 condit
                                                 minimum     rate portfolio impact




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     share
                                                                                                                                                                                                            mobil                                                                                                                                  team       day
                                                                                                                                                                                                growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         compani
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            offer
                                                                                                                                                                     generat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    main

                                                   current incom                              balanc sheet                                                                                  network                                                                                                                                                author                                                                   pend
                                                                                     equiti level                                                                                                           point
                                                                                                                                                                                                line




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   transact
                                                 addit busi
                                                                                                                                                                                            cost busi                                                                                                                                                state                                                                 file




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        approv
                                                                                                   invest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   anticip cash applic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       made
                                                                           billion loan                                                                                                                    cours
                                                                                                                               signific




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oper




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                turn
                                                           manag leverag




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sale                                              announc
                                                                    growth




                                                                                                                                                                                          market eur final activ
                                                                                                                       strong fund
                                                                                                               increas




                                                                          million ratio                                                                                                               result
                                                                                                                     improv liquid




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  addit                                               acquisit
                                                                                             capit
                                                                  turn




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      million                                                                                                                                                                            process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     adjust
                                                          point total




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       merger
                                                                                                                               cash                                           margin                                                                                     due                                                                                receiv
                                                                                                                                                                   contract




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      necessari
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             negat tariff




                                                                                                                                   valu
                        group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    close




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 subject
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              agreement




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     earli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              contribut




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         increas
                                                                                                                    deposit




                                                                                         bank risk                                                                                     ebitda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                revenu




                        market




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  project
                                                                                       requir asset                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  complet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      issu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               final
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       servic brl
                                                        share




                                                                                                                                                                              profit
                                                                                                                                                                                                       price
                                                                                                               tier




                                                                                                                                                                                                       oper




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         impact                                                                                                                                                          busi week
                                                                                                            credit




                                                                                              remain                     cost                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   follow
                                                                                                                                                                                      strong




                                                                            posit basi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  acquir
                                                                                         target                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sharehold




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    third
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 govern
                                                                      dividend net                                                                                                                                                      posit                                                                                                                              propos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       higher




                                                                                       return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lower




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  board
                                                                         common interest                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            requir
                                                                                                                                                                                                       improv                                                                                                                                                              current
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           asset




                                                                                         maintain financi                                                                                                                                net                                                                                                               obtain            integr discuss
                                                                                                                                                                                                     show
                                                                                                                                                                                                      total    part                                                                                                                                                                   recent
                                                                                                                                                                                                     mention import                                                 energi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Document topic share for Presentation (SA)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.01
                  0.02
 legalese




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        margins




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  m&a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                  0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00 0.02 -0.02
                    -0.04
                  0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  china
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        euro
 fda
                  0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.04
                  0.015 -0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010    2012                           2014       2016                           2018

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.01
 fins




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        util
                  0.000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.04 -0.01
                     -0.015
                  0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        legalese2
 client
                  0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                  -0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.04




                                                                      2010                           2012                 2014                       2016   2018                                                                                                        2010                          2012   2014                 2016                                   2018

                                                                                                                         Index                                                                                                                                                                               Index


Figure A1: Presentation topics from LDA with 2000 iterations Gibbs sampling. Seasonally
adjusted topic frequencies shown in second panel.
                                            A2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wordcloud for Q and A
                             opportun specif pathway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             environ_NEG      custom_NEG risk_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             part_NEGrate_NEGgood_NEG industri_NEG
                                fda   wt = 0.102
                                   clear       endpoint                                                                                                                             m&a wt = 0.1087
                                                                                                                                                                                      progress                                                                                                                                 fins wt = 0.08699                                                                                                                                                     neg wt = 0.08181




                                                                                    potenti
                            safeti                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           put_NEG process_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         level_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                       order
                                                                                                                                                                                               coupl                                                                                                                                     follow              incom




                                                                                                                 progress strategi regulatori_NEG
                                   meet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        big_NEG
                                              commerci                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  probabl




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         point_NEG
                          posit                                                                                                                                                                follow           comment                                                                                                            buffer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        issu_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     given_NEG
                                                   follow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            book




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               specif_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                even_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                process                                                                                                               current account




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        yet_NEG
                                              forward




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     regulatori_NEG
                           line agenc                                                                                                                                       delay                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     differ_NEG




                                                                                                                                          great




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     noth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             return             provis regul_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               price_NEG
                         updat              develop




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          point
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  insur basel clear                                                                                                                                                  abl_NEG
                 dose understand
                                                                                                                                                                           project                                                                        made




                                                                           file
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          part




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  billion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     compani
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sure decis                                                                       model busi

                                                        approv
                                                                                                                                                                                   wait




                                                                                                                              partner addit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   asset
                                                                                                                                                                        line                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           market
                                                                                    discuss




                                                                                                                                                                                                           approv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          differ
                                            product




                                                                                                                                                                                       forward




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             basi
                       market
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   happen far
                       launch

                                                                                                                                                                                          review




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  manag                                                                                                                                                           good sort_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             posit_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           point
                                                                                                                                                                                     acquisit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fund
                                    process




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      capit
                                                                                                                                                                                  complet
                                                                           studi                                                                                                           state                                     littl ask




                                                                                                                                                                                   mention
                                                                                                                drug                                                                                                                                                                                                                     discuss                                                                                                                               relat_NEG market_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           file




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     increas_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      updat abl                                                                  increas




                                                                                                                                                                           announc sort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     requir given




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tier
                                                                                                                                                                                                issu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     regul_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               busi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mention bank
                                                                         data



                                                                                                                               requir
                                                                                                                    good phase




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  comment_NEG
                                                                                              patient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  done week




                                                                                                                                                                                                 hope
                                                                                                                                                                                                        deal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cash
                                                                                                                                                                                 relat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         risk
                                                                                                                            author
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             close                                                                             loan ratio                     posit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            quit impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          day step




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dividend
                                                                                                                                                                         good                                                                                                                               weight point                     target                                                                                                                                 peopl busi_NEG
                                                                         fda




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   anyth_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        requir_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        transact inform
                                                                                              trial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   certain impact_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               signific_NEG clear
                          indic                                                                                                                                                                call                                                                                                             equiti rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                basic
                                                                                                                                                                      probabl                              compani                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           certain_NEG product_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          level relat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             invest
                                   sure




                                                              clinic
                                                point




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ask
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eur
                                                                                                                                                                                               final




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cost
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cost_NEG
                                   littl




                                                                                                                                                                                                        requir place




                                                                                                                                                                        certain
                                                                                                                                                                          part
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cours sort                                                                                                                                                        sure_NEG




                                                                                                                      popul
                                                               europ                                                                                                                            discuss




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            issu
                                                                                                                      part
                                                              iii




                                                                                                                                                                                                agreement oper   put                                                                                                       indiscern                                                                                                                                         tri_NEG compani_NEG
                                                                   differ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capit_NEG interest
                                                                                              design

                       mention import                                                                   abl                                                                                    govern understand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          happen_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                               earli permit                                                                                                        balanc view market
                     european certain                                                                  path                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              understand                                                                                                          whether_NEG approv_NEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                author sharehold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    clear_NEGoper_NEG state
                              cours                                                                    sort                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           question_NEG state_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   coupl
                                                                                               govern                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transmiss




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               probabl
                                           client   wt = 0.1378
                                              interest                                                                                                                            china wt
                                                                                                                                                                                        sell = 0.1196                                                                                                                          util wt =differ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.08991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               electr
                                                                                                             point




                                                 high platform




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                long
                                                                                                                                                                                             place                                                                                                                                                process
                                 manag technolog




                                                                                                                                                                                                     fuel




                                                                                                                                                                                           sale high
                                                                                                          great




                                                                   posit growth                                       data                                                                         grow technolog                                                                                                                            sort




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      custom contract
                                              peopl client mani




                                                                                                                                                                                   relat                                                                                                                                                           forward




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       capex coal period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oper
                                                                         invest                                                                                                                           america even




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     water commiss
                                                                                                                 requir                                                                                                                                                                                                                     earn power




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pipelin
                                                                                                                                                                                          govern
                            put                                                                                                                                                                        opportun capac




                                                                                                                                                                                                    requir
                                                              opportun




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           point put tax
                                                                                good sure




                                                                                                                                                                                            sort




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      part price
                                                                                                                               risk                                                                                                                                                                                              energi
                                                                                                                                       issu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          demand signific




                                                                                                                                                                                          issu
                                                                                                                                                                                   world state
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           invest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        potenti level
                                                                         industri




                                                                                                                                 long




                                                                                                                                                                                                               market
                                                                                                                                                                                                  price
                                                                                custom
                                complianc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           littl strong
                 impact




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               plant                               project
                  trade




                                                                                                                                financi




                                                                                                                                                                                    north
                                                                                                       area
                                                                                    busi

                                                                                                                      particular activ




                                                                                                                                                                                   certain                                good car compani




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          area
                                                                                                                                             strong




                                                                                               product                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cost

                                                                                                                                                                                   part
                                                                                                                                                                                                 busi                             china
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rate
                                                                                                                                                                               chines




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  asset gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     volum
                                                                                                servic                                                                                    growth                                                                                                                  capit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              product
                                                       care




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        certain
                                                                                                                                                                                         custom
                                                                                                  environ                                                             long                                                                                                                                       return                                   busi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    util
                                                                  clear                                                                                                                   countri
                                                                                                                                                                        environ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              europ                              system                                      file




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     margin india
                        larg
                                                      market tri                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          growth state




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tri
                                                                                                                                                                         mani industri




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          suppli
                                       deal
                                                                                                                       europ big
                                                                                                             certain




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             relat case littl
                                                                                                                                                                                             differ                                                                                                                                                   good
                                                                                                              help




                                                                                                                                                                       import   increas
                                                    compani differ
                                         import




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           spend
                                                                                                                                                                                  impact develop
                                                   oper sort littl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        opportun     million




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          issu
                                                                                                                                                                          mention posit
                                                                                                                                                                                   probabl happen
                                                     part state                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          compani generat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  renew
                                                       rule                                                                                                                      particular launch                                                                                                                                  decis capac
                                               happen whether system                                                                                                                                                  drive
                                                                               world                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           increas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 current interest


                                                                                         framework                                                                                             mortgag
                        ebitda                                                                                                                                                           interest
                 euro-competit
                          mobil wt = 0.09419                                                                                                                                 corpfin wt =  0.09597                                                                                                                     margins  wt =   0.083




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   level third
                                import
                                                                                                                                                                              comment thought
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             declin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  margin certain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    signific
                                                     case        final whether                                                                                                                               million potenti




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          fourth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   growth volum
                                                     relat quit understand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           basi                    given
                                                                                                                                                                                               given




                                                                                                                                                                                                        issu manag comfort
                                                                                                                                                                       opportun forward
                                                                                                                                                                                        sure
                                                                                                                                    wonder




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lower
                                                                                                                                                                                       real




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              revenu
                                                                     posit regul_NEG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           littl
                                                                                                                                 compani
                                    share part




                                                                                                                                                                                                         balanc sort                                                                                                                                                                              sort reduct
                                                                                                                                                                     posit billion great




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pressur
                                                          discuss




                                                                                                                                                                               help lend




                                offer                              tariff                                                                                                                  good                                         certain                                                             servic                                                                  relat                        coupl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         loan




                                                                              network
                                                                                    market




                                                                    ask                                                                                                                rate ratio                                               view
                                   countri




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         feel                                                                 rang                                                          rate                             line net
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   environ littl




                                                                               invest
                                   situat


                                                         cost
                                                                         price



                                                                                                                      mention capex




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 probabl fund



                                                                                                                                                                                          market                                          level                                                                                                                            impact                                part
                       concern




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             addit
                   spain good




                                                                                                                                       potenti
                                                                                     impact




                                                                                                       govern                                                                                                                                                                                              invest
                                                                                                                                                                                                       bank                                                                                                                                                        cost




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          benefit
                                                                                                                                                                      growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           result
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  point tri




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  portfolio

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            deposit



                                         oper                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   higher




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     busi
                                                                                                                   busi                                             peopl
                                                                                                       eur
                                                                                                           competit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    differ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              expens

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       assum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        point
                                      revenu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               probabl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               item
                                                                                                                                                                                                       capit                                                                                                                                  million
                                                                                                                                                                      grow




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             overal
                                                                                                             clear
                                                                                                                       million
                                         possibl




                                                                                                                      consid




                                                          cours
                                                    increas                                                                                                                 asset busi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    wonder                                    increas                                      tax                         oper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             put risk




                                                                fix
                                                                                                       differ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         guidanc half run




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       call
                                                                                                                                                                            deal credit
                                                                  view




                                                         indiscern                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             offset
                                                     answer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                leverag




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    price mention help
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        relat
                                                                                                                   decis




                                                                      current                                                                                          increas compani
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          part




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           profit      forward spend comment
                                                                      custom point                                                                                              coupl sheet                                                                                                                                            improv account
                                                                    level happen                                                                                                                       share                                                                                                                               complianc
                                                                    follow basic                                                                                                                        industri
                                                                      comment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Document topic share for Q and A (SA)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.00 0.02 0.04
                   0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.000 0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           margins
                                                                                                                                                                                                 china
 fda
                   0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.015
                    -0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.04
                   0.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.02
                   0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                 corpfin
 client




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           neg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.00
                   -0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.02-0.02
                   0.02 -0.06
 euro-competit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010     2012                    2014            2016                                    2018

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Index
                   0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                 fins
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.02
                      -0.04
                   0.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.03
                   -0.01 0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.01
 m&a




                                                                                                                                                                                                 util
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.03 -0.01
                   -0.04




                                                     2010                              2012                         2014                              2016   2018                                                                                   2010                              2012   2014     2016                                         2018

                                                                                                                 Index                                                                                                                                                                       Index


Figure A2: Q&A topics from LDA with 2000 iterations Gibbs sampling. Seasonally adjusted
topic frequencies shown in second panel.
                                         A3
Table A1: Topic-word distributions for the presentation section. The top 20 words in each
topic is shown, along with the topic-word distribution. The LDA is estimated using Gibbs
sampling with 2000 iterations.
     Topic     Words
     legalese  financi 0.045, measur 0.04, gaap 0.039, call 0.038, non 0.03, releas 0.023, sec
               0.019, inform 0.018, compani 0.018, websit 0.017, statement 0.016, forward
               0.015, file 0.014, discuss 0.013, reconcili 0.013, result 0.013, present 0.013,
               press 0.013, investor 0.012, earn 0.011
     fda       clinic 0.02, approv 0.02, develop 0.018, product 0.016, studi 0.014, trial 0.014,
               patient 0.013, phase 0.012, commerci 0.012, fda 0.012, data 0.011, potenti
               0.009, addit 0.008, market 0.008, file 0.008, launch 0.007, progress 0.007, sub-
               miss 0.007, result 0.006, iii 0.006
     fins      capit 0.048, ratio 0.025, bank 0.018, loan 0.014, requir 0.012, billion 0.012,
               asset 0.012, million 0.012, risk 0.011, increas 0.011, remain 0.01, level 0.009,
               total 0.009, strong 0.009, equiti 0.008, posit 0.008, basi 0.008, point 0.008,
               credit 0.008, invest 0.007
     client    market 0.02, busi 0.016, custom 0.011, servic 0.01, growth 0.009, industri 0.009,
               manag 0.008, environ 0.007, product 0.007, oper 0.007, opportun 0.007, client
               0.007, financi 0.006, posit 0.006, increas 0.006, complianc 0.006, invest 0.006,
               compani 0.005, solut 0.005, technolog 0.005
     margins million 0.072, increas 0.032, expens 0.03, cost 0.027, revenu 0.023, relat 0.019,
               tax 0.018, oper 0.017, result 0.015, due 0.015, incom 0.013, compar 0.013,
               higher 0.013, impact 0.013, net 0.013, rate 0.011, lower 0.01, approxim 0.01,
               sale 0.01, share 0.01
     euro      million 0.021, eur 0.02, revenu 0.018, increas 0.014, busi 0.013, impact 0.013,
               market 0.012, growth 0.012, cost 0.011, ebitda 0.011, result 0.009, price 0.008,
               oper 0.008, posit 0.007, main 0.007, period 0.006, billion 0.006, due 0.006,
               network 0.006, half 0.006
     util      rate 0.019, earn 0.014, util 0.013, custom 0.013, invest 0.013, busi 0.012, energi
               0.012, project 0.012, oper 0.011, gas 0.011, growth 0.009, million 0.007, capit
               0.007, result 0.007, case 0.007, servic 0.007, electr 0.007, cost 0.007, file 0.007,
               power 0.006
     legalese2 statement 0.035, risk 0.033, forward 0.028, result 0.027, factor 0.023, compani
               0.019, differ 0.019, uncertainti 0.018, materi 0.018, futur 0.014, busi 0.012, file
               0.011, caus 0.011, market 0.011, product 0.011, regulatori NEG 0.011, condit
               0.011, competit 0.01, secur 0.01, econom 0.009
     m&a       approv 0.037, close 0.021, transact 0.019, process 0.013, complet 0.012, acquisit
               0.01, receiv 0.01, compani 0.01, subject 0.01, announc 0.01, agreement 0.008,
               final 0.008, sharehold 0.008, share 0.007, review 0.007, oper 0.006, progress
               0.006, busi 0.006, remain 0.006, propos 0.006
     china     market 0.026, product 0.024, growth 0.013, increas 0.013, demand 0.01, sale
               0.01, industri 0.009, busi 0.009, custom 0.008, china 0.008, price 0.008, requir
               0.006, strong 0.006, fuel 0.006, technolog 0.006, project 0.005, develop 0.005,
               oil 0.005, high 0.005, system 0.005




                                                  A4
Table A2: Topic-word distributions for the Q&A section. The top 20 words in each topic is
shown, along with the topic-word distribution. The LDA is estimated using Gibbs sampling
with 2000 iterations.
   Topic         Words
   fda           data 0.02, studi 0.017, approv 0.014, patient 0.014, fda 0.013, trial 0.013,
                 discuss 0.011, product 0.01, clinic 0.01, phase 0.01, file 0.008, develop 0.007,
                 potenti 0.006, process 0.006, europ 0.006, drug 0.006, differ 0.006, point 0.006,
                 forward 0.005, agenc 0.005
   client        busi 0.02, market 0.017, custom 0.009, industri 0.009, environ 0.009, servic
                 0.008, opportun 0.008, product 0.008, good 0.008, client 0.008, compani 0.007,
                 peopl 0.007, area 0.006, differ 0.006, manag 0.006, sort 0.006, help 0.005, invest
                 0.005, posit 0.005, complianc 0.005
   euro-competit market 0.021, price 0.014, impact 0.008, cours 0.007, eur 0.007, govern 0.007,
                 cost 0.006, invest 0.006, increas 0.006, competit 0.006, oper 0.006, indiscern
                 0.006, network 0.005, tariff 0.005, discuss 0.005, regul NEG 0.005, revenu
                 0.005, clear 0.005, posit 0.005, busi 0.005
   m&a           approv 0.028, process 0.026, close 0.011, issu 0.009, deal 0.008, transact 0.007,
                 done 0.006, point 0.006, hope 0.006, review 0.006, file 0.006, state 0.006, call
                 0.005, final 0.005, complet 0.005, discuss 0.005, requir 0.005, compani 0.005,
                 updat 0.005, littl 0.005
   china         market 0.033, product 0.026, china 0.014, busi 0.011, growth 0.008, price 0.007,
                 custom 0.007, countri 0.007, europ 0.007, good 0.007, littl 0.007, industri 0.006,
                 demand 0.006, opportun 0.006, requir 0.005, certain 0.005, differ 0.005, increas
                 0.005, sale 0.005, impact 0.005
   corpfin       bank 0.019, capit 0.016, loan 0.01, market 0.008, littl 0.008, good 0.007, environ
                 0.007, busi 0.007, credit 0.007, balanc 0.006, rate 0.006, growth 0.006, compani
                 0.006, level 0.006, risk 0.005, point 0.005, opportun 0.005, certain 0.005, asset
                 0.005, portfolio 0.005
   fins          capit 0.034, bank 0.014, risk 0.012, ratio 0.011, requir 0.009, asset 0.009, point
                 0.008, level 0.008, dividend 0.007, impact 0.007, billion 0.007, busi 0.006, in-
                 creas 0.006, manag 0.006, rate 0.006, basi 0.005, clear 0.005, cours 0.005,
                 indiscern 0.005, discuss 0.005
   util          rate 0.016, project 0.012, busi 0.011, util 0.01, gas 0.009, invest 0.009, state
                 0.009, cost 0.008, case 0.007, custom 0.007, power 0.006, energi 0.006, asset
                 0.006, opportun 0.006, plant 0.006, forward 0.006, capit 0.006, littl 0.005,
                 return 0.005, earn 0.005
   margins       cost 0.032, million 0.028, impact 0.017, busi 0.015, revenu 0.015, rate 0.014,
                 growth 0.014, increas 0.013, expens 0.013, tax 0.011, relat 0.011, margin 0.011,
                 littl 0.01, guidanc 0.009, half 0.008, line 0.007, sort 0.007, higher 0.007, fee
                 0.006, mention 0.006
   neg           regul NEG 0.031, regulatori NEG 0.026, market NEG 0.01, busi NEG 0.009,
                 ca 0.008, impact NEG 0.007, anyth NEG 0.007, issu NEG 0.006, point NEG
                 0.006, yet NEG 0.005, product NEG 0.005, point 0.005, sure NEG 0.005, com-
                 pani NEG 0.005, specif NEG 0.005, requir NEG 0.005, sort NEG 0.005, mar-
                 ket 0.005, abl NEG 0.004, happen NEG 0.004



                                                 A5
Table A3: We collect all earnings calls whose presentation section's topic distribution is
above 50% for a given topic. We then report the mean N etRegP and its standard error
(assuming independence across calls) for this set of earnings calls for a given topic. The top
panel of the tables show these results. The bottom panel shows the analogous results for the
Q&A portions of the calls.
     Regulatory trends within topical contexts in the Presentation section
                                 Topic        Mean        SE
                                 legalese     0.0093      0.0004
                                 fda          -0.0174     0.0005
                                 fins         -0.0011     0.0008
                                 client       0.0061      0.0007
                                 margins      0.0083      0.0016
                                 euro         -0.0040     0.0011
                                 util         -0.0162     0.0009
                                 legalese2    0.0136      0.0005
                                 m&a          -0.0535     0.0011
                                 china        0.0079      0.0010

          Regulatory trends within topical contexts in the Q&A section
                              Topic             Mean        SE
                              fda               -0.0147     0.0007
                              client            0.0010      0.0008
                              euro-competit     -0.0057     0.0009
                              m&a               -0.0327     0.0013
                              china             0.0003      0.0009
                              corpfin           0.0023      0.0010
                              fins              -0.0001     0.0009
                              util              -0.0114     0.0009
                              margins           0.0068      0.0016
                              neg               -0.0027     0.0009




                                              A6
Table A4: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead investment growth
on our net regulatory measures, as well as other control variables. Control variables include
company size (log sales), a dummy variable to indicate whether the respective section of a
given call had a regulatory mention, a decomposition of investment growth into a company-
specific and industry-specific (2 digit SIC code) component, as well as lags and interactions
of the above variables. Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported in parentheses.
                                      Effects of N etReg on asset growth

                                                                    Asset Growthi
                                                                                t+4

                                (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)               (7)             (8)
NetRegPi
       t                     -0.302   
                                                    -0.312   
                                                                                                        -0.329     

                              (0.065)                (0.062)                                             (0.072)
NetRegQAi
        t                                 -0.145                   -0.162                                                 -0.233
                                          (0.078)                  (0.105)                                                 (0.090)
Ind. Adj. NetRegPi
                 t                                                           -0.260
                                                                              (0.062)
Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi
                  t                                                                      -0.148
                                                                                         (0.106)
NetRegPi
       t-4                                                                                                0.007
                                                                                                         (0.064)
NetRegQAi
        t-4                                                                                                                0.179
                                                                                                                           (0.066)
Sizei
    t                        -0.010      -0.011     -0.010        -0.011     -0.010     -0.011          -0.008            -0.009
                              (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.003)
Ind. NetRegPi
            t                                                                -0.972
                                                                              (0.380)
Ind. NetRegQAi
             t                                                                           -0.142
                                                                                         (0.336)
Sales Growthi
            t                0.092       0.094      0.092          0.094     0.092      0.094            0.084             0.094
                             (0.029)      (0.027)   (0.029)        (0.027)   (0.029)     (0.027)         (0.034)           (0.026)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t            -0.009      -0.025     -0.009        -0.025     -0.008     -0.025           -0.014           -0.034
                             (0.007)      (0.007)   (0.007)        (0.007)   (0.006)     (0.006)         (0.007)           (0.007)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t-4                                                                                      0.015             0.010
                                                                                                         (0.007)           (0.005)
Never Regulat Dummyi
                   t         -0.035      -0.053     -0.035        -0.053     -0.034     -0.053           -0.022           -0.049
                              (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.011)       (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.010)         (0.017)           (0.014)
NetRegPi      i
       t *Sizet                                       0.009
                                                     (0.026)
NetRegQAi      i
        t *Sizet                                                    0.016
                                                                   (0.031)
Ind. Adj. NetRegPi      i
                 t *Sizet                                                    -0.0001
                                                                             (0.027)
Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi      i
                  t *Sizet                                                                0.003
                                                                                         (0.032)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?            Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes
Observations                  57,745      52,775     57,745        52,775     57,745     52,775          40,686            36,215
R2                             0.034       0.037      0.034         0.037     0.034       0.037          0.028              0.032
Adjusted R2                    0.033       0.035      0.033         0.035     0.033       0.035          0.026              0.030
                                                                                                                          
Note:                                                                                               p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                             A7
Table A5: This table shows the results of regressing four-quarter-ahead operating income
growth on our net regulatory measures, as well as other control variables. Control variables
include company size (log sales), a dummy variable to indicate whether the respective section
of a given call had a regulatory mention, a decomposition of operating income growth into
a company-specific and industry-specific (2 digit SIC code) component, as well as lags and
interactions of the above variables. Standard errors, clustered by 2-digit SIC, are reported
in parentheses.
                            Effects of N etReg on operating income growth

                                                               Operating Income Growthi
                                                                                      t+4

                                 (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)            (6)               (7)             (8)
NetRegPi
       t                      -0.235                 -0.100                                                  -0.181
                              (0.135)                (0.257)                                                 (0.129)
NetRegQAi
        t                                 -0.127                   -0.139                                                      -0.167
                                          (0.140)                  (0.333)                                                     (0.143)
Ind. Adj. NetRegPi
                 t                                                            -0.055
                                                                              (0.241)
Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi
                  t                                                                          -0.165
                                                                                             (0.308)
NetRegPi
       t-4                                                                                                  -0.328
                                                                                                            (0.158)
NetRegQAi
        t-4                                                                                                                    -0.259
                                                                                                                               (0.278)
Sizei
    t                         -0.069     -0.065     -0.069        -0.065     -0.069         -0.065          -0.057            -0.055
                               (0.008)    (0.007)    (0.008)       (0.007)    (0.008)        (0.007)         (0.008)           (0.008)
Ind. NetRegPi
            t                                                                -1.433
                                                                              (0.811)
Ind. NetRegQAi
             t                                                                               -0.172
                                                                                             (0.788)
Sales Growthi
            t                 -0.116     -0.106     -0.116        -0.106     -0.116         -0.106          -0.105            -0.098
                               (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)       (0.009)    (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)           (0.010)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t               0.012      0.024      0.012         0.023      0.014          0.024           0.007             0.022
                               (0.017)    (0.019)    (0.017)       (0.019)    (0.015)        (0.018)         (0.018)           (0.017)
No Regulat Dummyi
                t-4                                                                                           0.011             0.018
                                                                                                             (0.019)           (0.017)
Never Regulat Dummyi
                   t           -0.005      0.008     -0.005         0.008     -0.003          0.008         -0.0004             0.022
                               (0.024)    (0.027)    (0.024)       (0.027)    (0.023)        (0.027)         (0.031)           (0.033)
NetRegPi      i
       t *Sizet                                      -0.076
                                                     (0.096)
NetRegQAi      i
        t *Sizet                                                    0.007
                                                                   (0.140)
Ind. Adj. NetRegPi      i
                 t *Sizet                                                     -0.058
                                                                              (0.093)
Ind. Adj. NetRegQAi      i
                  t *Sizet                                                                    0.023
                                                                                             (0.126)
2-digit SIC Ind. FE?             Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Observations                   39,662     36,940     39,662        36,940     39,662         36,940          28,873            26,388
R2                              0.039      0.036      0.039         0.036     0.039           0.036          0.033              0.032
Adjusted R2                     0.037      0.034      0.037         0.034     0.037           0.034          0.031              0.030
                                                                                                                              
Note:                                                                                                   p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                             A8
Table A6: This table shows the results of regressing returns on lagged N etReg (for the
presentation and the Q&A sections), as well as control variables. SU E measures the stan-
dardized unexpected earnings following the construct found in Bernard and Thomas (1989)
and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, Macskassy (2008). Returns are measured from the close of
day t (i.e. the earnings reporting date) for calls occurring prior to 4PM New York time, and
from the close of day t + 1 (the next business day) for calls occurring after 4PM New York
time. Excess returns refer to the stock return in excess of the risk-free rate and F F 6 Ret
refers to abnormal excess returns relative to the Fama-French five factor model augmented
with the momentum factor. Standard errors, clustered on conference call event dates, are
reported in parentheses.
                                    Effects of N etReg on returns

                                    Excess Reti
                                              t,t+22;t+1,t+23                 FF6 Reti
                                                                                     t,t+22;t+1,t+23

                              (1)             (2)               (3)     (4)                (5)            (6)
   FF6 Reti
          t-1,t;t,t+1       0.026           0.027         0.028         0.008          0.006             0.010
                            (0.012)         (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.010)        (0.010)           (0.011)
   FF6 Reti
          t-22,t-1;t-21,t   -0.009          -0.008        -0.006       -0.017         -0.014            -0.015
                            (0.013)         (0.013)       (0.014)      (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.013)
   FF6 Alpha                -1.674          -1.239       -1.633       -2.098          -1.528           -1.912
                            (0.738)         (0.744)       (0.791)      (0.655)        (0.667)           (0.709)
   NetRegPi
          t;t+1              0.005                         0.026       -0.006                            0.003
                            (0.019)                       (0.029)      (0.016)                          (0.025)
   NetRegQAi
           t;t+1                            0.045           0.039                      0.031             0.021
                                            (0.020)       (0.032)                      (0.017)          (0.028)
   log(ME)                  -0.002         -0.002        -0.001       -0.001          -0.001            -0.001
                            (0.0005)       (0.0005)      (0.0005)     (0.0004)        (0.0004)         (0.0004)
   SUE                       0.0004         0.001         0.001       0.001           0.001             0.001
                            (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (0.0003)     (0.0003)        (0.0003)         (0.0003)
   log(BM)                  -0.0005        -0.00000        0.0003      -0.001         -0.0002          -0.0004
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)
   log(share turnover)        0.0005        0.0004         0.0001     -0.0004         -0.0004           -0.001
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)
   No Regulat               -0.0005          0.001          0.001      0.0001         -0.0001            0.002
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.002)
   Never Regulat              0.004         0.006          0.006        0.004           0.004           0.005
                             (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.003)          (0.003)
   Constant                  0.031         0.027          0.025        0.010           0.008             0.005
                             (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.005)
   Observations              25,975          24,590        21,628      25,975             24,590        21,628
   R2                        0.002           0.002         0.003       0.003              0.003         0.003
   Adjusted R2               0.002           0.002         0.002       0.002              0.002         0.002
                                                                                                       
   Note:                                                                         p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                       A9
Table A7: This table shows the results of regressing returns on lagged RegSent (for the
presentation and the Q&A sections), as well as control variables. SU E measures the stan-
dardized unexpected earnings following the construct found in Bernard and Thomas (1989)
and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, Macskassy (2008). Returns are measured from the close of
day t (i.e. the earnings reporting date) for calls occurring prior to 4PM New York time, and
from the close of day t + 1 (the next business day) for calls occurring after 4PM New York
time. Excess returns refer to the stock return in excess of the risk-free rate and F F 6 Ret
refers to abnormal excess returns relative to the Fama-French five factor model augmented
with the momentum factor. Standard errors, clustered on conference call event dates, are
reported in parentheses.
                                    Effects of RegSent on returns

                                    Excess Reti
                                              t,t+22;t+1,t+23                 FF6 Reti
                                                                                     t,t+22;t+1,t+23

                              (1)             (2)               (3)     (4)               (5)             (6)
   FF6 Reti
          t-1,t;t,t+1       0.025           0.028         0.028         0.009          0.007             0.010
                            (0.012)         (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.010)        (0.010)           (0.011)
   FF6 Reti
          t-22,t-1;t-21,t   -0.010          -0.007        -0.006       -0.017         -0.014            -0.014
                            (0.013)         (0.013)       (0.014)      (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.013)
   FF6 Alpha                -1.725          -1.467       -1.706       -2.130         -1.797            -2.039
                            (0.743)         (0.752)       (0.792)      (0.661)        (0.673)           (0.712)
   RegSentPi
           t;t+1             0.017                        0.052         0.002                           0.039
                            (0.016)                       (0.026)      (0.014)                          (0.022)
   RegSentQAi
            t;t+1                          0.050          0.061                       0.029              0.039
                                            (0.019)       (0.029)                     (0.016)           (0.025)
   log(ME)                  -0.002         -0.002        -0.002       -0.001         -0.001            -0.001
                            (0.0005)       (0.0005)       (0.001)     (0.0004)       (0.0004)          (0.0004)
   SUE                       0.0004         0.001         0.001       0.001          0.001             0.001
                            (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (0.0003)     (0.0003)       (0.0003)          (0.0003)
   log(BM)                  -0.0005         0.0001        0.0003       -0.001        -0.0002           -0.0004
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
   log(share turnover)        0.0005        0.0004        0.0003      -0.0004        -0.0005            -0.001
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
   No Regulat                -0.001         0.0003         0.001       0.00002       -0.0003             0.002
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.002)
   Never Regulat              0.004         0.005         0.006         0.004          0.003            0.006
                             (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.002)        (0.003)           (0.003)
   Constant                  0.032         0.029         0.027         0.010          0.009              0.006
                             (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.004)        (0.005)           (0.005)
   Observations              25,677          24,097        21,348      25,677         24,097            21,348
   R2                         0.003          0.003         0.003        0.003         0.003              0.003
   Adjusted R2                0.002          0.002         0.002        0.003         0.002              0.003
                                                                                                       
   Note:                                                                         p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                       A10
Table A8: This table shows the results of regressing returns on lagged AllSent (for the
presentation and the Q&A sections), as well as control variables. SU E measures the stan-
dardized unexpected earnings following the construct found in Bernard and Thomas (1989)
and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, Macskassy (2008). Returns are measured from the close of
day t (i.e. the earnings reporting date) for calls occurring prior to 4PM New York time, and
from the close of day t + 1 (the next business day) for calls occurring after 4PM New York
time. Excess returns refer to the stock return in excess of the risk-free rate and F F 6 Ret
refers to abnormal excess returns relative to the Fama-French five factor model augmented
with the momentum factor. Standard errors, clustered on conference call event dates, are
reported in parentheses.
                                    Effects of AllSent on returns

                                    Excess Reti
                                              t,t+22;t+1,t+23                    FF6 Reti
                                                                                        t,t+22;t+1,t+23

                              (1)             (2)               (3)        (4)               (5)             (6)
   FF6   Reti
            t-1,t;t,t+1     0.024   
                                           0.024    
                                                          0.024       
                                                                           0.004          0.004             0.004
                            (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.010)        (0.010)           (0.010)
   FF6 Reti
          t-22,t-1;t-21,t   -0.011         -0.011         -0.011          -0.017         -0.017            -0.017
                            (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.011)        (0.011)           (0.011)
   FF6 Alpha                -1.377         -1.398        -1.397          -1.826         -1.805            -1.830
                            (0.701)        (0.701)        (0.701)         (0.622)        (0.622)           (0.622)
   AllSentPi
           t;t+1             0.107                        -0.002          0.172                             0.089
                            (0.066)                       (0.075)         (0.057)                          (0.063)
   AllSentQAi
            t;t+1                           0.335        0.336                           0.299            0.255
                                            (0.088)       (0.099)                        (0.079)           (0.088)
   log(ME)                  -0.002         -0.002        -0.002          -0.001         -0.001            -0.001
                            (0.0005)       (0.0005)      (0.0005)        (0.0003)       (0.0003)          (0.0003)
   SUE                      0.0004         0.0004        0.0004          0.001           0.001            0.001
                            (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (0.0002)        (0.0003)       (0.0003)          (0.0003)
   log(BM)                   -0.001         -0.001        -0.001          -0.001         -0.001            -0.001
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
   log(share turnover)        0.001          0.001         0.001         -0.0002        -0.0001           -0.0001
                             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
   No Regulat                 0.002         0.003         0.003           0.003          0.003            0.004
                             (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.001)           (0.002)
   Never Regulat             0.006          0.008         0.008           0.007          0.006            0.008
                             (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)           (0.003)
   Constant                  0.030          0.029        0.029            0.009          0.009             0.008
                             (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)         (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.004)
   Observations              28,937          28,879        28,879         28,937         28,879            28,879
   R2                         0.002          0.003         0.003           0.003         0.003              0.003
   Adjusted R2                0.002          0.003         0.003           0.002         0.003              0.003
                                                                                                          
   Note:                                                                            p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                                                       A11
