                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      REFORMING INEFFICIENT ENERGY PRICING:
                             EVIDENCE FROM CHINA

                                         Koichiro Ito
                                        Shuang Zhang

                                     Working Paper 26853
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26853


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




For helpful comments, we thank Hunt Allcott, Douglas Almond, Severin Borenstein, Fiona
Burlig, Steve Cicala, Lucas Davis, Tatyana Deryugina, Larry Goulder, Michael Greenstone,
Kelsey Jack, Ryan Kellogg, Catherine Wolfram, and seminar participants at Stanford, Colorado
Boulder, UC Berkeley, University of Chicago, Resources for the Future, the Federal Reserve
Board of Governors, and NBER Environment and Energy Program Meeting. We thank Theodor
Kulczycki, Jing Qian, Chenyu Qiu, and Andrew Smith for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Koichiro Ito and Shuang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Reforming Inefficient Energy Pricing: Evidence from China
Koichiro Ito and Shuang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 26853
March 2020
JEL No. L38,L51,L97,O1,O38,O44,Q4,Q41,Q5,Q53,Q56

                                         ABSTRACT

Inefficient energy pricing hinders economic development in many countries. We examine long-
run effects of a recent heating reform in China that replaced a commonly-used fixed-payment
system with individually-metered pricing. Using staggered policy rollouts and administrative data
on household-level daily heating consumption, we find that the reform induced long-run
reductions in heating usage and generated substantial welfare gains. Consumers gradually learned
how to conserve heating effectively, making short-run evaluations underestimate the policy
impacts. Our results suggest that energy price reform is an effective way to improve allocative
efficiency and air quality in developing countries, where unmetered-inefficient pricing is still
ubiquitous.


Koichiro Ito
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th St
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ito@uchicago.edu

Shuang Zhang
Department of Economics
University of Colorado Boulder
UCB 256
Boulder, CO 80302
shuang.zhang@colorado.edu
1        Introduction

Inefficient energy pricing is ubiquitous in developing countries, and it hinders progress on two

fundamental factors for economic development--reliable energy access and clean air. Since energy

prices are considered as powerful political instruments, energy consumption is often highly subsidized

in developing countries, leaving marginal prices substantially lower than marginal costs. In 2018,

global fossil-fuel consumption subsidies exceeded 400 billion dollars, and nearly all of them were

used in developing countries (Information Energy Agency, 2020).1 This inefficiency eventually

results in limited and unreliable energy access for consumers in a dysfunctional equilibrium, where

subsidies are high enough for firms to make profits without investing in infrastructure (McRae,

2015b). Furthermore, very low--and often zero--marginal prices provide little incentives to conserve

energy, which exacerbates severe air pollution in many countries (Almond et al., 2009; Ebenstein

et al., 2017; Ito and Zhang, 2020).

        In this paper, we investigate long-run impacts of reforming inefficient energy pricing commonly

used in developing countries. We collected newly-available administrative data on household-level

daily heating usage for 16,133 households from 2007 to 2018 in the city of Tianjin, by collaborating

with the World Bank, the Chinese government's Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development

(MOHURD), and a regulated heating provider. Residential heating bills in China have been solely

based on annual fixed fees, regardless of each consumer's usage--that is, the marginal price has been

subsidized to zero. Starting in 2005, the government installed individual meters and introduced new

pricing called consumption-based billing (CBB): a two-part tariff with a constant marginal price

and fixed fees.

        Our research design and data address two key empirical challenges in the literature. First,

individually-metered usage data are usually available only after the introduction of CBB because

firms typically install meters at the same time as they introduce CBB (McRae, 2015a). It makes
    1
    For example, the majority of households have paid zero marginal price for heating for a long time in China (Ito
and Zhang, 2020). In India, liquefied petroleum gas price is highly subsidized (Barnwal, 2014), and a flat monthly fee
with small or zero marginal price is common for electricity customers in the agricultural sector (Ryan and Sudarshan,
2018; Badiani-Magnusson and Jessoe, 2019). In Colombia, electricity pricing has been based solely on fixed charges
until recently (McRae, 2015a). Turkmenistan is considering transition from a fixed payment scheme to consumption-
based billing for residential electricity, natural gas and drinking water (Diplomat, 2018). Even in developed countries
such as the United States, fixed payments with zero marginal price are still common for water and electricity in some
regions or some customer segments, including apartment tenants and agricultural customers (Davis, 2012; Burlig,
Preonas and Woerman, 2020).



                                                          1
empirical analysis challenging because individual-level usage data are unobservable before CBB.

Our data overcome this challenge because regulators required household-level metered data to be

collected at least one year before the introduction of CBB. This allows us to access daily household-

level usage data before and after the reform. The second challenge in the literature is the lack

of control group for estimating a causal effect of CBB. To address this problem, we develop an

event-study design that exploits staggered rollouts of the reform.

   We begin with graphical and statistical analysis of the event-study estimation. Our results on

the intention-to-treat (ITT) indicate that the introduction of CBB reduced the average heating

usage by 13% in the first year, 21% in the second year, 27% in the third year, and 31% in the

fourth year, suggesting that heating demand became more elastic in the long run. In the fourth

year, the average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) was a 36.3% reduction in heating usage.

These impacts are economically substantial and long-lasting compared to a variety of policies on

residential energy usage studied in the literature, as we discuss below.

   We investigate two dimensions of the long-run dynamics in energy demand. First, we find that

consumers were likely to gradually learn when they should conserve heating. We divide treatment

days into quartiles of daily average temperature. The ATET is similar between colder and warmer

days in the first year of treatment. However, after the second year of treatment, the response

becomes larger on warmer days relative to colder days. It suggests that consumers gradually learn

how to wisely save energy. Second, we find that relatively-poorer households became responsive to

prices over time, while richer households responded similarly between the short run and long run.

   To examine the welfare impacts of CBB, we need to test a hypothesis that has not been formally

tested in the literature. A standard welfare analysis of two-part tariffs relies on the assumption that

consumers properly distinguish fixed costs from variable costs. However, Liebman and Zeckhauser

(2004) suggest that behavioral consumers may misperceive a change in average price as a change

in marginal price in a complex price schedule. This behavior, if found in data, makes the standard

welfare analysis for two-part tariffs no more appropriate. The price variation in our research design

is suitable to test this hypothesis because many consumers experienced an increase in marginal

price but a decrease in average price. We use this price variation to run the encompassing test

(Davidson and MacKinnon, 1993; Ito, 2014). Our results suggest that consumers in our data prop-

erly distinguished fixed costs from variable costs, providing supporting evidence for an assumption

                                                  2
in the standard welfare analysis of two-part tariffs.

    Based on these empirical findings, we calculate welfare gains from CBB. We show that the

social welfare gain from CBB comes from two elements: improved allocative efficiency and reduced

environmental externalities. We separately estimate each welfare gain by integrating our empirical

findings, plant-level emissions data, and willingness to pay for clean air estimated by Ito and Zhang

(2020). Our results indicate that the total social welfare gain is 61.29 dollars per year per household

and 262.68 million dollars per year for Tianjin. The one-time administrative cost of introducing

CBB was 99.22 dollars per household, which implies that the policy's benefit exceeded its cost half

way through the second treatment year.

    In addition to the efficiency effects of CBB, another important welfare question is the redis-

tributional impacts. To investigate this question, we collected data on housing prices as a proxy

for wealth. We then calculate CBB's impacts on consumer surplus for wealthier households and

poorer households separately. Our results suggest that the introduction of CBB increased consumer

surplus on average, but it was regressive--the change in consumer surplus was higher for wealthier

households than poorer households. This regressivity comes from the fact that the pre-reform policy

was quite progressive. Because the fixed charge was proportional to the square meters of residences,

the pre-reform payment was higher for wealthier households, who tended to live in larger residence.

    Related literature and our contributions. First, our study provides the first evidence on the

long-run responses to energy prices in developing countries. In the coming decades, most of the

global increase in energy demand will come from developing countries (Wolfram, Shelef and Gertler,

2012). How to design energy pricing in these countries is, therefore, a first-order question for

addressing climate change and global scarcity in natural resources. However, the energy demand

literature has focused on developed nations because of the availability of administrative billing

data.2 Moreover, nearly all existing studies focus on estimating short-run demand elasticity because

long-run exogenous variation in energy prices is hardly available.3 We collected administrative
    2
      For example, see Borenstein (2010), Aroonruengsawat and Auffhammer (2011), Wolak (2011), Ito (2014), Jessoe
and Rapson (2014), Ito (2015), Ito, Ida and Tanaka (2018), and Deryugina, MacKay and Reif (2020) for studies based
on administrative energy billing data in the United States and Japan. Recently, researchers started to collect such
data in developing countries: Mexico (Davis, Fuchs and Gertler, 2014), South Africa (Jack and Smith, 2015, 2020),
Colombia (McRae, 2015a), Brazil (Costa and Gerard, 2018), and Kenya (Lee, Miguel and Wolfram, 2020).
    3
      Deryugina, MacKay and Reif (2020) emphasize this point and estimate two-year responses to electricity prices
in Illinois. They find that Illinois households gradually responded to changes in electricity prices, which is consistent
with our findings for Chinese households. Another related study is Costa and Gerard (2018), but their study focuses
on persistent responses to a temporal policy shock, and therefore, different from Deryugina, MacKay and Reif (2020)


                                                           3
billing data in China, and our quasi-experimental design allows us to estimate four-year responses

to long-run price variation. Our findings on the sizable and long-lasting welfare gains highlight

that inefficiency in energy pricing is likely to be large in developing countries, and therefore, it is

important to conduct rigorous studies in these countries.4

    Second, our findings provide a new insight to the literature on consumer inattention under com-

plex pricing. Motivated by Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004), many studies test if standard economic

theory's assumptions are consistent with data when consumers have complex price schedules. For

example, Ito (2014) finds that consumers respond to average price rather than marginal price un-

der a nonlinear electricity price schedule, where the marginal price is a step function of monthly

consumption, similar to multi-tiered income tax schedules. This evidence is, however often cited

incorrectly to argue that consumers may be confused between marginal and average prices when

a price schedule includes fixed and variable charges. Borenstein and Davis (2012) clarify that the

evidence from Ito (2010, 2014) is not directly applicable to this argument, and what has to be tested

is whether consumers distinguish fixed costs from variable costs. Our paper is the first study to test

this hypothesis and find that consumers in our data are attentive to the difference between changes

in fixed costs and variable costs.

    Finally, our results provide important policy implications to prevailing severe air pollution in

developing countries. Recent studies show that such severe air pollution causes large negative im-

pacts on various economic outcomes, including infant mortality (Jayachandran, 2009; Arceo, Hanna

and Oliva, 2012; Greenstone and Hanna, 2014), life expectancy (Chen et al., 2013; Ebenstein et al.,

2017), and labor supply (Hanna and Oliva, 2015). For this reason, policymakers and economists

consider air pollution to be one of the first-order obstacles to economic development. An impor-

tant next step in this literature is to seek potential solutions to address this problem. Our paper

is among the first studies to explore a solution in collaboration with policymakers. Our results

highlight that reforming inefficient energy pricing is likely to be an effective way to alleviate air

pollution in developing nations.
and our study.
    4
      For example, Wolak (2011) and Ito, Ida and Tanaka (2018) find that the introduction of residential dynamic
electricity pricing in the United States and Japan, which created increases in peak-hour prices by 100­300%, induced
10­15% reductions in electricity usage. Another policy that has been extensively studied in many developed countries
is information provision with peer comparison in energy usage, which typically induced 1­2% reductions in energy
use (Allcott and Rogers, 2014).



                                                         4
2     Research Design and Data

This section describes three key features of our research design. First, the heating pricing reform

in Tianjin was introduced with staggered rollouts, which created quasi-experimental variation in

treatment. Second, the policy-induced price variation allows us to test if consumers properly dis-

tinguished between fixed and variable costs. Third, the city required household-level metered usage

data to be collected at least one year before the introduction of CBB, allowing us to access daily

household-level usage data before and after the reform.


2.1   Staggered Rollouts

The city introduced CBB with staggered rollouts between 2008 and 2016. The timing of the rollout

was well spread across years. The number of households who were introduced to CBB was 720 in

2008, 1,183 in 2009, 3136 in 2010, 1064 in 2011, 1209 in 2012, 2129 in 2013, 5531 in 2014, 738 in

2015, and 423 in 2016. This long window of rollouts enables us to estimate the policy's long-run

effect based on event-study design.

    The vast majority of households in Tianjin live in condominiums, and therefore, the rollouts were

done at the condominium building level. Thus, in our estimation, we cluster the standard errors

at the building level. The city's annual operation budget for the reform was constrained, which

was the reason for the staggered rollouts spanned for nine years. According to the city officials, the

rollouts were done in an unsystematic order, though the timing was not randomly assigned. Hence,

our estimation relies on the standard identification assumptions for quasi-experimental event study

design, as we describe in Section 3. For example, we test if the rollout timings are correlated with

building characteristics. We do not find statistically significant relationships between the rollout

timings and the observable building characteristics, including year of building, square meters of

residence, and house value, as we discuss in Section 3.3.

    Once a building was assigned to CBB, all households were defaulted into CBB. However, there

was an option for them to opt-out from CBB and stay with the pre-reform tariff. They had to opt-out

before the first winter of CBB. In our data, we observe that about 70 percent of households complied

with CBB and 30 percent of households opted-out. For both compliers and non-compliers, we

observe their daily metered heating usage. We address this incomplete compliance in our estimation


                                                  5
in Section 3.


2.2      Price Variation Created by the Reform

Before the policy change, households paid an annual fixed charge equal to 3.97 dollars times their

residence's square meters. For example, a household with 100 square meters of residence paid 397

dollars for every winter, regardless of how much heating was used.

      After the policy change, a heating bill became a two-part tariff: a new annual fixed charge

equal to 1.895 dollars times square meters; and a variable charge equal to 1.4 cents per kWh of

heating usage.5 This policy change provides useful variation for our empirical analysis because

many consumers experienced an increase in marginal price but a decrease in average price. For

example, consider a household with 100 square meters of residence whose typical usage was 10,000

kWh per winter. The pre-reform payment was 397 dollars with zero marginal price. With the same

amount of usage, the post-reform payment would be 338.5 (= 198.5 + 0.014 · 10, 000) dollars with

marginal price equal to 1.4 cents. Thus, given the same amount of usage, this household experienced

an increase in marginal price but a decrease in average price.

      The change in marginal price was common to all households--it changed from 0 to 1.4 cents per

kWh. However, the change in average price depended on usage per square meter. Given the same

usage level, households whose usage per square meter was less than 142 were likely to experience a

decrease in average price and the rest of households were likely to experience an increase in average

price. Based on the pre-reform usage data, we observe that 55% of households had usage per square

meter less than 142. This implies that many consumers were likely to experience an increase in

marginal price but a decrease in average price, which is key variation we use in Section 4.6


2.3      Data

We obtained administrative data on household-level daily heating usage from a regulated heating

provider in Tianjin. The data cover usage for all of the provider's residential customers from

December 2007 to February 2018. Heating usage is automatically recorded once a day and uploaded

to the provider's database. With a confidentiality agreement, we obtained direct access to the
  5
      The regulator set the marginal price equal to the marginal cost based on the information on heating production.
  6
      Figure A.1 provides visual illustration of this price variation.



                                                          6
database. We also observe each household's address, apartment number, square meters, and house

value.

    The data include 16,133 households in total. However, as we explain in Section 3, our main

analysis examines the long-run effects of CBB by analyzing households whose data are available at

least one year before and four years after the introduction of CBB. With this restriction, our main

dataset includes 3,874 households. In the appendix, we also show results on the short-run effects

of CBB based on a dataset without this restriction and find that the short-run effects are similar

between our main dataset and the dataset without the four-year data restriction (Figure A.4 and

Table A.5).

    Every year, a winter heating season starts in mid-November and ends in mid-March. Each year's

exact start date in November and end date in March depend on that year's temperature. To make

our analysis consistent between years, we focus on daily usage in three winter months--December,

January, and February. In these three months, heating is on everyday in every year so that we do

not have missing days for any year.

    We report summary statistics for key variables here and other variables in Table A.1. The

average heating usage is 99.92 kWh per day and 12,097.1 kWh per winter. The average heating bill

per winter is 454.1 dollars before the reform and 396.7 dollars after the reform. The average size of

residence is 114 square meters, and the average housing price is 539,682 dollars.



3     Treatment Effects of consumption-based billing

This section investigates the causal effect of consumption-based billing on heating usage. As we

described in Section 2.1, the policy take-up was not mandatory, and about 70% of households

complied. This is one-sided incomplete compliance because all households in the control group were

untreated. For this reason, we estimate the intention-to-treat (ITT) and the average treatment

effect on the treated (ATET).


3.1      Intention-to-Treat

We begin with a standard event study analysis, which provides visual investigation of treatment

effects in the presence of staggered treatment assignment. We estimate the following equation by


                                                 7
OLS:
                                                             b
                                                                    k
                                       yit = i + st +            k Dit + uit ,                                   (1)
                                                          k=a

where yit is the natural log of daily heating usage for household i on day t, and i is household-level

fixed effects (i ). We allow day fixed effects (st ) to be different among households with different

years of meter installations (s). We use j = [a, b] to denote the event-time relative to the first month

of treatment. For example, k = -1 is the last month of the pre-treatment period and k = 0 is the

first month of treatment. Because we use data from three winter months--between the first day of

December and the last day of February--it is helpful to consider the following example. Suppose

a household whose first treatment month was December 2010. For this household, k equals -1 in

February 2009, 0 in December 2010, 1 in January 2011, 2 in February 2011, 3 in December 2012,
                           k = 1 if day t falls within the event-time k for household i.
and etc. A dummy variable Dit

       We follow McCrary (2007) and Kline (2012) to address two important issues in event-study

regression. First, we normalize -1 = 0 so that all other k are treatment effects relative to the

the last month of the pre-treatment period. Second, we impose the following endpoint restrictions:

k =  for k < -3 and k =  for k > 11 and make sure that all households in the analysis

have balanced panel in the event-time within k = [-3, 11]. In this way, we make sure that k in

k = [-3, 11] are estimated from the same set of households and comparable. Finally, uit is the error

term, and we cluster the standard error at the building level to account both for within-building

correlation and serial correlation.

       In Figure 1, we show the estimates of k in k = [-3, 11]--between one year before and four years

after the policy assignment. This figure provides three key results. First, there is no statistically

significant pre-trend before the policy introduction. Second, the policy impact becomes larger in

the second and third years after the policy implementation, and it persists in the fourth year. In

Table 1, we estimate k for each treatment year. The results indicates that the ITT was a reduction

in heating usage by 13% in the first year, 21% in the second year, 27% in the third year, and 31%

in the fourth year.7
   7
   yit is heating usage in log. Therefore, k (-0.136, -0.230, -309, -0.367 in Table 1) provide the ITT in log points.
The ITT in percentage changes can be obtained by exp(k ) - 1.




                                                         8
3.2      Average Treatment Effect on the Treated and the Heterogeneity

Under the standard assumptions for the local average treatment effect (LATE), the instrumental

variable (IV) estimator provides the average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) because our
                                                                                          k
incomplete compliance was only on the treatment group. To estimate the ATET, we include Tit

(household i's actual treatment status in event-time k ) as right-hand-side variables in equation (1),
                               k ) as instruments. Column 2 in Table 1 suggests that the ATET
and use treatment assignment (Dit

was a reduction in usage by 18% in the first year, 28% in the second year, 33.4% in the third year,

and 36.3% in the fourth year.8

       These findings suggest evidence of learning--heating demand became more elastic in the long

run. We investigate two dimensions of this long-run dynamics in energy demand by estimating

heterogeneity in the ATET. In Panel A of Figure 2, we divide treatment days into quartiles of daily

average temperature. The ATET is similar between colder and warmer days in the first year of

treatment. However, after the second year of treatment, the response becomes larger on warmer

days relative to colder days. It suggests that consumers gradually learn how to wisely save energy.

In the absence of marginal incentives, they did not have to save heating in both warm and cold days.

With a price incentive, it is reasonable to save more heating on warm days than cold days. The figure

suggests that this behavior gradually occurred over time. In Panel B, we divide households into

two groups by housing price, which is a proxy for wealth. we find that relatively-poorer households

became responsive to prices over time, while richer households responded similarly between the

short run and long run. This result indicates that learning is particularly sizable for less-wealthy

households.


3.3      Validity of the Identification Assumptions.

The validity of our quasi-experiment is subject to a standard set of identification assumptions for

event-study research design. The most important assumption in our estimation is the parallel trend

in counterfactual outcomes. In the absence of treatment, the trajectory of the outcome variable

(heating usage) has to be parallel between treatment and control groups. Although this is an

untestable assumption, we provide two pieces of supporting evidence. The first evidence is the
   8
   Because yit is heating usage in log, k (-0.20, -0.33, -0.40, -0.45 in Table 1) are the ATET in log points. The
ATET in percentage changes can be obtained by exp(k - 1).



                                                       9
absence of the pre-trend in Figure 1--the trajectory of heating usage was not statistically different

between treatment and control groups prior to the treatment periods. Second, we test if observable

building characteristics are associated with the the staggered timings of policy implementation. We

do not find statistically significant relationships between the timings of policy implementation and

the year of building, size of residence, and house value in Table A.2.

    To interpret our IV estimate as the ATET, we also need the standard assumptions for the LATE

(Imbens and Angrist, 1994). A potential concern is that the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assump-

tion (SUTVA) can be violated if a household's usage is affected by other households' compliance

decisions. We examine if we observe evidence of such violation in our data. We test if a change

in household's heating usage is correlated with compliance decisions of neighbors, and do not find

statistically significant correlation in Table A.4.



4     Demand Estimation and Encompassing Test

In this section, we use the policy-induced price variation to estimate demand for heating and imple-

ment the encompassing test (Davidson and MacKinnon, 1993; Ito, 2014) to examine if consumers

in our data properly distinguished fixed costs from variable costs. Testing this hypothesis is key to

the welfare analysis in Section 5.


4.1    Conceptual Framework

Before we present our empirical strategy, it is useful to provide a brief conceptual framework.

Consider a utility maximization problem for heating demand y . A consumer has income I , the

marginal price of heating is mp, and the fixed charge is f . We consider a quasi-linear utility

function u = v (y ) - mp · y - f + I .9

    A standard utility maximization problem simply solves the first order condition for the utility

function, which leads to a condition: v (y  ) = mp. Therefore, the optimal usage (y  ) can be

obtained when the marginal utility from heating usage equals to the marginal price. On the other
   9
     A quasi-utility function assumes that there is no income effect. This assumption is likely to be a valid in our
empirical context because the income effect of the CBB policy was likely to be very small. The CBB policy reduced
the annual fixed charge by about $226 per household. The average household income in Tianjin in our sample period
was $15,041. Therefore, $200 was about 1.5 percent of household income. In the literature on residential energy
demand, the income elasticity is found quite small, around 0.01. It implies that the income effect of the CBB policy
on usage would be a change in usage by about 0.015 percent.


                                                        10
hand, Liebman and Zeckhauser (2004) suggest the possibility that the consumer may misperceive

a change in average price (ap) as a change in marginal price. Two-part tariffs could create this

misperception if consumers do not properly distinguish between changes in fixed costs and changes

in variable costs. In this case, the optimal usage can be characterized by v (y  ) = ap.

       In Section 2.2, we described that the policy introduction created different variation in changes in

marginal and average prices (Figure A.1). We exploit this policy-induced variation to test whether

consumers respond to marginal price or average price under a two-part tariff.


4.2       Empirical Analysis and Results of Encompassing Tests

Consider the following equation:


                                   yit = i + st + 1 M P it + 2 AP it + uit ,                                         (2)


where the dependent variable (the log of heating usage) and fixed effects are the same as equation

(1). M Pit and APit are the marginal and average prices of heating usage. In the encompassing test,

we examine how the inclusion of one variable or another (M Pit and APit ) affects the estimates of

1 and 2 . If consumer behavior is more consistent with standard economic theory, the inclusion of

APit would not affect the estimate of 1 , and the estimate of 2 would be near zero.10 We expect an

opposite result if consumer behavior is more consistent with shmeduling (Liebman and Zeckhauser,

2004).

       The price variables are endogenous for two reasons. First, the policy's incomplete compliance

implies that self-selection into the new prices can be correlated with uit . Second, APit is a function

of usage, which creates a simultaneity between usage and prices (Borenstein, 2009; Ito, 2014).
                                                                                               P I and
       To address this problem, we use predicted prices based on policy-induced variation (M Pit
   P I ) as instruments. M P P I takes zero for the pre-policy period and 0.014 USD for the post-
APit                        it

policy period, regardless of customer i's compliance. In this way, the instrument is not subject to

endogeneity from incomplete compliance. As discussed in Section 2.2, the policy-induced variation

in average price is substantially different between consumers with lower usage per square meter and
                                                                                     P I , following
those with higher usage per square meter. To capture this variation, we construct APit
  10
     This may not be the case if the income effect is large enough, although this is unlikely in our case as we described
in footnote 9.


                                                           11
the literature on nonlinear income taxation and nonlinear pricing (Saez, Slemrod and Giertz, 2012;

Ito, 2014). We use yi to denote customer i 's average daily usage per square meter prior to the first
                                                                           P I with household i's
treatment year. We calculate the policy-induced predicted average price APit

yi with the price schedule at time t.

   The first stage of this instrument is strong because a consumer's past usage is a strong predictor

for their future usage (Chetty et al., 2011). However, Saez, Slemrod and Giertz (2012) and Ito

(2014) emphasize that the exclusion restriction is violated if the mean reversion of the outcome

variable is not properly controlled. In general, economic data--such as energy usage or income

earnings--show strong mean reversion. Customers with low yi are likely to increase their usage in

other periods, while those with high yi are likely to decrease their usage in other periods, for reasons

unrelated to their responses to prices.

   To address this concern, we take a nonparametric control approach, following Ito (2014). The

idea is that if there is a valid control group, one can include flexible controls for the mean reversion,

assuming that the mean reversion is not systematically different between treatment and control

groups. We make percentile groups (k = 1, ..., 100) based on yi . Then, we allow the day fixed

effects (st ) to differ by the percentile groups. This flexible control does not absorb the policy-

induced price variation in our research design because the event-study design provides control and

treatment groups within each percentile group.

   Columns 3 of Table 1 shows that the semi-elasticity with respect to marginal price is -14.9.

Because the dependent variable is the log of heating usage and the price variables are in dollars, the

estimate implies that one cent increase in marginal price would result in a 14.9 percent reduction in

usage. In column 4, we include both marginal and average prices. Including average price merely

changes the coefficient for marginal price, suggesting that the variation in average price does not

explain much about the variation in usage conditional on marginal price. This result suggests that

data are consistent with standard economic theory--consumers properly distinguish between fixed

and variable costs--and supports that a standard welfare analysis can be applied in Section 5.




                                                   12
5     Welfare Analysis

In Figure 3, we explain how consumption-based billing affects social welfare and consumer surplus.

Before the policy change, the regulated heating provider offered a tariff with zero marginal price

and a fixed charge. Then, the regulated provider introduced CBB as a form of two-part tariff with a

marginal price that was set equal to the marginal cost. In the figure, Y0 and Y1 are usage before and

after the introduction of CBB. A social welfare gain comes from the improved allocative efficiency

(C in the figure). In addition, suppose that there are unpriced environmental externalities. Then,

CBB creates another welfare gain (D in the figure) from reduced externalities.

    Consumer surplus can be increased or decreased by CBB. The annual fixed charges were 3.97 · s

dollars before the reform, where s is square meters of residence, and 1
                                                                      2 · 3.97 · s dollars after the reform.

Hence, for a quasi-linear utility function, the change in consumer surplus equals to 1
                                                                                     2 · 3.97 · s - (A + B )

in the figure. In this section, we calculate social welfare gain and changes in consumer surplus based

on our empirical findings in the previous sections.


5.1    Social Welfare

In Panel A of Table 2, we calculate social welfare gains based on the ITT estimates in Table 1.

The allocative efficiency (C in Figure 3) is 30.23 dollars per household per year and 129.54 million

dollars per year for Tianjin.

    To calculate an additional welfare gain from reduced environmental externalities (D in Figure

3), we need to know the externalities from heating production. We make the following steps to

provide an estimate. First, we leverage the heating provider's plant-level hourly emissions data

from the nation-wide continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS) to estimate the relationship

between heating consumption and emissions. As we report in Table A.3, we find that 1 percent

increase in heating consumption is associated with 0.523 percent increase in PM10 concentrations,

where the baseline PM10 concentrations before the reform was 143. This implies that our ITT

estimate (31 percent reductions in usage) induced a reductions in PM10 concentrations by 23.185

ug/m3 . Second, Ito and Zhang (2020) suggests that a Chinese household's marginal willingness

to pay for a reduction in PM10 is 1.34 dollars per ug/m3 of PM10 per year. Then, multiplying

these two estimates imply that the WTP for the policy-induced reduction in PM10 is 31.07 dollars


                                                    13
per household per year and 133.15 million dollars per year for Tianjin. Note that this estimate is

likely to be a lower bound estimate for environmental externalities because this calculation does

not include other potential environmental externalities than PM10 and the MWTP for reductions

in PM10 in Ito and Zhang (forthcoming) is a lower bound estimate for reasons described in that

study.

   The total social welfare gain (C + D in Figure 3) is 61.29 dollars per household per year and

262.68 million dollars per year for Tianjin. To put this number in context, we also show that

this social welfare gain is 16.6 percent of the heating provider's pre-reform total annual revenue.

The one-time administrative cost of introducing CBB including the cost of installing meters was

99.22 dollars per household, which implies the policy's benefit exceeded its cost halfway through

the second treatment year.


5.2      Consumer Surplus

In Panel B of Table 2, we divide households into two groups by their housing prices, and calculate

the changes in consumer surplus for each group. Both groups had increases in consumer surplus,

and the increase was larger for households with higher housing prices. Similarly, the payment for

heating decreased for both groups, with a larger decrease for households with higher housing prices.

   These results provide two key implications. First, the policy produced overall gains in consumer

surplus in addition to the social welfare gains. This is a policy-relevant finding because how the

policy's impacts on consumers matter to the adaptation of consumption-based billing. Second, the

results suggest that the introduction of consumption-based billing seems regressive in the sense that

gains in consumer surplus were larger for the rich. However, a more accurate statement is that the

pre-existing policy--a fixed charge based on square feet of residence--was quite progressive because

it was essentially a cross-subsidy from households with larger homes to those with smaller homes.

The introduction of consumption-based billing lowered this cross-subsidy, and therefore, seemed

more regressive than the pre-existing policy.




                                                 14
6    Conclusion

In this paper, we examined long-run effects of a recent heating reform in China that replaced

a commonly-used fixed-payment system with individually-metered pricing. Using staggered pol-

icy rollouts and administrative data on household-level daily heating consumption, we found that

the reform induced long-run reductions in heating usage and generated substantial welfare gains.

Consumers gradually learned how to conserve heating effectively, making short-run evaluations un-

derestimate the policy impacts. Our results suggest that energy price reform is an effective way

to improve allocative efficiency and air quality in developing countries, where unmetered-inefficient

pricing is still ubiquitous.




                                                 15
References
Allcott, Hunt, and Todd Rogers. 2014. "The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral
 Interventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation." American Economic Review,
 104(10): 3003­37.

Almond, Douglas, Yuyu Chen, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2009. "Winter Heat-
 ing or Clean Air? Unintended Impacts of China's Huai River Policy." The American Economic
 Review: Papers and Proceedings, 99(2): 184­190.

Arceo, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. 2012. "Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant
 Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City."
 NBER Working Paper No. 18349.

Aroonruengsawat, Anin, and Maximilian Auffhammer. 2011. "Impacts of Climate Change on
 Residential Electricity Consumption: Evidence from Billing Data." National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc NBER Chapters.

Badiani-Magnusson, Reena, and Katrina Jessoe. 2019. "Electricity Prices, Groundwater,
 and Agriculture: The Environmental and Agricultural Impacts of Electricity Subsidies in India."
 , ed. Wolfram Schlenker, Chapter Agricultural Productivity and Producer Behavior, 157­183.
 University of Chicago Press.

Barnwal, Prabhat. 2014. "Curbing leakage in public programs with direct benefit transfers."
 Working Paper.

Borenstein, Severin. 2009. "To What Electricity Price Do Consumers Respond? Residential
 Demand Elasticity Under Increasing-Block Pricing." Working Paper.

Borenstein, Severin. 2010. "The Redistributional Impact of Non-linear Electricity Pricing." Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 15822.

Borenstein, Severin, and Lucas Davis. 2012. "The equity and efficiency of two-part tariffs in
 US natural gas markets." The Journal of Law and Economics, 55(1): 75­128.

Burlig, Fiona, Louis Preonas, and Matt Woerman. 2020. "Spatial externalities in groundwater
 extraction: Evidence from California agriculture." Working Paper.

Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2013. "Evidence
 on the impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from China's Huai River
 policy." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(32): 12936­12941.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. "Adjustment
 Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish
 Tax Records." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 749­804.

Costa, Francisco, and François Gerard. 2018. "Hysteresis and the welfare effect of corrective
 policies: Theory and evidence from an energy-saving program." National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Davidson, Russell, and James G. MacKinnon. 1993. "Estimation and Inference in Economet-
 rics." Oxford University Press OUP Catalogue.


                                              16
Davis, Lucas W. 2012. "Evaluating the Slow Adoption of Energy Efficient Investments Are Renters
 Less Likely to Have Energy Efficient Appliances?" , ed. Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram
 Vol. The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy. University of Chicago Press.

Davis, Lucas W., Alan Fuchs, and Paul J. Gertler. 2014. "Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a
 Large-Scale Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico." American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 6(4).

Deryugina, Tatyana, Alexander MacKay, and Julian Reif. 2020. "The long-run dynamics of
 electricity demand: Evidence from municipal aggregation." American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 12(1): 86­114.

Diplomat. 2018. "Turkmenistan Set to Rollback Subsidies for Good."

Ebenstein, Avaraham, Maoyong Fan, Michael Greenstone, Guojun He, and Maigeng
 Zhou. 2017. "New evidence on the impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy
 from China's Huai River Policy." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(39): 10384­
 10389.

Greenstone, Michael, and Rema Hanna. 2014. "Environmental Regulations, Air and Water
 Pollution, and Infant Mortality in India." American Economic Review, 104(10): 3038­3072.

Hanna, Rema, and Paulina Oliva. 2015. "The effect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence
 from a natural experiment in Mexico City." Journal of Public Economics, 122: 68­79.

Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. "Identification and Estimation of Local
  Average Treatment Effects." Econometrica, 62(2): 467­475.

Information Energy Agency. 2020. "Energy subsidies: Tracking the impact of fossil-fuel subsi-
  dies."

Ito, Koichiro. 2010. "How Do Consumers Respond to Nonlinear Pricing? Evidence from Household
  Electricity Demand." Working Paper University of California, Berkeley, Energy Institute at Haas.,
  , (210).

Ito, Koichiro. 2014. "Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Non-
  linear Electricity Pricing." American Economic Review, 104(2): 537­63.

Ito, Koichiro. 2015. "Asymmetric Incentives in Subsidies: Evidence from a Large-Scale Electricity
  Rebate Program." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(3): 209­37.

Ito, Koichiro, and Shuang Zhang. 2020. "Willingness to Pay for Clean Air: Evidence from Air
  Purifier Markets in China." Journal of Political Economy.

Ito, Koichiro, Takanori Ida, and Makoto Tanaka. 2018. "Moral Suasion and Economic Incen-
  tives: Field Experimental Evidence from Energy Demand." American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 10(1): 240­67.

Jack, B. Kelsey, and Grant Smith. 2015. "Pay as you go: Prepaid metering and electricity
  expenditures in South Africa." American Economic Review, 105(5): 237­41.

Jack, B. Kelsey, and Grant Smith. 2020. "Charging ahead: Prepaid electricity metering in
  South Africa." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

                                                17
Jayachandran, Seema. 2009. "Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from Indonesia's
  Wildfires." Journal of Human Resources, 44(4): 916­954.

Jessoe, Katrina, and David Rapson. 2014. "Knowledge is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence
  from Residential Energy Use." American Economic Review, 104(4): 1417­38.

Kline, Patrick. 2012. "The Impact of Juvenile Curfew Laws on Arrests of Youth and Adults."
 American Law and Economics Review, 14(1): 44­67.

Lee, Kenneth, Edward Miguel, and Catherine Wolfram. 2020. "Experimental Evidence on
  the Economics of Rural Electrification." Journal of Political Economy.

Liebman,       Jeffrey,        and     Richard        Zeckhauser.      2004.     "Schmeduling."
  www.hks.harvard.edu/jeffreyliebman/schmeduling.pdf.

McCrary, Justin. 2007. "The Effect of Court-Ordered Hiring Quotas on the Composition and
 Quality of Police." American Economic Review, 97(1): 318­353.

McRae, Shaun. 2015a. "Efficiency and Equity Effects of Electricity Metering: Evidence from
 Colombia." Working Paper.

McRae, Shaun. 2015b. "Infrastructure quality and the subsidy trap." American Economic Review,
 105(1): 35­66.

Ryan, Nicholas, and Anant Sudarshan. 2018. "The Efficiency of Rationing: Agricultural Power
 Subsidies, Power Supply and Groundwater Depletion in Rajasthan." Working Paper.

Saez, Emmanuel, Joel B. Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz. 2012. "The elasticity of taxable
  income with respect to marginal tax rates: A critical review." Journal of Economic Literature,
  50(1): 3­50.

Wolak, Frank A. 2011. "Do Residential Customers Respond to Hourly Prices? Evidence from a
 Dynamic Pricing Experiment." The American Economic Review, 101(3): 83­87.

Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef, and Paul Gertler. 2012. "How will energy demand develop
 in the developing world?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 119­38.




                                              18
                                               Figure 1: Event-Study Analysis: Intention-to-Treat (ITT)




                          .1
                                          Before CBB           First year    Second year      Third year     Forth year
                          0         -.1
               ln(daily heating usage)
            -.4     -.3   -.5-.2




                                          -3     -2   -1   0     1     2     3     4      5    6     7   8   9   10   11
                                                               Month relative to the introduction of CBB

Notes: This figure shows the ITT estimates from equation (1). There are three months in each treatment
year because the heating season is December, January, and February. The bars indicate the 95 percent
confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the building level.




                                                                              19
        Figure 2: Heterogeneity in the Average Treatment Effects on the Treated (ATET)

                                                      Panel A: Heterogeneity by temperature of the day



                                0
               change in ln daily heating usage
                      -1        -1.5 -.5




                                                  1                    2                     3                        4
                                                                             Post-CBB year

                                                            Temperature quartile 1           Temperature quartile 2
                                                            Temperature quartile 3           Temperature quartile 4




                                                          Panel B: Heterogeneity by housing prices
                                0
               change in ln daily heating usage
                    -.6        -.4
                                -.8      -.2




                                                  1                    2                     3                        4
                                                                             Post-CBB Year

                                                           Low home value group              High home value group


Notes: Panel A shows the ATET by quartiles of daily temperature. The thresholds for the quartiles are 25.8,
29.9, and 33.7 F. Panel B shows the ATET for households whose house values are lower than the median in
our data (512,885 dollars) and those whose housing prices are higher than the median.



                                                                                20
                      Figure 3: Welfare Impacts of Consumption-Based Billing

                  Price




                               Demand

                                                                    Social Marginal Cost


                                                E              D
                                                                             Externality

                              Marginal Cost


                                                                C

                                   A                      B


                                                    Y1                 Y0            Usage
Notes: This figure shows the conceptual framework for the welfare impacts of consumption-based billing. Y0
and Y1 are usage before and after the introduction of CBB. A social welfare gain comes from the improved
allocative efficiency (C in the figure) and reduced environmental externalities (D in the figure). A change in
consumer surplus is the change in the fixed payment plus -(A + B ) in the figure.




                                                     21
                                 Table 1: Main Estimation Results

                           Dependent variable: Log of daily heating usage
                                              (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)
                                             ITT             ATET              Encompassing Test
First year of treatment                     -0.136           -0.205
                                           (0.029)          (0.044)
Second year of treatment                    -0.230           -0.331
                                           (0.047)          (0.077)
Third year of treatment                     -0.309           -0.407
                                           (0.069)          (0.109)
Fourth year of treatment                    -0.367           -0.451
                                           (0.089)          (0.148)
Marginal price                                                               -14.916          -14.928
                                                                             (1.359)          (1.348)
Average price                                                                                   -0.255
                                                                                               (0.353)

Observations                              2,332,745        2,332,745        2,332,745        2,332,745
R2                                           0.66
First-Stage F-Stat                                           17.12           2135.55           65.11
Estimation                                   OLS              IV               IV               IV
Household FE                                  Y                Y                Y                Y
Day*First data year FE                        Y                Y
Day*First data year FE*Pct FE                                                   Y                Y
Notes: This table shows the estimation results from equations (1) and (2). Standard errors in parentheses
are clustered at the building level.




                                                     22
                      Table 2: Welfare Gains from Consumption-Based Billing

                                        Panel A: Social welfare

                                                     Welfare gain per          Welfare gain for Tianjin
                                                   household (USD/year)         (million USD/year)
Social welfare gain from improved                           30.23                        129.54
allocative efficiency (C in Figure 3)
Social welfare gain from reduced                            31.07                        133.15
environmental externalities (D in Figure 3)
Total social welfare gain                                   61.29                        262.68
(C+D in Figure 3)
Social welfare gain relative to                                                          16.6%
pre-reform total revenue
                                      Panel B: Consumer surplus

                                                      Households with              Households with
                                                     lower home value             higher home value
Consumer surplus gains (USD/year)                           0.25                         26.72

Percentage changes in payment                                -6%                         -13%
relative to pre-reform
Notes: See texts in section 5 how we calculate the welfare gains and consumer surplus.




                                                   23
                   Online Appendices: Not For Publication

A    Additional Tables

                                 Table A.1: Summary Statistics

Daily heating usage (kWh)                                         106.27
                                                                  (49.15)
Total heating usage per heating season (kWh)                     13,092.5
                                                                 (4,760.7)
Heating bill per heating season before reform (dollar)             469.2
                                                                  (148.9)
Heating bill per heating season after reform (dollar)              419.1
                                                                  (129.5)
Square meter of the residence                                      118.2
                                                                  (37.51)
Housing price (dollar)                                            544,523
                                                                 (232,330)
Take-up rate of the CBB policy                                     0.64
                                                                  (0.48)
Number of households                                               3,874
Observations                                                     2,332,754




                                                24
                       Table A.2: Rollout Timing and Building Characteristics

                       Dependent variable: Rollout year of usage-based pricing
Year of build                                                                                      0.008
                                                                                                  (0.029)

Average condo size (square meter)                                                                  -0.001
                                                                                                  (0.002)

Average home price per square meter (1,000 dollars)                                                0.028
                                                                                                  (0.036)
First meter data year FE                                                                             Y
Observations                                                                                        171
R2                                                                                                  0.84
Notes: In this table, we test if observable building characteristics are associated with the the staggered
rollout timings of policy implementation. The observations are at the building level. The dependent variable
is the rollout year of consumption-based billing.




                                                    25
                      Table A.3: Household Heating Usage and Plant Emissions

                                                 (1)                   (2)                    (3)
                                               lnSO2                 lnNOX                  lnPM


ln(Daily total heating usage)                 1.032                  0.700                 0.523
                                              (0.339)                (0.227)               (0.145)
Observations                                     270                   270                   270
R2                                               0.72                  0.94                  0.82
Year-month FE                                     Y                     Y                     Y
Notes: In this table, we estimate the relationship between heating usage and plant-level emissions. We
observe high frequency (hourly) emissions that come from the main heating plant in the heating provider.
The data come from the nation-wide continuous emission monitoring systems (CEMS). From 2014, high-
emitting firms were required to upload hourly, automatically recorded pollutant-specific concentration data to
a publicly available, online platform for each province. Plant-level monitors are installed on stacks associated
with generating units and perform hourly measurements of the concentration of SO2 , NOx and PM in emitted
stack gases. To examine the relationship between household heating usage and plant emissions, we obtain
hourly emission data from the heating plant. For each of the three pollutants, we measure the plant's
average daily concentration by the average of all observed hourly values in a 24-hour period. Figure A.3
shows the scatter plot of these three variables, controlling for year-month fixed effects. Daily total heating
usage is positively correlated with plant-level daily SO2 concentration, and similarly with NOx and PM.
In this table, we control for year-by-month fixed effects and find that, a 1% increase in daily total heating
usage is associated with a 1.03% increase in the plant's daily SO2 emission concentration, a 0.7% increase in
NOx concentration and a 0.52% increase in PM concentration. The emission concentrations are measured
on stacks before the combustion gases go into the air, and therefore local weather conditions do not affect
the measures directly.




                                                        26
            Table A.4: Does Heating Usage Depends on Neighbors' Compliance Status?

                                                                ln(daily heating usage)
CBB*complied                                                            -0.089
                                                                         (0.024)
CBB*next door neighbor complied                                           -0.008
                                                                         (0.020)
CBB*upper level neighbor complied                                         0.010
                                                                         (0.015)
CBB*lower level neighbor complied                                          0.003
                                                                         (0.015)
Observations                                                           2,331,098
R2                                                                        0.71
Day*Building FE                                                            Y
Household FE                                                               Y
Notes: In this table, we test if changes in heating usage are correlated with neighbors' compliance status.
The dependent variable is log of daily heating usage at the household level. The first coefficient implies
that changes in heating usage are negatively correlated with households own compliance status, which is
consistent with our main findings on the policy's treatment effects. The rest of the coefficients indicate that
there is little statistical evidence that changes in heating usage are correlated with neighbors' compliance
status.




                                                      27
Table A.5: Main Estimation Results: Based on Households Whose Data Are Available One Year
Before and One Year After the CBB

                           Dependent variable: Log of daily heating usage
                                                           (1)                                  (2)
                                                          ITT                                  ATET
First year of treatment                                   -0.115                               -0.170
                                                         (0.023)                              (0.033)

Observations                                            3,258,304                            3,258,304
R2                                                         0.66                                 0.66
First-Stage F-Stat                                                                             253.06
Estimation                                                OLS                                    IV
Household FE                                               Y                                     Y
Day*First data year FE                                     Y                                     Y
Notes: This table shows the estimation results from equations (1) and (2) using households whose data are
available one year before and one year after the CBB. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the
building level.




                                                   28
B     Additional Figures

                                     Figure A.1: Policy-Induced Changes in Marginal and Average Prices


                                    .025

                                            Change in Marginal Price = 0.014
           price (dollar per kWh)




                                       0




                                    -.025
                                               Change in Average Price




                                     -.05                           Cutoff value = 142

                                               50            100           142           200             250
                                                                   Usage/square meters

Notes: This figure shows the changes in marginal price and average price induced by the introduction of the
consumption-based billing policy.




                                                                      29
                                      Figure A.2: Rollout Timings of Consumption-Based Billing




                         6000
               number of households
               2000      0    4000




                                      2008   2009   2010   2011    2012   2013   2014   2015     2016
                                                                   year

Notes: This figure shows the rollout of the consumption-based billing policy.




                                                                  30
                    Figure A.3: Household Heating Usage and Plant Emissions
                                                                      (a) SO2 emission concentration (mg/m3 )




                                              2.8
                            ln(daily average SO2 concenration)
                              2         2.2     2.4
                                              1.8         2.6




                                                                 14                14.1               14.2                14.3           14.4
                                                                         ln(daily total heating usage of all households (in 1000 kwh))



                                                                      (b) NOx emission concentration (mg/m3 )
                                              4.2
                            ln(daily average NOX concenration)
                                    3.9        4
                                              3.8       4.1




                                                                 14                14.1               14.2                14.3           14.4
                                                                         ln(daily total heating usage of all households (in 1000 kwh))



                                                                      (c) PM emission concentration (mg/m3 )
                                              2.05
                            ln(daily average PM concenration)
                            1.85       1.9     1.95
                                              1.8          2




                                                                 14                14.1               14.2                14.3           14.4
                                                                         ln(daily total heating usage of all households (in 1000 kwh))



Notes: See notes in Table A.3.




                                                                                                 31
Figure A.4: Event-Study Analysis: Intention-to-Treat (ITT): Based on Households Whose Data
Are Available One Year Before and One Year After the CBB



                         .1
                                            Before CBB                                    First year
             ln(daily heating usage)
               -.1       -.2     0




                                       -3       -2               -1              0             1       2
                                                     Month relative to the introduction of CBB

Notes: This figure shows the ITT estimates from equation (1) using households whose data are available one
year before and one year after the CBB. The bars indicate the 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard
errors are clustered at the building level.




                                                                    32
