                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     IMMIGRATION AND WORKER-FIRM MATCHING

                                        Gianluca Orefice
                                         Giovanni Peri

                                      Working Paper 26860
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26860


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




This work benefited from a State aid managed by the National Agency for Research, through the
program "Investissements devenir" with the following reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 (Remote
Access to data CASD). We are grateful to Frederic Docquier, Lionel Fontagne', Hillel Rapoport,
Ariell Reshef, Gonzague Vannoorenberghe and participants to seminars held at University of
Paris 1, Cergy-Pontoise, IESEG, Paris School of Economics, Universit\'{e} Catholique de
Louvain and OECD-CEPII Migration conference for insightful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gianluca Orefice and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Immigration and Worker-Firm Matching
Gianluca Orefice and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 26860
March 2020
JEL No. F22,J24,L25

                                          ABSTRACT

The process of matching between firms and workers is an important mechanism in determining
the distribution of wages. In a labor market characterised by large dispersion of workers'
productivity and worker-firm complementarity, high quality firms have strong incentives to
screen for the quality of workers. This process will increase the positive quality association of
firm-worker matches known as positive assortative matching (PAM). Immigration in a local labor
market, by increasing the variance of workers abilities, may drive stronger PAM between firms
and workers. Using French matched employer-employee (DADS) data over the period 1995-2005
we document that positive supply-driven changes of immigrant workers in a district increased the
strength of PAM. We then show that this association is consistent with causality, is quantitatively
significant, and is associated with higher average productivity and firm profits, but also with
higher wage dispersion. We also show that the increased degree of positive assortative matching
is mainly reached by high-productive firms "losing" lower quality workers and "attracting" higher
quality workers.


Gianluca Orefice
Department of Economics
University of Paris-Dauphine
Place du Marechal de Lattre de Tassigny
75016 Paris.
France
gianluca.orefice@dauphine.psl.eu

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction

Recent studies have shown that a significant part of wage differences across similar workers is due to their

location and the employer they work for. Geographic location, and especially the density of economic activity

around one's workplace, have been associated with large wage premia (e.g. Glaeser and Mare 2001; Combes,

Duranton and Gobillon 2008; and De La Roca and Puga 2017). More recently the quality of the firm where a

worker is employed, and the specific worker-firm match, have also been shown to explain a significant percentage

of workers' wage differentials (Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis 1999; Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott 2007;

Card, Heining and Kline 2013). Those components of a worker's wage may also be related to each other as

the location of a worker affects the employment options available locally and the type of worker-firm matching

taking place (Dauth, Findeisen, Moretti & Suedekum 2018).

    In particular, local conditions can affect the wage of individuals independently from his/her characteristics

by attracting better "quality" firms or by affecting the efficiency of worker-firm matches. Part of the "location

premium" in wages, associated with places where productivity and wages are high, is driven by the fact that

"good" locations are good because they attract good firms and may facilitate Positive Assortative Matching

(PAM hereafter), namely the matching of high-quality workers with high-productivity firms. This last feature,

in the presence of complementarities between workers and firms' quality would generate average wage and

productivity gains as well as higher dispersion of wages in "good" locations.

    Dauth et al. (2018) analyzes whether local density is associated with better average quality of firms and

with the intensity of PAM between firms and workers in that location. They find that high economic density

encourages stronger PAM. The reason that economic density may increase PAM is that in thicker labor markets

firms may have better access to information on workers, due to repeated interactions and frequent contact, and

top quality firms may be more aggressive in screening and attracting high quality workers, generating a strong

PAM. In the presence of complementarity between firm and worker quality, the aggregate result of PAM is

higher average surplus created, higher average wages and firms' profits, and higher dispersion of wages in local

labor markets.

    In this paper we analyze whether an inflow of foreign workers increases the extent of PAM between firms

and workers in a region. Immigration increases the size of the local market, and through a simple "scale"

effect, it may enhance the positive "thickness" externalities analyzed in Dauth et al. (2018). However, beyond

yielding a simple increase in density, immigration of foreign-born is also likely to increase the variety of local

abilities. Immigrants come from different backgrounds, cultures and experiences, and the range and variety of

their abilities are likely to be more dispersed than for natives. Moreover, due to linguistic and cultural barriers

their specific quality may be harder for local employers to assess, especially in early interactions. In this paper

we develop the hypothesis that when the share of immigrants in a labor market becomes larger, this drives


                                                        2
higher variance in the unobserved quality of workers, and higher uncertainty from the employers' point of view

on the actual type of workers. As a consequence, in the presence of productive complementarity in the quality

of firms and workers, high quality firms have stronger incentives to conduct screening of workers because their

return to a "positive match" is larger. Thus high-quality firms hire and retain high-quality workers (as they

can pay higher wages) leaving low-quality workers to low-quality firms. Hence the degree of positive assortative

matching increases in areas with more immigrants. This has positive effects on average productivity and average

wages in the labor market. However, it also generates larger dispersion of wages.1

    To test this hypothesis we use matched employer-employee data in all French districts in the years 1995-2005.

With these data we calculate the average quality of workers and firms over the whole period, and can observe

their match each year as in Card et al. (2013); Davidson, Heyman, Matusz, Sjoholm & Zhu (2012); and Dauth

et al. (2018). We then approximate the strength of PAM in two ways: first, using the rank correlation between

worker and firm quality in a district (Dauth et al. 2018); second, using the (net) share of positive assortative

matches in the district, calculated as share of firm-worker matches where both parties are above or both below

the mean quality net of the share of mismatches (mismatches are calculated as those matches where firms are

above median quality and workers below, or vice-versa), as in Davidson et al. 2012. We then analyze whether

the change in immigrant share in each district is associated with the change in these measures. Put more

simply, we analyze whether the presence of immigrants increases the strength of the positive quality association

of firm-worker match: do high-quality firms become more likely to employ high-quality workers in labor markets

with more immigrants? To address the endogeneity problem of immigration, we propose a modified approach

of the shift share instrument a
                              ` la Card (2001). We use the past share of immigrants across districts, interacted

with predicted (rather than observed ) inflows of immigrants based on the origin-specific flows of immigrants

to other EU-15 countries (excluding France).2 To test the validity of this modified shift-share instrument, we

check its correlation with pre-period economic and demographic variables as suggested by Goldsmith-Pinkham,

Sorkin & Swift (2019), and subject it to a plausible exogeneity test following Conley, Hansen & Rossi (2012).

The use of this instrument and its validity checks are not novel contributions of the paper, but they ensure that

our use of the IV strategy is sound. The innovation we offer is the analysis of assortative firm-worker matching

as a local channel through which increased immigration in a region may affect firm outcomes and, through their

matches with workers, average productivity and wages.

    We show evidence that an increase in the share of migrant workers in a district is associated with stronger

assortative matching between firms and workers. This result is robust to the specific measure of assortative
   1 This effect is different from other potential productivity effects analyzed in the literature, even when considering search and

matching. In Chassamboulli & Palivos (2014) and Battisti, Felbermayr, Peri & Poutvaara (2018), for example, immigration
attenuates the effects of search frictions in the labor market, decreasing the equilibrium unemployment, but the impact works
through a job creation channel different from that of this paper.
   2 By using the predicted inflows of immigrants we purge the IV of any France-specific factor that may have attracted immigrants

from a specific place-of-origin. We draw on the idea of Autor, Dorn & Hanson (2013) who instrument the Chinese import penetration
of US districts by using the non-US exposure to Chinese imports.


                                                                 3
matching and to different proxies for firm and worker quality.3 The IV estimates show results consistent with a

causal effect of larger immigrant share on stronger assortative matching. In particular, a one percentage point

increase in the supply-driven share of immigrants in the district implies an increase in the share of positive

assortative matches (net of mismatch) by 3.3 percentage points; corresponding to a 30% reduction in the PAM

gap between a district belonging to the 25th percentile of the PAM intensity distribution and the Parisian labor

market (which belongs to the top 75th percentile of the distribution). We also document that this effect is

particularly strong in districts with a higher dispersion of immigrant worker types (i.e. where the dispersion of

unobserved worker quality is higher and firms have stronger incentives to screen).

    We then provide some insight into the re-allocation of workers through which assortative matching is

achieved. As we cannot observe directly the screening intensity of firms, we analyze the types of moves across

firms to check if they are consistent with our view that assortative matching is achieved via screening. In par-

ticular, better screening would be highly valuable to high-quality firms as immigration increases, so one should

observe the strongest transition of high-quality workers toward high-quality firms. Similarly, the high-quality

firms should be those getting rid of low-quality workers at higher rate. In line with this prediction, in response

to immigration, we see that high-quality workers (those above the median of the quality distribution) become

much more likely to transition from low- to high-"quality" firms (those respectively below/above the median of

the firm quality distribution). Similarly, low-quality workers (below the median of the worker quality distribu-

tion) become more likely to make the the opposite transition from the top two quartiles of firm quality toward

the bottom. This movement of workers in response to immigration is consistent with higher screening from the

top quality firms, and explains the mechanism underlying the positive effect of immigration on the strength of

PAM.

    The main contribution of this paper is the identification and quantification of an additional channel through

which immigrants have an effect on the average productivity, wage, and on wage distribution in receiving

economies. The effect of immigration on worker-firm matching highlighted in this paper provides an additional

unexplored mechanism that may contribute to explain the positive productivity effect of migration shown

empirically in the previous literature (Peri 2012; Mitaritonna, Orefice and Peri 2017). This channel may also

contribute to explain the non-negative effect of immigrants on native average wages in local labor markets

(Pischke & Velling 1997, Card 2005, Ottaviano & Peri 2012, Dustmann, Frattini & Preston 2013).

    Two research branches in the literature are related to this paper. The first is the growing literature on

what affects matching across firms and workers in local labor markets. Davidson et al. (2012) show that

trade liberalization improves the degree of matching for export-oriented industries. In the same vein, Davidson,

Heyman, Matusz, Sjoholm & Zhu (2014) shows that export-oriented sectors display a higher correlation between
  3 Insection 3.2 we describe how we approximate the quality of workers and firms, while in section 4 we describe the two measures
of PAM adopted in the paper.



                                                                4
firm and worker types. Using French firm level data, Bombardini, Orefice & Tito (2019) show that the workforce

composition of exporting firms has lower dispersion of worker types than domestic firms; this supports the idea

that exporters have higher incentive to screen for high quality workers. Dauth et al. (2018) find that high

local density encourages stronger PAM. In thicker labor markets, high quality firms may be more effective in

attracting high quality workers, generating strong positive assortative matching. The second branch of the

literature to which this paper contributes is that on the local economic consequences of migration. The new

channel highlighted in this paper provides an additional explanation for the non-negative effect of migration on

the average wages of native workers highlighted in the literature (see Friedberg and Hunt 1995 and Lewis and Peri

2015 for surveys of the labor market effect of migration).4 While the findings of small wage effects and possible

positive productivity effects from immigration are common in the literature,5 to the best of our knowledge this

is the first paper that focuses on assortative matching between firms and workers across local labor markets

as a channel to explain the non-negative wage effect of immigration. The only (partial) exception is a recent

theoretical contribution by Burzynski & Gola (2019) that includes a matching mechanism not empirically

tested in a general equilibrium model with heterogeneous firms and migration. We develop a much simpler

model to illustrate how higher dispersion in worker ability, due to higher shares of immigrants, can generate

stronger local assortative matching in the presence of screening. While we do not directly observe screening by

firms, we test some implications of the model relative to the degree of assortative matching, immigrant inflows,

and the transition of high-/low-quality workers toward high-/low-quality firms.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we present the theoretical framework

intended as a guide for the empirical exercise. In sections 3 and 4 we respectively discuss the data, the measures

used to approximate firm and worker quality, and the strength of PAM. In section 5 we discuss the empirical

strategy and some stylized facts. In sections 6 we present the estimated effect of increased immigration on

measures of assortative matching and on average district wages and profits and wage dispersion. In section 7

we analyze the impact of immigration on mobility and reallocation of workers across firms which represents the

mechanism through which local labor markets increase their degree of assortative matching. The final section

concludes.
    4 Other explanations for the small effect of migration on native wages include the productivity increases resulting from more

efficient allocation of tasks between native and migrant workers, migrant and native workers' complementarity, and a boost in
innovation at the aggregate level (Peri 2012; Peri and Sparber 2009) and at firm level (Mitaritonna et al. 2017).
    5 Card (2005) found that immigrants had little if any effect on wages at the local labor market level. Similarly Pischke & Velling

(1997) and Dustmann et al. (2013), respectively for Germany and UK, do not find any negative effect of immigration on the wages
of native workers.




                                                                  5
2     A simple model

In our empirical analysis we consider whether an increase in the share of immigrants within a labor market

increases the intensity of positive assortative matching. This means that higher-quality firms match with

higher-quality workers, and lower-quality firms with lower-quality workers. If firms have imperfect knowledge

about workers' quality and if the presence of immigrants increases the variance of workers' quality (types)

then, in the presence of strong complementarity between quality of firms and quality of workers, the more

productive firms have larger incentives to screen when there are more immigrants in the market. More firms

doing screening will result in a higher probability of PAM. This is due to the fact that high-quality firms have

a larger return to matching with higher-quality workers, and hence their premium from assortative matching

increases as the quality of the top workers increases. Stronger assortative matching will also generate higher

average productivity and higher average profits among firms within each local labor market, as well as a higher

dispersion of productivity.6 In this section we propose a simple model to illustrate such mechanism in the

context of local labor markets with native and migrant workers who differ only in the different dispersion of

their quality distribution. We first show the key results for an economy with only two quality (types) of workers

and firms: high- and low-productivity. We then generalize the main insight and result to the case of N types

(quality levels) for workers and firms.


2.1     Model with two types of Firms and Workers

Consider an economy with labor force of unit mass, in which the average quality/effectiveness of labor, equal to

w , is assumed to be larger than one. Workers in this labor market come in two different quality levels (types)

with productivity equal to w - , for the low productivity ones, and w + , for the high productivity group.

Both values are also assumed to be larger than one for simplicity. We assume that both groups have the same

size so that each quality level of worker, denoted as µ = [w - , w + ], comprises 1/2 of the total labor force.

We also assume that while all workers can observe their quality (type), firms cannot observe the specific quality

of the worker. Therefore      is also the standard deviation of the expected quality of workers in a group, from the

firm's perspective. There is also a unit mass of firms with average quality (productivity) f and among them

half have relatively high quality f + x and half of them have relatively low quality f - x where both values

are larger than one. This generates a distribution of firms over the quality levels  = [f - x, f + x], with half

of the firms in each group.

    Each firm j matches to one worker i,7 and produces surplus (value added) according to the following
   6 A similar mechanism is analyzed for the effect of trade liberalization on the intensity of assortative matching by Helpman,

Itskhoki & Redding (2010) and Davidson, Matusz & Shevchenko (2008).
   7 In a recent paper Eeckhout & Kircher (2018) show that assortative matching happens across firms of different size (i.e. when

the firm matches with many workers). In their model the firms choose both the quality and the quantity (size) of their workforce.
In this case, positive assortative matching not only depends on the degree of complementarity between types, but also on the



                                                               6
production function, in which the quality of firms and workers are complementary:



                                                        Yi,j = (µi  j )                                                        (1)


This expression is a special case that captures the complementarity between the quality of firm and workers

and the super-modularity of production.8 Once the match has taken place and production begins, the surplus

is split equally between wage of the worker and profit of the firm, so that the wage of worker i is:9

                                                                (µi  j )
                                                        Wi =                                                                   (2)
                                                                    2

and the profit of firm j is:
                                                               (µi  j )
                                                        i =                                                                    (3)
                                                                   2

    We assume that the firms have imperfect information and cannot distinguish the identity of high- and low-

quality workers without screening them. Those with quality w + and w - will look identical to each firm.

Firms, however, can pay a cost of screening, K , after which they are able to perfectly observe worker quality.

For the moment we assume that this screening cost is equal for each firm (in the next section we relax this

assumption).

    The incentives to pay the cost of screening are higher for the high-quality firms in each group as they

have a larger profit to earn from matching with high-quality workers, due to the convexity of production and

complementarity between high-quality firms and high-quality workers. Hence if the screening cost is below a

certain threshold the high-quality firms (those with quality f + x) will pay the screening cost and will match

with high-quality workers, leaving low-quality workers to low-quality firms. This is, in effect, positive assortative

matching. However, if the screening cost, to be paid ex-ante,10 is above a certain threshold, high quality firms

will not pay it and there will be random matching in terms of quality of the workers, assuming that firm and

workers meet at random. The expected profit of the high-quality firms when screening and matching with the

best quality workers is:


                                                          (w + )(f + x)
                                               E (S ) =                 -K                                                     (4)
                                                               2

Their expected value when they do not screen and match randomly with workers is:
complementarity between types and quantity.
   8 The logic is that high-quality workers are paid more not only because of their innate quality, but also because they work for

high quality firms (as in Kremer 1993).
   9 The surplus can be split in any proportion between firm and worker. We choose 1/2 for simplicity.
  10 The screening cost can be thought also as a period of trial in which the high-quality firm learns the type of workers and then

starts production only if the worker is high-quality.




                                                                7
                                         0.5 (w + )(f + x) + 0.5 (w - )(f + x)
                              E (R ) =                                                                          (5)
                                                           2

Therefore high quality firms will screen if E (S ) > E (R ) which implies:


                                                       1
                                                 K<      (f + x)                                                (6)
                                                       2

If this condition is satisfied then the high-quality firms will screen and they will match with all the high-quality

workers, leaving the unmatched low-quality workers to the low-quality firms. Hence, if the condition above

is satisfied, full assortative matching prevails in this model, meaning that high-quality firms will match with

high-quality workers only, and low-quality firms with low-quality workers only. Notice that in this model what

matters is the screening cost for the high-quality firms. Those are the firms that, conditional on having paid

the screening cost K and thus having observed worker quality, will choose to match with all the high-quality

workers (notice that every high-quality worker would be employed by high-quality firms as they pay higher

wages). Hence, what matters is whether high-productivity firms decide to screen or to match randomly. If

the cost of screening K is different between high- and low-productivity firms, then it is the screening cost of

high-productivity firms that determines whether these firms screen of match randomly. Once high-productivity

firms screen and hire all high-quality workers and pay them more, the low-quality firms will match with the

remaining low-quality workers.

   Two simple implications derive from the equation above:


  1. If the cost of screening is equal across firms in a labor market, then the probability of observing high-

      quality firms screening for high-quality workers in that market is monotonic in the threshold value of K ,

      and increases with the standard deviation of workers' quality .

  2. For common screening costs, the probability of screening will be higher for firms in areas with higher

      average productivity, f .


2.2    The role of immigrants

We now introduce the population of immigrants to the model. Immigrants are treated as having a larger

standard deviation of types (uncertainty) but the same average quality of native workers. Immigrants come

from different backgrounds, so their adjustment to local labor markets can be very different. In general their

background and the quality of their education and working experience can be very different. Overall, as they

come from different countries, they are a more heterogeneous group than natives in their quality, even controlling

for their observable characteristics. We can think of this as a result of their country of origin diversity, but



                                                         8
also as a result of the different selection that they have in different countries (positive from some countries and

negative from others, as predicted by Borjas 1987). We will test the assumption of higher quality dispersion of

immigrants in the data in several ways - see section 4.1.2. In our simple model, this feature is captured by the

following condition:    I   >     N   where "I" indicates immigrants and "N" native workers. This immediately implies

that in a population of all immigrants, the probability of screening by the high-quality firms is higher than in

a population of all natives and therefore assortative matching would be more likely for a given screening cost.

   When the population in a labor market is a mixture of the two groups (I and N ), so is the average value of

workers'   which would be equal to [         I    shI +      N    (1 - shI )], where shI is the share of immigrants in the total

population of workers. Then the condition for high-quality firms to perform screening is:


                                                  1
                                           K<       [   I    shI +   N     (1 - shI )] (f + x)                              (7)
                                                  2

In this case the probability of screening and assortative matching increases in the share of immigrant workers

shI as long as the standard deviation of immigrants' quality is larger than that of natives' quality (and as long

as their average quality is the same). This will be a key implication that we test in the empirical part of the

paper, namely:

Proposition 1 For a given cost of screening, local markets with a larger share of immigrants have a stronger

incentive to perform screening which will result in PAM between workers and firms.

A corollary of (Proposition 1 ), based on equation 7, is that the probability of PAM is larger when the dispersion

of immigrant quality,       I,   is larger. We test this additional implication too:

Corollary 1.1 The effect of immigrant share on the incentive to perform screening and on improved PAM

between workers and firms is magnified in local labor markets with a greater dispersion in immigrant quality.

Another important implication of the model above is that average value-added (surplus) and profits of firms will

be larger in markets where PAM occurs, and hence will be positively associated with the share of immigrants.

This is easily proven by writing the difference between average surplus with PAM and average surplus with

random matching for firms. This difference is:



                                  1
        E (SS ) - E (SR ) =         [(w - )(f - x) + (w + )(f + x) - (w - )(f + x) - (w + )(f - x)]                         (8)
                                  2

The expression easily simplifies into (2 x), which is always larger than 0 as long as                   and x are greater than

0. Hence the average surplus in a region with PAM is always larger than the average surplus in a region with

random matching. This difference, equal to (2 x), grows in the standard deviation of workers' quality and

                                                                      9
the standard deviation of firms' quality. As workers and firms split the surplus (see equations 2 and 3), the

inequality in the expected surplus in equation (8) will carry over also to firms' average profit no matter how the

surplus is split. So the final implication of our simple model is that:


Proposition 2 Local markets with larger shares of immigrants (i.e. wider dispersion in unknown types) have

higher average firm profits.


This proposition will also be tested in the empirical section of the paper. Additionally, PAM will increase the

standard deviation of workers' wages and of firms' profits as the match distribution will be concentrated on the

extreme outcomes, (f - x)(w - ) and (f + x)(w + ), rather than on the intermediate ones, (f + x)(w - )

and (f - x)(w + ). Hence:

Proposition 3 A higher share of immigrants (i.e. wider dispersion in unknown types) will be associated with

higher wage- and profit-dispersion.

Notice that as the screening cost is paid ex-ante, once firms conduct any screening in a market they will screen

all workers, and they will therefore also generate positive assortative matching for native workers. Hence if the

cost of screening is such that firms would not screen when all workers are natives but they will screen when

there is a sufficiently large share of immigrants, then the presence of immigrants will also increase the assortative

matching of natives and therefore their average wages in the region. This positive impact on the matching of

natives takes place only if there is initial uncertainty about the quality of natives. If firms can perfectly observe

the quality of natives without screening, then the "spillovers" from screening on better matching native workers

does not occur. The fact that there also exists a non-negligible share of mismatches between workers and firms

in districts with lower immigration shares (as shown in table 2) suggests the presence of imperfect information

on the quality of native workers.


2.3    Model with many types of firms and workers and different screening costs

Let us now consider an economy similar to the one described in the previous section, but with 2N types of firms

and workers characterized by different productivity levels. In particular, workers' productivity can be any of the
                                -1                            -1
following 2N levels [w - , w - NN  , ...w - N , w + N ...w + NN  , w + ] so that one can rank their quality in

increasing order from i = -N to i = N and        is still a measure of overall quality dispersion. Similarly, assume
                                                                        -1                             -1
that there are 2N groups of firms of productivity equal to [f - x, f - NN            x
                                                                           x, ...f - N       x
                                                                                       , f + N ...f + NN  x, f + x].

Let's also assume that each group of firms, indexed by quality index j = -N, -N + 1, ... - 1, +1, N - 1, N pays

a screening cost Kj . In this case, the firms of top level quality (j = N ), with productivity equal to f + x are

those with the strongest incentives to screen. These firms will screen if the generated surplus from paying the



                                                         10
screening cost and assortatively matching with workers of top quality (w + ) is larger than the surplus than

matching randomly and not paying the screening cost. Namely:

                                                                           +N
                                                         1
                              (f + x) (w + ) - KN          (f + x)              w +       j                     (9)
                                                        2N                            N
                                                                       j =-N

This inequality is satisfied if:

                                                                       
                                                          N -1
                                              1
                                    KN    -                           j  (f + x)                              (10)
                                            2N - 1               N
                                                         j =-N


The expression in square brackets in the inequality (10) above is linear and increasing in , in x, and in f .

Therefore, for a given screening cost, the higher is    (the dispersion of workers' quality types), the higher is x

(which captures the dispersion of firm productivity), and the higher is average firm productivity f , the more

likely the top-quality group of firms will be to screen. If the inequality is satisfied, the top firm types do the

screening, match with the top quality workers, and the other 2N - 1 firm types are left to decide whether to

screen or to randomly match with the remaining 2N - 1 workers types. In general, for a firm of quality type

M with costs of screening KM , screening will be optimal if:

                                                                            
                                                              M -1
                                          M      1
                                   KM       -                              j  (f + x)                         (11)
                                          N   N +M -1                  N
                                                              j =-N


The expression in square brackets in the inequality (11) above is linear and increasing in M . Therefore as we

move to lower quality firms the incentive to do screening decreases monotonically. This has the following two

implications that generalize the results from a two-type model to this multi-type model:


   1. For a cost of screening that is constant among firm types or declining with quality, M , there will be

      a "marginal quality group" such that all groups of higher quality pay the screening cost and match

      assortatively, and those with lower quality do not screen and match randomly. This is an immediate

      consequence of the fact that the threshold for screening in (11) is increasing in M . For screening costs

      that are excessively high, no firm will screen; for very low screening costs, all firms will screen.

   2. For a given level of screening costs, the share of firms doing screening (and therefore the intensity of

      assortative matching) increases in the dispersion of quality types of workers. The share of firms doing

      assortative matching will always be positively selected in terms of quality.


The key insight of the multi-type model, confirming the two-type model, is that an increased dispersion in

quality of workers leads to an increased share of firms doing assortative matching, and this in turn increases

average profits and average wages. This is an interesting and new channel, to the best of our knowledge, through


                                                         11
which higher shares of immigrants may have a positive effect on the average matching and average wages of

natives in a region. We will test this channel in the empirical section.

    While this model is extremely simplified, the basic intuition that a larger dispersion of worker quality makes

screening more profitable for high-quality firms and increases the share of positive assortative matches (and

therefore the average wages and productivity when firm and worker quality are complementary) is a very robust

implication of our model. It holds for 2 and for N quality groups, and as N becomes larger this can approximate

a continuum of quality levels.



3     Data and measures of worker and firm quality

Our empirical analysis consists of three steps which we develop in Sections 4, 5 and 6. First, we compute proxies

capturing workers and firms' quality/productivity. In doing so, we assume that individual quality (of workers

and firms), being an innate characteristic, remains constant over the period of analysis (1995-2005) and we

estimate it using different methods. First, we apply the method pioneered by Abowd et al. (1999) and perfected

by Card et al. (2013) to separate in a wage equation the individual and firm components, and we use those

as measures of firm's and a worker's quality, respectively. Aware that these measures can be imprecise and,

particularly for firms, may not be highly correlated with actual productivity (Eeckhout & Kircher 2011), we also

follow Bartolucci, Devicienti & Monz´
                                    on (2018) in using more direct measures of productivity and profitability of

firms as measures of the quality of firms. In the second step, we calculate two measures of the strength of positive

assortative matching between firms and workers in each of the 101 French Districts, separately, for each year

between 1995 and 2005.11 Following, respectively, Dauth et al. (2018) and Davidson et al. (2012), we calculate

two proxies for the positive correlation between firm and worker quality across employer-employee matches

for each district and year. Finally, we analyze in a reduced form regression at the district-year level whether

the presence of immigrants is correlated with the intensity of positive matching between workers and firms in

French districts. A French district is an administrative unit, smaller than regions, which is the combination of

few labor markets. It is the only geographic level of aggregation for which data on immigration can be collected

in a consistent way over our sample period, and between the data sources used to build our instrumental variable.

This is the reason for conducting our analysis at the district level. While this choice may reduce the variation

of the explanatory variable, measurement error is kept to a minimum by using these units.12 By using an

instrumental variable approach, we also try to establish a causal link between immigration and the intensity of

assortative matching. Before describing the aforementioned empirical steps, we provide a detailed description
  11 Because of data availability in 1982 (used to build the IV) in our empirical exercise we use only 92 districts (we mainly get rid

of overseas districts).
  12 The use of smaller geographic areas, such as French zone d'emploi, would imply an imprecise allocation of immigrants over

time and therefore generate significant measurement error in the explanatory variable of interest.




                                                                 12
of the dataset employed in this paper.


3.1      Data

Our empirical analysis uses two main data sources: (i) matched employer-employee French data (D´
                                                                                               eclaration

Annuelle des Donn´
                 ee Sociales - DADS), and (ii) balance sheet data for the universe of French firms (FI-

CUS/FARE).

   DADS is an administrative database collected by the French Statistics Office (INSEE) and containing infor-

mation on the employment structure of the universe of French firms. All wage-paying firms and legal entities

located in France are obliged to report information to DADS on their workforce composition. For each worker

we have information on annualized real earnings, total number of hours worked, gender, year, and place of birth

(France vs foreign-born), occupation (4-digit PCS-ESE classification), experience, district of residence, and the

industry of the employer.13 Two versions of the DADS data are used here. DADS Postes includes the entire

workforce in France and has been used to compute the total employment of native and immigrant workers across

French districts. Unfortunately, DADS Postes does not provide information on the worker's ID, so information

on a single worker cannot be linked over time in a longitudinal panel to estimate the "individual fixed effect"

over the worker's career (i.e. the wage decomposition as in Abowd et al. 1999 and Card et al. 2013). To

construct the two measures of worker type adopted in this paper, based on lifetime wage and worker's wage

decomposition (as defined in the next section), we need to follow each individual across years. Hence we use

DADS Panel. This represents a (one in twelve) subsample of individuals born in October of each year, for which

the DADS Panel provides a worker identifier (nninouv ) that enables us to follow individuals over time.

   We construct our sample to maximize the precision of the data on wages and the information on employers.

This turns out to be the sample of full-time workers in the manufacturing sector. To do this, we focus on

full-time jobs (more comparable in terms of wage) held by workers in the manufacturing sector (for which we

have detailed balance sheet information on the employer from FICUS/FARE data) in each year from 1995 to

2005. The limitation of the sample to the manufacturing sector, implies that we only use spells of workers while

they work in this sector to estimate our wage equation. Some workers can move in and out of the manufacturing

sector, but only the working spells within the manufacturing are used to estimate the worker specific effect.

Moreover, we only consider job spells with one employer at a point in time. Focusing on full-time jobs helps

to reduce the dispersion in hours worked which could add noise to the measure of workers' quality that should

be based on differences in marginal productivity (i.e. hourly wages) rather than in hours worked (see Card et

al. 2013). In Table 1 we provide the number of full-time workers, for every year, who can be tracked over time

thanks to their ID and do not have missing information on annual wages. On average, more than one hundred
 13 We   do not have information on the country of origin of foreign-born workers nor on their education levels.




                                                                 13
thousands workers per year can be tracked over time and therefore considered in our calculations of worker

quality types (i.e. worker's wage decomposition and lifetime wage as discussed in the next section). 4.5% of

workers move every year (from firm to firm), identified as workers with an employer identifier (SIREN) within

the manufacturing sample changing between time t - 1 and t (see the fourth column of Table 1 for the number

of workers that change firm by year, i.e. movers).14 In DADS data (panel and postes ) each firm is identified

by a unique identification code (called SIREN), so DADS data can be easily merged with balance sheet data,

available only for manufacturing firms, which we use to compute characteristics of the firm, including measures

of its productivity.


                                                      ­ Table 1 about here ­


    The firm identifier SIREN is assigned by the French statistical office (INSEE) for administrative purposes

and may potentially combine multiple plants in France. Most firms only have one plant, and the great majority

of multi-plant firms have plants in the same district, so that the location of the firm (headquarters) and of the

plant(s) coincide in the overwhelming majority of cases. Only 2% of firms in our sample have plants (workers)

in more than one district. Hence the location of one firm in one district ensures that our local analysis is

accurate.15 Notice that the firm identifier changes when a firm changes its ownership. This means that when a

SIREN disappears from the dataset, it does not necessarily signify the "death" of the firm (similarly, the entry

of a new SIREN does not necessarily signify the "birth" of a new firm). We consider a change in ownership as a

potential change in the firm type (as done also in Card et al. 2013), and estimate separate employer quality for

the firm before and after the change in ownership, as the two instances of the firm can be distinct along several

dimensions. A new owner may introduce new managerial practices and/or technologies that change the quality

of the firm (and thus the firm-type).

    FICUS/FARE data report standard balance sheet information (value added, sales, total employment, capital,

intermediate inputs, industry etc.) for the universe of French manufacturing firms over the period 1995-2005.

These data are used to compute the Value Added Per Worker (here used as the main proxy for the quality of

firms) and the Total Factor Productivity of firms over time (here used as an alternative proxy for the type of

firms in appendix). For coherence with the DADS data, we drop firms that employ part-time workers only.

We also exclude from the sample all firms with a missing SIREN code. Finally, our estimation sample includes

on average more than 32,000 firms with a median size of approximately two hundred employees (see Table

1). FICUS/FARE data are also used to compute district specific control variables such as the average capital-

labor ratio and the intermediate input intensity of firms in the district - see section 6.1. The district's export
   14 This is a crucial statistic in the AKM decomposition (see next section). Worker quality (productivity), in fact, can be identified

only if there are enough workers moving across firms and connecting them such that we can separate out a worker from a firm
effect.
   15 In section 6.1 we propose a robustness check excluding large firms who are likely to have plants in different districts.




                                                                  14
intensity, used as an additional control variable in section 6.1, has been computed by aggregating firms' exports

from French Customs at the district level.


3.2        Quality of workers and quality of firms

In order to identify and estimate firm-specific and worker-specific quality, we first follow the wage decomposition

proposed by Abowd et al. (1999) - AKM hereafter - as well as Card et al. (2013) and Dauth et al. (2018), among

others. In particular, we estimate a Mincerian wage regression over the whole 1995-2005 period. We regress the

(log) individual yearly wage of full-time manufacturing workers on worker fixed effects (i ), firm fixed effects

(J(i,t) ),16 and a set of observable individual characteristics (Xi,t ) including year dummies, a quartic polynomial

in experience, an Ile de France dummy,17 a gender dummy, and gender interacted respectively with experience,

Ile de France, and year dummies. The estimated equation is as follows:




                                           ln(wage)i,t     = i + J(i,t) + Xi,t + ri,t                                              (12)


In this specification, the worker fixed effect (i ) can be interpreted as the time invariant component of worker's

productivity which is rewarded equally across employers. It can therefore be used as a proxy for the quality of

a worker. The assumption is that such quality does not vary over the period considered, because it is intrinsic

to worker's characteristics and skills and it is uncorrelated with the firm specific component (J(i,t) ). Similarly

(J(i,t) ) can be interpreted as a firm-specific component of the wage, invariant over time. More specifically, the

firm fixed effect (J(i,t) ) obtained using the AKM method is a proportional wage premium paid by a specific

firm j to all employees (this is the firm's component of surplus-sharing in a standard log-additive wage setting

model).18 In a robustness check we slightly depart from the original AKM decomposition, and add the broad

occupation category of workers among the set of controls Xi,t with the aim of capturing the observable, formal

skills of workers.19

    The identification of worker-specific effects and firm-specific effects relies on workers moving across firms

over the period considered, and on the assumption that any other wage component which is specific to the

firm-worker match is not systematically correlated with either the firm or the worker quality. In our sample, as

reported in Table 1, 4.5% of workers move across different firms annually, so that over the 10 year period more

than half of workers have worked for at least two employers in our sample.20 This implies a significant degree
  16 The  function J (i, t) gives the identity of the unique firm j employing worker i at time t.
  17 Following  Abowd et al. (1999) we include an Ile de France dummy to control for the specificity of the Parisian labor market.
  18 As in Card et al. (2013), we use the iterative conjugate algorithm to estimate individual and firm fixed effects.
  19 Occupation categories are: (i) skilled white collar, (ii) unskilled white collar, (iii) skilled blue collar, and (iv) unskilled blue

collar.
  20 Assuming that one worker moves only once over the sample period.




                                                                   15
of mobility over the considered period. This reduces but does not eliminate the concern of limited mobility

bias in our sample. In appendix B we discuss and check the orthogonality conditions underlying the AKM

decomposition and the estimation results. In particular, we show the symmetry in wage gains for individuals

moving from firms in the top to firms in the bottom quartile of productivity, relative to those moving from

bottom to top. This is lends confidence to the notion that movers do not select a specific firm based on the

expected wage component of the worker-firm match (i.e. movers do not sort across firms based on the match

component of the expected wage). In appendix B we also show that a fully saturated model with job-specific

fixed effects yields only a slight improvement in the fit of the data relative to the model we estimate (including

only firm and individual effects), as suggested by the very small increase in the R-squared from 0.947 to 0.95

when saturating with employer-employee fixed effects. This is also evidence that match-specific effects are not

very relevant for explaining productivity (wage) in an employer-employee match, implying that the individual

and firm components in a linear combination explain most of the variance in log wages. Finally, in Table B1

we show descriptive statistics of the parameters obtained from the estimation of equation (12). Notice that the

AKM parameters obtained using French data are similar to those obtained by Dauth et al. (2018) and Card

et al. (2013) on German data. Namely, we obtain the same mean (and median) worker and firm effects as in

Dauth et al. (2018). Also, we obtain a correlation between worker and firm fixed effects which is small and in

line with Dauth et al. (2018) when they use the 1985-1991 period. In line with both Dauth et al. (2018) and

Card et al. (2013) we obtain that the standard deviation of worker effects is larger than that of firm effects.

   We also consider alternative measures of worker and firm quality which rely on stronger assumptions but

are easier to calculate. For workers, we consider the average residual lifetime wage; for firms, the value added

per worker. The worker's average residual lifetime wage, conditional on observable characteristics, is generated

as follows. We first regress individual (log) wage on experience, sector, and year dummies. We then take the

residual of this regression, and average it across the years over which the individual is observed in the data.

This measure captures the average lifetime wage, controlling for observables, which is a proxy of the average

productivity/quality of a worker. Controlling for sector and year fixed effects allows us to obtain a residual wage

purged by year trends and industry heterogeneity in wage setting. Since in the period 1995-2005 we observe

workers at different stages of their careers, so we also purge the residual wage of the effect of the worker's

experience. The advantage of this measure is that it is intuitive, easy to calculate, and a robust statistic.

The disadvantage is that it includes location and firm-specific effects, which may be correlated with individual

quality.

   None of the worker-quality proxies described above is perfect; they each have strengths and weaknesses. For

this reason, in what follows we adopt both measures to calculate the strength of assortative matching and test

the effect of migration on PAM. It will be important to show that our results are robust to the specific measure



                                                        16
of worker's type adopted.

    As far as a firm's quality measure is concerned, the firm fixed effects from the AKM decomposition, while

often-used, may be a rather poor measure of firm quality with respect to productivity. Firm fixed effects

represent the employer-specific component in wage setting (see Abowd et al. 1999; and Card et al. 2013),21 but

it is a coarse measure of productivity/quality of firms. It is not always true that firms with higher productivity

level pay higher wages. A recent strand of literature suggests that when wages are non-monotonic in firm type,

then firm fixed effects in AKM decomposition do not necessarily reflect the firm productivity type (Gautier &

Teulings 2006, Eeckhout & Kircher 2011, de Melo 2018). Hence, in the same vein as Bartolucci et al. (2018), we

adopt an alternative measure of firm quality which more closely captures productivity compared to the wage-pay

potential: the labor productivity of a firm in a given year measured as Value Added per Worker, VAPW.22 From

our empirical analysis we can also (indirectly) argue whether worker-firm matching increases the total potential

payroll paid to workers (as revealed by AKM firm fixed effects), or the total value-added generated by them.

In the first case it is the firm-specific wage matters, while in the second it is the productivity of the firm that

matters, assuming in both cases that wage captures the worker's productivity.

    We choose the productivity measure of the firm as the main proxy for the type of firm. However, in a

robustness check in Table A3 we provide baseline results using firm fixed effects from the AKM decomposition

as a proxy for the type of the firm. As a further robustness check, in appendix Table A4 we follow de Melo (2018)

and use the average co-worker type as a proxy for firm type. In the de Melo (2018) approach, the strength of

positive assortative matching is approximated by the correlation between worker type and the average type of

his/her coworkers. Finally, in Table A4 we also report a robustness check using TFP (rather than value added

per worker) as a proxy for the type of firm.



4     Measuring within district assortative matching

Following Davidson et al. (2012), a first measure of the intensity of assortative matching between workers

and firms in each French district is represented by the difference between the share of positive assortative

matching and the share of mismatches in each district. The share of positive assortative matching in the

district is the sum of the share of high-quality workers employed in highly-productive firms, HH , and the

share of low-quality workers employed in low-productivity firms (LL ), where high (low) quality workers/firms

are those above (below) the median of worker/firm distribution (in each district). By contrast, the share of

mismatch involves the share of high-quality workers in low-productivity firms (HL ), and the share of low-quality
   21 Many papers analyzing the role of the workplace component in rising wage inequality have used firm fixed effects from AKM

decomposition as a measure of the surplus obtained by all employees in a given firm (i.e. employer-share of the surplus in a wage
setting environment). See Abowd et al. (1999); and Card et al. (2013).
   22 In the appendix section we use the Total Factor Productivity (TFP) of firms as an alternative proxy for firm-type. TFP of

firms has been calculated using the Wooldridge (2009) approach.



                                                               17
workers in highly-productive firms, (LH ). The strength of matching in a given district d at time t is equal to

(HH + LL ) - (HL + LH ). In line with Dauth et al. (2018), the second proxy we use for the strength of

matching in the district is the rank correlation between worker and firm type within a district in a given year

(setting to zero statistically non-significant correlations, where the the p-value of the rank correlation is below

0.10). Based on their type, we rank workers and firms within each district and compute the rank correlation

between firm- and worker-types for each local labor market and year. In the next sections we show important

descriptive evidence on the assortative intensity of worker-firm matching, in relation to average productivity

and the presence of immigrants across French districts.


4.1     Stylized facts on within-district matching

Before moving to the formal econometric estimation, we provide descriptive evidence characterizing: (i) the

match between firms and workers in France (fact 1 - see section 4.1.1), (ii) the empirical distribution of migrant

workers' quality relative to natives' quality (fact 2 - see section 4.1.2), (iii) the correlation between the average

productivity of districts and the strength of assortative matching between firms and workers in the district (fact

3 - see section 4.1.3), and (iv) how the presence of migrants in each district correlates with the strength of

assortative matching (section 4.1.4). These facts together establish the presence of assortative matching and

its positive correlation with immigrants and productivity. These facts are in line with the implications of our

simple model and support some of the assumptions made.


4.1.1    Fact 1: Worker-Firm match (and mismatch) across French districts

Figures 1 and 2 plot the empirical distribution of workers types (approximated respectively by lifetime wage and

by worker fixed effects from the AKM decomposition) for individuals employed by high- and low- productivity

firms as measured by Value Added per Worker. The two figures show that highly productive firms defined

as those having Value Added per Worker above the 75th percentile of the distribution (solid line) employ (on

average) higher quality workers relative to low-productivity firms defined as those with value added per worker

below the 25th percentile (dashed line in figures 1 and 2). While this correlation in the overall sample also

shows a large share of worker-firm "mismatches", the figure reveals a degree of positive assortative matching,

albeit imperfect.23


                                                ­ Figure 1 and 2 about here ­


As further evidence of the matching across French districts, in Table 2 we report the share of positive assortative

matching (HH , LL ) and mismatch (LH , HL ), in 1995 and 2005 for: (i) all French districts (top panel of
  23 If we define firm productivity according to the firm-effect in AKM, the overall firm-worker quality correlation is actually very

small and negative.


                                                                 18
the table); (ii) high-immigration districts, which are those with an immigrant-share above the median (central

panel); and (iii) low-immigration districts (bottom panel). We use Value Added per Worker as proxy for the

firm type, and lifetime conditional wage as a proxy for worker type. The table clearly shows that the share of

positive assortative matching (around 60% in most cases) is larger than the share of mismatched firms (about

40%). The presence of a significant amount of mismatch, however, is consistent with the idea that there are

significant information asymmetries or searching costs in the labor market (even in districts with small shares

of immigrants bottom of Table 2).24 The numbers shown in Table 2 are similar to those obtained by Davidson

et al. (2012) on Swedish data. About 60% of the firm-worker matches are assortative, and about 40% are

mismatched, which implies non-random but also imperfectly assortative matching.


                                                  ­ Table 2 about here ­



4.1.2    Fact 2: Worker-quality distribution and immigrant-intensity

An important condition, assumed in the model, is that immigrants have a more disperse distribution of individual

qualities with respect to natives. This implies that firms face higher degrees of uncertainty in immigrants

intensive labor markets, and this would make a match with the "right" worker more valuable, while avoiding a

match with the "wrong" worker also becomes more important. This section shows that the empirical distribution

of migrant workers' quality is actually more dispersed than that for native workers. First, in Table 3 we show

that the average quality of native workers as captured by average lifetime wage is slightly larger than that

for migrants, but quite close to it. More importantly, both the standard deviation and the interquartile range

of worker types are 10-20% larger for immigrants than for native workers. This is true when we use residual

lifetime wage and it is even stronger when we use AKM worker fixed effects as a proxy for worker quality.


                                                  ­ Table 3 about here ­


An additional preliminary way to show the association between the presence of immigrants and the uncer-

tainty/dispersion in worker quality is to check their correlation across districts. To do so, in Table 4 we regress

six moments of the worker type distribution in each district, i.e. 5th , 10th , 25th , 75th , 90th and 95th percentile,

on the share of immigrants residing in the district. Controlling for region-by-year fixed effects and district-

specific control variables (including the average worker type in the district), Table 4 shows negative coefficients

for percentiles of the wage distribution below the median, and positive coefficients for percentiles above the

median. This supports the idea that the presence of immigrants across districts is associated with a more

dispersed distribution of worker quality across French districts. Their presence is associated with lower quality
  24 In a world without screening cost or with perfect information, the worker-firm match would be perfectly assortative, hence

there would be an absence of mismatch.


                                                              19
low-percentile types and higher quality of high percentile types. This is consistent with the idea that a greater

immigrant-presence widens the distribution of worker quality in a district, because of the larger dispersion of

immigrants' quality.

    In Table A1 in the appendix, we replicate the same type of estimation using different measures of workers'

quality dispersion, such as the standard deviation, the interquartile range, and the max-min difference in worker

types for each district. Conditional on region-by-year fixed effects and district-specific controls, districts with

high shares of immigrants show a larger dispersion of worker quality as suggested by a positive coefficient for

the standard deviation, and the interquartile and min-max ranges.25


                                               ­ Table 4 and A1 about here ­



4.1.3    Fact 3: Positive matching, districts' productivity and employment

If stronger assortative matching leads to an improvement in the allocation of labor within French districts, then

it should be associated with a higher level of average labor productivity. This is shown in Table 5 where we report

the correlation between the strength of assortative matching and the average value added per worker in the

district. Controlling for district and region-by-year fixed effects, we find that the degree of assortative matching

(as revealed by the rank correlation between firm and worker type) is significantly positively correlated with

the average productivity of the district. Similarly, the strength of matching the share of positive assortative

matching minus the share of mismatch is positively correlated with the productivity of the district. Table 5

also shows that the association is similar whether we use AKM fixed effects or average residual wage as the

measure of worker quality.26


                                                    ­ Table 5 about here ­



4.1.4    Immigration and positive matching: a first glance at data

Figure 3 provides a sense of the correlation between migration and positive assortative matching across French

districts. In the vertical axis we plot the 10-year change, between 1995 and 2005, in the degree of assortative

matching as revealed by worker-firm quality rank correlation (panel a and b) and strength of positive assortative

matching (panel c and d). As a proxy for worker type we alternatively use lifetime conditional wage (panel

a and c) and AKM worker fixed effects (panel b and d). As a proxy for firm quality we use value added per
  25 Regressions reported in Table 4 and Appendix Table A1 include district-specific controls (population, share of skilled workers,

and concentration index of firms in the district) to be consistent with the econometric estimations reported in section 5.
  26 To check that our data match the findings obtained in previous literature we also show, in Appendix Figure A1, that the

correlation between total population and positive assortative matching across districts is positive and significant. Dauth et al.
(2018), show such correlation in German regions, and they suggest that denser districts have stronger positive worker-firm type
correlations as a consequence of stronger assortative matching in denser and thicker labor markets.


                                                                20
worker in all cases. On the horizontal axis we report the change in the share of immigrants for each district

over the period 1995-2005. By taking long-run difference approach, district specific (time invariant) factors are

controlled for. So the slope of the linear correlation reported in each panel of figure 3 is purged by district

specific unobserved factors and within district change generates the correlation. All the scatter plots reported

in figure 3 show a positive (albeit weak) correlation between the share of immigrants in the district and the

strength of positive assortative matching. Districts where immigrants increased their presence in the population

also experienced an increase in the degree of positive assortative matching between firms and workers. While

the correlations are not extremely strong (these may be affected by the presence of omitted variables), this is

in line with Proposition 1 in section 2.



5     Immigration and firm-worker matching at the district level

This section discusses the empirical strategy we adopt to test the effect of exogenous migration shocks on

the strength of positive assortative matching across French districts. In section 5.1 we present our baseline

econometric specification, while in section 5.2 we discuss the identification strategy and the Instrumental Variable

approach aimed at solving the potential endogeneity and omitted-variable problems.


5.1     Empirical Model

In order to get closer to testing whether inflows of immigrants causally affect the quality correlation of worker-

firm matching across French districts, we employ the following empirical specification:




                                     yd,t   = 1 Immi Sh d,t + 2 Xd,t + d + rt +               d,t                                 (13)


where the subscript d and t stand respectively for district and year; d and rt are district and region-by-year

fixed effects (there are 23 regions in France and each of them includes on average 4 districts).27 District fixed

effects control for any district-specific (time invariant) factor that may affect the firm-worker match in the local

labor market. In particular, district fixed effects control for the average productivity of firms in the local labor

market d, which has a role in affecting the probability of assortative matching in our theoretical framework

(see eq. 6 in section 2.1). Region-by-year fixed effects are then included to control for any region-specific time

trend driven by specific regional policies or economic shocks that may have an effect on the hiring process and

on firm dynamics, such as changes of labor laws or local competition conditions. The set of control variables
 27 We follow the official classification of French regions in force over the period 1995-2005. Because of data availability for the IV

we use 92 districts.




                                                                  21
Xd,t includes: (i) the concentration index of firms in the district, i.e. the Herfindahl-Hirschmann index of firms'

market share in a specific district;28 (ii) the (log) population of native workers in the district; (iii) the share

of skilled over total workers in the district. The concentration index captures possible market power of local

firms that may affect matching behavior in local labor markets. The (log of) native workers in the district aims

to control for the size/density of the district and of the local labor market. Using German data, Dauth et al.

(2018) show that in big cities and/or in more dense local labor markets the strength of assortative matching

may be stronger. Finally, we control for the share of skilled workers in the district because skill biased technical

change can increase the degree of positive assortative matching (see Acemoglu 1999 and Albrecht and Vroman

2002), and the intensity of such change is associated with the presence of skilled workers.

    The main explanatory variable is the share of immigrants in the total workers' population in each district-

year. In order to test Proposition 1, the dependent variable yd,t is alternatively: (i) the rank correlation between

firm and worker type; and (ii) the strength of positive assortative matching defined as (HH +LL )-(HL +LH ),

where ij is the share of workers of type i employed in a firm with productivity type j .29 This is the measure

used in Davidson et al. (2012). We also use firm profit as a dependent variable in order to test Proposition 2.

Firm profits are calculated as total revenues minus total cost of the firm (wage bill, purchase of intermediate

inputs and raw materials).30


5.2     Identification and IV strategy

Considering the empirical specification discussed in the previous section, as the change in immigrant share

across districts over time is not random, we might be concerned that Ordinary Least Square estimates do not

identify the causal effect of immigration on assortative matching (endogeneity). The inclusion of district and

region-by-year fixed effects absorbs some of the unobserved variables, likely linked to economic and demographic

conditions, that may affect both the share of immigrants and the hiring behavior of firms. Nevertheless, eco-

nomically more successful districts may experience an inflow of immigrants in addition to a change in the hiring

process of firms, leading to less-efficient worker-firm matching (when the economic performance of a district

is favorable, the intensity of PAM may decrease because firms are less "picky" in choosing their ideal worker

or because tighter labor markets imply difficulty for firms in finding the ideal worker). To address this issue

we rely on an Instrumental Variable (IV) shift share approach (the so called "enclave" instrument) proposed

by Card (2001) and refined in several subsequent studies. Aware of the criticism that this IV strategy has

received, especially in the recent period (see Jaeger, Ruist and Sthuler 2018; Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin and
   28 The Herfindahl-Hirschmann for firm concentration has been calculated as HH              I    2
                                                                                      d,t =   i=1 sit , where sit is the market share of
firm i in its district d at time t.
   29 As discussed in section 4, high (low) types of workers/firms are those above (below) the median of the worker/firm distributions

in each district.
   30 We aggregate firms' profit at the level of district by a weighted average with weights equal to the size of the each firm (i.e. the

share of firm's sales over total sales in the district).



                                                                   22
Swift 2019)31 we introduce some modifications aimed at reducing the potential correlation of initial immigrants

shares with subsequent economic changes, and we subject the IV to some validity checks.32 The first modifica-

tion is to use the predicted number of immigrants to France from country o in year t based on the origin-specific

flows of immigrants to other EU-15 countries (excluded France).33 Such an adjustment eliminates the potential

correlation of France-specific economic factors that may generate inflows of immigrants from specific places-of

origin, and also be especially correlated with the economic performance of some specific districts. By doing

so, the shock component of the enclave approach is based on exogenous (non-France specific) push factors (as

suggested by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. 2019 for the validity of the enclave approach).34 The constructed vari-

able approximates the supply-driven component of migration from each origin country by measuring migration

toward countries other than France. Specifically, using OECD bilateral migration flows data, we regress the

total inflows of migrants in France from each origin o at time t - ImmiF RA,o,t - on the inflow of migrants from

o to all other EU-15 countries (ImmiEU 15,o,t ), controlling for origin and year fixed effects:



                                       ImmiF RA,o,t = 1 ImmiEU 15,o,t + o + t +              o,t                                  (14)


The predicted values from regression (14), ImmiF RA,o,t , net of the origin and year fixed effects,35 represent the

origin-specific predicted inflows of immigrants in France, based on the variation of immigrant inflows in other

(similar) countries. Following Card (2001), we therefore allocate the predicted inflows of immigrants from a

given origin o, ImmiF RA,o,t , using the spatial distribution of immigrants across French districts in 1982 (from

Labor Force Survey data, LFS):36


                                                           IM M Id,o,1982
                                     IM M I d,t =                            ImmiF RA,o,t .                                       (15)
                                                      o
                                                          IM M IF RA,o,1982

Notice that the spatial distribution of immigrants in 1982 pre-dates the creation of a common EU labor market

(1992) and hence pre-dates by more than a decade the large flow of EU immigrants in France. Moreover the
   31 Specifically, Jaeger et al. (2018) argue that the standard shift-share instrument, being based on the past settlement of immi-

grants, is highly correlated over time and potentially correlated with pre-period and current economic conditions. This implies
that the coefficient associated with a shift-share instrumented variable captures both the short and the long run (feedback ) effect of
migration, where the long-run effect may be correlated with persistent demand shocks. To avoid this problem, Jaeger et al. (2018)
propose including in the regression the lagged instrumented migration shock to control for the feedback effect. In our empirical
framework, the inclusion of district fixed effects implies that the long-run feedback from past migration and demand should be
absorbed and only the short-term change in immigration identifies the impact.
   32 In section 5.2.3 and in the Appendix C we test further the validity of our IV by applying the tests proposed by Goldsmith-

Pinkham et al. (2019).
   33 This approach is broadly inspired by the trade shift-share used in Autor et al. (2013). In that paper the import penetration

of China in the US is approximated by the supply-driven component of Chinese exports, i.e. the exposure to Chinese imports of
countries other than the US. See Autor et al. (2013) section B for more details.
   34 See Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) section 8.4.
   35 The predicted inflows of immigrants are Immi
                                                       F RA,o,t = 1 ImmiEU,o,t . From the fit of equation 14 we eliminate the year
fixed effects component because it may capture French specific shocks, common across districts, and affecting the localization of
immigrants. We also remove the origin fixed effects component to avoid time-invariant, origin-specific patterns of migration affecting
our IV.
   36 For coherence with LFS data here needed to compute the spatial distribution of immigrants across districts in 1982 the

OECD IMD data have been aggregated by the same set of origins (or group of origins) used in the LFS data.



                                                                  23
economic conditions are relative to more than a decade prior to the beginning of the considered period. This

makes the initial distribution of immigrants likely to have very low correlation with recent economic trends in

the district. Some validity checks on the initial distribution of immigrants by origin are discussed in section

5.2.3 and in Appendix section C. Finally, we calculate the share of immigrants in each (district) as follows:


                                                           IM M Id,t
                                       sIM
                                        d,t
                                            MI =                                                                (16)
                                                   IM M Id,t + N ativesd,1982

In expression (16) the native population is fixed at year 1982 so as to avoid spurious effects due to the potentially

endogenous native population growth in the district over the 1995-2005 period. For the validity of this variable

as an IV, the size of the existing immigrant communities in 1982 must not be correlated with district-specific

changes of labor and economic conditions between 1995 and 2005 (conditional on controls and fixed effects

included in the equation 13). This is reasonable, as there is a lag of more than ten years between the initially-

observed immigrant distribution and the beginning of our analysis. Moreover, the aggregate inflow of immigrants

from each origin country must be independent of the labor demand of any specific French district. This is likely

to hold, as we use the predicted inflow of immigrants from each origin country based on the supply-driven

component of migration toward similar destination countries other than France (EU15).

   Nevertheless, to increase confidence in the validity of our instruments we test whether the short and long-

run pre-1995 trends in labor market outcomes across districts are correlated with the post-1995 variation in our

IV. Table 6 presents the coefficients obtained by regressing the short-run changes in employment and average

wage over the period 1994-1995 (see columns 1-2) as well as their long-run trends, over two consecutive LFS

census (1982-1990), on the change in our IV (i.e. on the predicted inflow of immigrants) for the period 1995-

2005. None of these correlations is statistically significant. This means that districts that received large inflows

of immigrants in 1995-2005 due to increased push-driven migrant inflows did not perform differently in the

previous decade (or in the year right before the sample) compared to those that received few immigrants. This

is consistent with the validity of our instrumental variable, as it shows that pre-1995 trends in labor market

outcomes across French districts are uncorrelated with the predicted post-1995 intensity of immigrant flows.


5.2.1   Standard Shift-share IV

The modification introduced to the standard shift-share IV aims at improving the exogeneity of the instrumental

variable to contemporaneous, destination-specific unobservable shocks that may affect the settlement of immi-

grants and the local labor market dynamics. However, in order to check the robustness of our results, we also

adopt the standard shift-share IV and present the results in Table 9. That is, we use the observed rather than

the predicted immigration flows to France from each origin to augment the initial distribution of immigrants

across districts.


                                                         24
5.2.2      Deviation from the exclusion restriction

The validity tests discussed above provide qualitative evidence that the instrumental variable is not correlated

with pre-1995 labour market trends across French districts. However, there may still exist other omitted variables

leading to violations of the exclusion restriction. To address any remaining concern of endogeneity, we apply

the "plausible exogeneity" test proposed by Conley et al. (2012). The test allows for possible deviations from

exact validity of the exclusion restriction (i.e. non-zero correlation between the instrument and the error term

in eq. 13) and checks whether the estimate of the coefficient of interest (Immi Shd,t ) is robust to a range

of such possible deviations. We therefore relax the exclusion restriction of our IV and assume a correlation

between the instrument and the error term in equation (13) in the range                       [-2 ; 2 ].37 A prior on how far

such a correlation is from the exclusion-restriction validity (i.e.  = 0), can be approximated by regressing the

four measures of assortative matching on the instrumental variable (sIM
                                                                     d,t
                                                                         M I ), the endogenous variable (Immi


Shd,t ), and the other control variables included in equation 13. The estimated coefficients on sIM
                                                                                                 d,t
                                                                                                     M I (i.e.  )


are reported in Table A6. Then we follow Conley et al. (2012) and estimate the "Local-To-Zero" approximation

confidence intervals by assuming  is normally distributed with zero mean and a variance  = /2. In Table

A6 we report the 95% confidential intervals produced using the Conley et al. (2012) test for the plausible range

of  . None of the 95% confidence intervals for 1 resulting from plausible exogeneity regressions contains zero.

This implies that the positive and significant effect of immigrants on the four measures of assortative matching,

as revealed by our main IV estimations, is strongly robust to plausible deviations from the exclusion restriction.


5.2.3      Other Validity Tests

As discussed in Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) a crucial assumption for the validity of the shift-share in-

strument is the exogeneity of the initial origin-specific migration shares, in particular those that have high

Rotemberg weights in affecting the average 2SLS estimation.38 In line with our expectations, the top-5 origin

communities that affect the 2SLS estimator are: Other Countries n.e.c. (including South America and Asian

countries), Other African Countries, Ex-Yugoslavia, Portugal and Algeria.39 For this sub-sample of origins we

tested the absence of correlation between the initial shares of immigrants and: (i) the economic performance

of districts in 1982 (see Table C2); and (ii) the level of strength of PAM in 1995 (see Table C3). In line with

Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019), these tests support the exogeneity of the initial share of immigrants and the

overall validity of our 2SLS estimations. See Appendix C for a detailed discussion on such validity tests.
  37 See
       Conley et al. (2012) section 4.
  38 Rotemberg weights reveal how sensitive is the 2SLS average estimator on Immi Sh to non-exogeneity in any of the origin-specific
migrant shares. More details are reported in Appendix section C.
 39 The aggregation of origins adopted here is that of the original LFS data used to build the IV.




                                                                25
6    Main results on immigration and matching

We start by showing in Table 7 the OLS estimations of equation (13) using value added per worker as a proxy

for firm type. We find weak evidence of a positive effect of migration on the strength of assortative matching,

but no significant coefficient on rank correlation. Only when residual lifetime wage is used as a proxy for worker

type, the coefficient on the variable migrant shares is positive and statistically significant. See column 3 in Table

7. In Table A2 we adopt a weighted OLS estimator (with weights equal to the number of firms in the district

as a share of total French firms) and the immigrant share turns out to be statistically significant also when the

strength of assortative matching is approximated by the rank correlation between firm and worker types (as

revealed respectively by lifetime wage and value added per worker). See column (1) in table A2.


                                              ­ Table 7 about here ­


Least squares estimates, as in Table 7, however, may hide spurious correlations driven by current economic booms

which may attract foreign-born and also reduce screening and assortative matching, as in good economic times

high-quality firms may be less "picky" in choosing workers. Table 8 shows our main empirical specification, where

we use 2SLS estimator addressing potential endogeneity/omitted variable concerns. From these specifications

emerges clear evidence of a positive effect of migration, instrumented by the shift-share IV, on the four measures

of intensity and strength of assortative matching across French districts. A comparison between the OLS and

2SLS results highlights the negative bias present in the OLS estimations. Unobserved positive economic shocks

(such as demand shock in the districts) may attract immigrants and make the screening of workers less urgent.

The effect of migrant share is positive and significant when assortative matching is measured by the rank

correlation between firm- and worker-type (see Table 8 columns 1 and 2). The effect of migration is also

positive when the strength of positive assortative matching is measured by the share of positive matching net

of mismatches in the local labor market (see Table 8 columns 3 and 4). In line with Proposition 2, migration

also positively affects the average profits of firms in the district. Results reported in Table 8 also show a strong

positive correlation between skill intensity (last row of the table) and firm concentration on the strength of

positive assortative matching in the district. Highly concentrated districts (where few big firms dominate the

local labor market and are likely to have an advantage in screening and matching with high-quality workers)

show stronger positive assortative matching. Also, consistent with Acemoglu (1999) and Albrecht & Vroman

(2002), we find that French districts populated by skilled intensive firms (employing skilled workers) have a

greater degree of assortative matching.


                                              ­ Table 8 about here ­


The results discussed above are robust to alternative instrumental variables. Table 9 reports results using

                                                         26
the more standard shift-share instrument described in section 5.2.1. Independently of the methodology used

to compute the total inflows of immigrants in France over the period 1995-2005 (i.e. predicted IM M I d,t vs.

observed inflows in equation 15), an increase in the instrumented share of immigrants implies a higher rank

correlation between worker and firm types in the district (columns 1-2), and stronger assortative matching

(columns 3-4).


                                                      ­ Table 9 about here ­


In our baseline regressions, firm quality is approximated by productivity related measures (value-added per

worker). However, if we are interested specifically in the wage paid, the firm-specific component (from the AKM

decomposition) represents a valuable alternate proxy for firm-type (see Card, Cardoso, Heining and Kline 2018).

Moreover, when positive (negative) productivity shocks translate into workers' wage increases (decreases), the

pay premium of firms (firm fixed effects from an AKM decomposition) are a proxy for productivity measures.

Thus as a robustness check of our baseline results we use AKM firm fixed effects as a proxy for firm type.40

Results reported in appendix Table A3 show (less strong) evidence of the positive matching effect of migration

when firm types are approximated by an AKM firm-specific component. This confirms the results using a

different proxy for firm quality. It is also consistent with a small rent-sharing elasticity to productivity, so that

the pay premium at the firm level (AKM firm fixed effects) is only weakly correlated with productivity measures

of the firm.

    In terms of magnitude, the baseline results reported in Table 8 imply that a one percentage point (p.p.)

increase in the district's share of immigrants is associated with a 3.3 p.p. increase in the (net) share of positively

assortatively matched workers in the district (see column 3 in Table 8). This corresponds to 30% of the PAM

intensity gap between a district belonging to the lowest quartile of the distribution (i.e. 25th percentile) and

one in the top quartile, like the Parisian district (^
                                                     Ile de France).41 In other words, for a district belonging to

the median of the distribution in the (net) share of positive assortative matches, 3.3 p.p. corresponds to an

increase in the strength of PAM that fills the gap in the Parisian labor market.


6.1     Robustness checks

In this section we provide several types of robustness checks, adding control variables, changing some features

of the data, and modifying the selection of workers in the sample. Previous papers have identified a positive

impact of international competition measured as export intensity on the correlation of worker-firm matching
  40 Since AKM firm fixed effects have very small variation over time, for this robustness check we also rely on a pure cross-sectional

identification and include only region-year fixed effects, i.e. we omit district fixed effects. Results including both district and
region-year fixed effects are also reported in Table A3.
  41 The 25th percentile in the distribution of the (net) share of positively sorted matches is 0.133; the median is 0.179. The observed

value for ^
          Ile de France (in the top quartile) is a net share of 0.223.




                                                                  27
at the industry and firm level (see Davidson et al. 2012; Davidson et al. 2014; Bombardini et al. 2019). To check

whether openness to trade, potentially correlated with openness to immigrants at the district level, is a spurious

cause for the positive relation found in our analysis, we perform robustness checks including the export intensity

of the district (the log of total district exports) as a further control in equation (13).42 Moreover, Acemoglu

(1999) and Albrecht & Vroman (2002) show that skill-biased technical change may increase the incentives for

positive assortative matching in local labor markets by increasing the gap between high- and low-skilled workers'

productivity. While we already control for skill intensity in the district, we also add as controls the average

capital-equipment intensity43 and the average value of intermediate inputs relative to total product,44 presenting

the results in Table 10. These are likely proxies for the technological complexity (skill-bias) in a district. Results

in Table 10 show that the coefficient on the immigrant share is robust to the inclusion of these additional control

variables.


                                                    ­ Table 10 about here ­


The inclusion of additional control variables improves the precision of the IV (see first stage statistics reported

at the bottom of Table 10) and confirms the results obtained in Table 8, and the positive impact of immigrants

on rank correlation of the quality of firm-worker matching and of migration on average profits (see column (5)

in Table 10).45 Consistent with Proposition 1 and 2, an exogenous inflow of migrants causes an increase in

assortative matching and in the average profit of firms in the district. We then perform robustness checks using

alternative proxies for worker and firm types (such as coworkers' type and TFP based firm type proxies, and

occupation-conditioned worker-type proxies). Those are reported in Appendix section A Table A4, and all point

to similar (albeit sometimes imprecisely estimated) positive effects of migration on the assortative matching of

firms and workers.46

    One source of concern can be that the difference between the 2SLS and the OLS estimates is large. This is

a sign of significant bias in the OLS estimates, potentially driven by the fact that immigrants are attracted to
  42 French  Customs data are used to compute the total exports of firms located in a given district.
  43 Based  on FICUS/FARE data we compute the ratio between physical capital and total employment in each firm, and then take
the average across firms within a district.
  44 As a proxy for the intermediate input intensity we use the share between intermediate input purchases and the total value of

production of the firm.
  45 In particular, a one standard deviation increase in the share of immigrants (standard deviation 0.044) implies a 96% increase

in average profits. At first glance, this may appear a very large effect, but it is worth noting that one standard deviation increase
in the share of migrants is extremely rare in France (it would imply that a district belonging to the 25 percentile of the distribution
in immigrant share moved to the 75 percentile).
  46 In Table A4 we use the average coworker type as a proxy for the firm type (as suggested by de Melo 2018) and our baseline

results hold. We find positive and significant effects of migration on the strength of assortative matching when approximated by the
rank correlation (column 2) and the net share of positive matches in the labor market (column 4 in Table A4). In Table A4 we also
report estimation results using TFP as a proxy of firm type, rather than their value added per worker. Again, we find support for
a positive effect of migrant share on the strength of assortative firm-worker matching (statistically significant only when the worker
type is approximated by lifetime wage). Finally, in Table A4 we use worker type proxies (both lifetime wage and AKM fixed effects)
purged by the macro-occupation of the worker. In the calculation of the lifetime wage and in the AKM decomposition we condition
the wage on the macro-occupation of the worker (i.e. white-collar high skilled, blue-collar high skilled, white-collar unskilled, blue
collar unskilled). Our baseline results again qualitatively hold, with a positive (but imprecisely estimated) coefficient on migration
when we use the occupation conditioned AKM worker fixed effects as a proxy for worker type.



                                                                  28
districts when they are economically booming. Those are also periods during which the intensity of assortative

matches may decrease due to tighter labor markets making it more difficult for a firm to find the "right" match

for a job. However, the presence of (potentially) endogenous controls (Xdt ) and district-year omitted variables

may also generate such a difference. We test that the results in 2SLS are robust to omitting the controls Xdt

(potentially endogenous) and to adding a district-specific trend so as to identify the effects on a within-district

deviation around trend. In both cases, our baseline 2SLS estimates are robust.47

   One insight of our model is that, if there is ex-ante uncertainty about the quality of native workers and the

firm has to pay the screening costs ex-ante, not knowing whether it will match with a native or an immigrant,

then a larger share of immigrants (which will make screening profitable, on average) will imply that the firm

also screens native workers. This will result in a higher probability of assortative matching between firms and

native workers. When screening becomes profitable, firms will screen all workers and more high-quality firms

will match with high-quality natives. In the top part of Table 11 we specifically test whether exogenous inflows

of immigrants affect the assortative matching intensity between native workers and firms. We find a positive

and statistically significant effect of immigration on the strength of firm-native worker matching when native

worker types are approximated by either lifetime wage or AKM decomposition fixed effects. This emphasizes

better matching as a possible channel of positive spillovers from immigrants to native workers, and it helps

explain why many previous studies on local labor markets have not found a negative average wage effect of

migration on native workers.

                                             ­ Table 11 about here ­

In the bottom part of Table 11 we conduct the same exercise but using only migrant workers to compute our

proxies for strength of assortative matching. This is an important robustness check for two reasons. First,

migrant workers are plausibly more mobile across firms than natives. Second, imperfect information about

worker type is more likely to apply for migrant workers (French employers have more info on the education

level and type of natives than of migrant workers). For these two reasons we expect a stronger assortative

matching effect of migration on the sub-sample of migrant workers. This is confirmed by the results in Table

11, where the point estimates on the immigrant share are larger in magnitude for migrants than for natives

matching measures and in some specifications they are as much as two or three times larger. The larger

quality dispersion of immigrants makes it particularly profitable for high-quality firms to match with the "right"

immigrant workers.

   Finally, we cut our sample in order to reduce noise and error. Specifically, we trim from our sample the

largest and smallest firms. The presence of very small and very large firms (outliers) may have a disproportionate

effect in influencing the proxies of assortative matching adopted here. We replicate our baseline estimations
 47 Results   available upon request.


                                                        29
after excluding firms of size (number of employees) below the 5th and above the 95th percentiles in the size

distribution. These firms are excluded from the calculation of the worker-firm rank correlation and strength

of assortative matching. Results reported in Table A5 show the robustness of our baseline results to such

trimming.48


6.2     Immigration and wage dispersion

The model in section 2 also suggests that a higher share of immigrants should be associated with a higher

wage dispersion in the local labor market (see Proposition 3 ). In particular, the PAM effect of screening,

induced by migration, would re-allocate high-type (low-type) workers toward high-type (low-type) firms and

hence generate an increase in the wage gap between high- and low-type workers in each district. This section

tests such a channel.

    Table 12 reports regression results using the difference in the (log) average wage between high- and low-type

workers respectively, workers with quality above and below the median in each district-year (with worker type

approximated in turn by lifetime wage in columns 1 and 2 and AKM fixed-effect decomposition in columns 3

and 4). This measure of dispersion is similar to the 75-25 log wage percentile difference in a district. Results

in columns (1)-(4) suggest that an increase in the share of immigrants is associated with a significant increase

in the wage inequality in the district. Specifications (1) and (3) include district fixed effects, region-year fixed

effects, and basic district controls while the other columns add district exports, average capital intensity, and

intermediate input intensity. These results are consistent with the wage inequality effect of immigration in the

UK highlighted in Dustmann et al. (2013).


                                                    ­ Table 12 about here ­



6.3     Heterogeneous effect based on immigrant quality dispersion

An interesting corollary of Proposition 1 is that the probability of positive assortative matching is larger when

the standard deviation of immigrant quality,            I   is larger (see Corollary 1.1 ). This can be tested with a non-

parametric bin approach; i.e. by interacting the share of immigrants in the district with bins constructed

from percentiles of immigrant-type dispersion across districts binned model. We therefore extend the empirical

equation (13) as follows:
  48 The presence of multi-district firms is a small concern in our case as only about 2% of French firms are multi-district. However,

trimming large firms also represents a robustness check for the presence of multi-districts firms in our sample (indeed, large firms
are more likely to be multi-district).




                                                                 30
                    yd,t   =          k Immi Sh d,t  Dispersion Bin k
                                                                    d,t0 + 2 Xd,t + d + rt +                 d,t                (17)
                                 k


where variables and subscripts have the same meaning as in the previous sections, k is the number of bins

adopted to explore the heterogeneous effect of migration on the strength of assortative matching yd,t , and

Dispersion Bink
              d,t0 identifies whether the specific district d belongs to a specific bin k in at t0 (1995). Based

on the distribution of immigrant types in 1995 in each French district, we define: (i) bins for districts having an

inter-quartile range of immigrant types above/below the median; and (ii) bins based on min-max difference in

immigrant types in the district.49 We instrument each interaction between Immi Sh and the dispersion bin with

the interaction between the instrument sIM
                                        d,t
                                            M I and the dispersion bin. Results are reported in Table 13. We


find that immigrant share has a positive, significant and stronger effect on the intensity of assortative matching

in districts with a dispersion of immigrant types above the median (in 1995), while the effect is smaller and

often non-significant for those with dispersion below the median. Results are confirmed also by using dispersion

bins based on min-max difference in immigrant types as measure of dispersion. See columns 2, 4, 6 and 8 in

Table 13.50 While rather noisy (F-stat below 10) these results are consistent with the idea that larger dispersion

of immigrant quality is associated with even larger incentives for firms to screen with more likely assortative

matching outcomes as high quality firm can hire high-quality workers.


                                                   ­ Tables 13 about here ­




7     Workers' Transitions across Firms

In the previous sections we showed evidence of a positive effect of migration on the intensity of worker-firm

positive matching across French districts. In this section we analyze the reallocation of high- and low-type

incumbent workers (i.e. individuals with conditional lifetime wage above/below the median) across firms of

different types. As we have emphasized in the model, the increased probability of screening should affect the

allocation of all workers, including natives, across firms. More specifically, our model predicts that high-quality

firms are going to be those more likely to screen as they benefit the most from improving the quality of their

matches. To this end, we test the effect of immigrant share on the following outcomes: the number of high-

quality workers moving from low- to high- quality firms, and the number of low-quality workers moving from
  49 Here we use inter-quartile range and the min-max difference proxies for the dispersion of immigrant types in each district. We

take these proxies in the initial year (1995) to reduce endogeneity concerns.
  50 The point estimates in columns 4 and 8 actually show larger coefficients for districts with migrants type distribution below the

median. However, these are rather imprecisely estimated (with respect to coefficients for districts with migrants type distribution
above de median) with a F-stat suggesting weak IV problem.



                                                                 31
high- to low-quality firms. Both moves are a consequence of high-quality firms becoming more selective with

their matches, and so are consistent with the screening described in our theoretical framework.51

   Table 14 shows the 2SLS estimates of the impact of increasing immigrant share on mobility of high- and

low-quality workers across high- and low-quality firms. Entry (1) in the top row shows the effect on the number

of high-type workers moving from low- to high-type firms (respectively firms with value-added below and above

the median). These are high-quality workers enticed to high-quality firms. The impact of immigration on this

flow is highly significant and positive. On the other hand, immigration does not simply affect mobility between

firms because the number of high-quality workers attracted by low-quality firms, estimated in specification (2)

of row 1, is not affected by immigrants. This implies that low-quality firms do not increase their screening or are

not able to attract high-quality workers. Similarly, the second row of the table shows that immigration induces

high-quality firms to screen out low-quality workers, increasing the number of those that move to low-quality

firms. The opposite move (from low- to high-quality) is not affected by immigrants.

   The results in this table show that, consistent with increased screening in high-quality firms, migration is

associated with a transition of low-quality workers from high- to low-quality firms and of high-quality workers

from low- to high-quality firms (see column 1 of the table). In particular, a one standard deviation increase

in the share of migrants in a district more than doubles the number of movers from low- to high-productive

firms (120%increase).52 This suggests that stronger assortative matching induced by immigration is channelled

by better screening among high-quality firms that attract high-quality workers and shed low-quality workers.

Column 2 of Table 14 shows the effect of migration on the number of transitions going in the "wrong" direction,

namely high-quality workers attracted by low-quality firms and low-quality workers pushed to high-quality ones.

As those coefficients are much smaller and non-significant, immigration has no effect on the these flows, that

would reduce assortative matching and generate a distribution of workers to firm closer to random.


                                                ­ Tables 14 about here ­


   Overall the evidence on inter-firm mobility in response to immigration suggests that a larger share of im-

migrants generates mobility of workers between firms to increase the intensity of assortative matching. In

particular, there is evidence that some high- (low-) quality workers, who were in low- (high-) quality firms relo-

cate to high- (low-) quality firms. This is consistent with the idea that presence of immigrants, by increasing the

variety of skills, makes it more valuable for high-quality firms to screen and for them to attract high-productivity

workers, both among immigrants as well as among natives.
  51 In Table A7 we show the number of workers that move across firms of different type each year. Workers that experienced

unemployment spells larger than two years cannot be considered as movers for economic reasons, and are not included in these
statistics.
  52 The in-sample standard deviation of Immi Sh is equal to 0.04.




                                                            32
Conclusions

This paper uses employer-employee matched data for the universe of French manufacturing firms to identify

a new effect of immigration on local economies. Namely, we investigate whether immigrants promote positive

assortative matching between firms and workers. What the empirical evidence suggests is that, in local areas

(districts) where the share of immigrants increases, there is an increased tendency of high-productivity firms to

hire high-productivity workers (both natives and immigrants), leaving less-productive workers to less-productive

firms. This implies an increased strength of positive assortative matching in local labor markets. Improved PAM

is then associated with larger firm profits, larger average value-added, and higher average wages paid in the

district. For this reason, our paper provides a new and additional explanation for the lack of negative effects of

migration on native average wages found in many studies of the previous literature.

   Using measures of worker and firm quality based on the AKM decomposition and on other firm-level pro-

ductivity indicators, we first establish that the variability in workers' quality is higher for immigrants than for

natives, while their average quality is comparable. Then we find that, in districts where the share of immigrants

grew by one percent of the population, the rank-correlation between firm- and worker quality increased by

2 percentage points (when the worker type is approximated by residual lifetime wage), and the share of net

positive assortative matches increased by 3.3 percentage points. This is a significant effect, as it represents a

5.5% increase in the average share of positive assortative matches (net of mismatches) across French local labor

markets. We also find a positive effect on average firm profits and on wage dispersion.

   We propose a simple model of asymmetric information and screening costs to rationalize why the inflow of

immigrants would increase the percentage of firms involved in assortative matching. Namely, when the skill

dispersion of workers becomes larger it is in the interest of the high-quality firms to do screening and select the

best workers, leaving the lower-quality workers to lower-quality firms. Consistent with these predictions, we

observe that districts in which migrant-share increases and hence the dispersion of skills increases high-quality

firms "lose" low-quality workers and "gain" high-quality ones, which is consistent with increased screening on

their part.

   This simple and novel mechanism introduces a new channel through which immigrants affect the local average

wage and productivity for native workers. While the mechanism implies larger average wages and higher firm

profit, it also implies higher wage dispersion and hence a potentially negative effect on wages of lower-quality

workers. We think that the worker-firm interactions and the margin of firm responses highlighted in this paper

are important to capture a full set of effects of immigration which are overlooked in a neoclassical model.




                                                        33
Bibliography
Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F. & Margolis, D. N. (1999), `High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms', Econometrica
 67(2), 251­334.

Acemoglu, D. (1999), `Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative Theory and Some
  Evidence', American Economic Review 89(5), 1259­1278.

Albrecht, J. & Vroman, S. (2002), `A Matching Model with Endogenous Skill Requirements', International
  Economic Review 43(1), 283­305.

Autor, D. H., Dorn, D. & Hanson, G. H. (2013), `The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import
 Competition in the United States', American Economic Review 103(6), 2121­2168.

Bartolucci, C., Devicienti, F. & Monz´
                                     on, I. (2018), `Identifying Sorting in Practice', American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 10(4), 408­438.

Battisti, M., Felbermayr, G., Peri, G. & Poutvaara, P. (2018), `Immigration, Search and Redistribution: A
  Quantitative Assessment of Native Welfare', Journal of the European Economic Association 16(4), 1137­
  1188.

Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., Redding, S. J. & Schott, P. K. (2007), `Firms in International Trade', Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 21(3), 105­130.

Bombardini, M., Orefice, G. & Tito, M. D. (2019), `Does Exporting Improve Matching? Evidence from French
  Employer-Employee Data', Journal of International Economics 117, 229­241.

Borjas, G. J. (1987), `Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants', American Economic Review 77(4), 531­
  553.

Burzynski, M. & Gola, P. (2019), Mexican Migration to the United States: Selection, Assignment, and Welfare,
  LISER Working Paper Series 2019-10, LISER.

Card, D. (2001), `Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher Immi-
  gration', Journal of Labor Economics 19(1), 22­64.

Card, D. (2005), `Is the New Immigration Really so Bad?', Economic Journal 115(507), 300­323.

Card, D., Cardoso, A. R., Heining, J. & Kline, P. (2018), `Firms and Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and
  Some Theory', Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1), 13­70.

Card, D., Heining, J. & Kline, P. (2013), `Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German Wage In-
  equality', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3), 967­1015.

Chassamboulli, A. & Palivos, T. (2014), `A Search-Equilibrium Approach To The Effects Of Immigration On
 Labor Market Outcomes', International Economic Review 55, 111­129.

Combes, P.-P., Duranton, G. & Gobillon, L. (2008), `Spatial wage disparities: Sorting matters!', Journal of
  Urban Economics 63(2), 723­742.

Conley, T. G., Hansen, C. B. & Rossi, P. E. (2012), `Plausibly Exogenous', The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 94(1), 260­272.

Dauth, W., Findeisen, S., Moretti, E. & Suedekum, J. (2018), Matching in Cities, NBER Working Papers 25227,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                                       34
Davidson, C., Heyman, F., Matusz, S., Sjoholm, F. & Zhu, S. C. (2012), `Liberalized Trade and Worker-Firm
  Matching', American Economic Review 102(3), 429­434.

Davidson, C., Heyman, F., Matusz, S., Sjoholm, F. & Zhu, S. C. (2014), `Globalization and imperfect labor
  market sorting', Journal of International Economics 94(2), 177­194.

Davidson, C., Matusz, S. J. & Shevchenko, A. (2008), `Globalization and firm level adjustment with imperfect
  labor markets', Journal of International Economics 75(2), 295­309.

De La Roca, J. & Puga, D. (2017), `Learning by Working in Big Cities', Review of Economic Studies 84(1), 106­
  142.

de Melo, R. L. (2018), `Firm Wage Differentials and Labor Market Sorting: Reconciling Theory and Evidence',
  Journal of Political Economy 126(1), 313­346.

Dustmann, C., Frattini, T. & Preston, I. P. (2013), `The Effect of Immigration along the Distribution of Wages',
 Review of Economic Studies 80(1), 145­173.

Eeckhout, J. & Kircher, P. (2011), `Identifying Sorting­In Theory', Review of Economic Studies 78(3), 872­906.

Eeckhout, J. & Kircher, P. (2018), `Assortative matching with large firms', Econometrica 86(1), 85­132.

Friedberg, R. M. & Hunt, J. (1995), `The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country Wages, Employment and
  Growth', Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2), 23­44.

Gautier, P. A. & Teulings, C. N. (2006), `How Large are Search Frictions?', Journal of the European Economic
 Association 4(6), 1193­1225.

Glaeser, E. L. & Mare, D. C. (2001), `Cities and Skills', Journal of Labor Economics 19(2), 316­342.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Sorkin, I. & Swift, H. (2019), `Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why, and How',
 American Economic Review (forthcoming).

Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O. & Redding, S. (2010), `Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Economy', Econo-
  metrica 78(4), 1239­1283.

Jaeger, D. A., Ruist, J. & Stuhler, J. (2018), Shift-Share Instruments and the Impact of Immigration, NBER
  Working Papers 24285, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Kremer, M. (1993), `The O-ring theory of economic development', The Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. pp.
  551­575.

Lewis, E. & Peri, G. (2015), Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions, in G. Duranton, J. V.
  Henderson & W. C. Strange, eds, `Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics', Vol. 5 of Handbook of
  Regional and Urban Economics, Elsevier, chapter 0, pp. 625­685.

Mitaritonna, C., Orefice, G. & Peri, G. (2017), `Immigrants and firms? outcomes: Evidence from France',
 European Economic Review 96(C), 62­82.

Ottaviano, G. I. P. & Peri, G. (2012), `Rethinking The Effect Of Immigration On Wages', Journal of the
  European Economic Association 10(1), 152­197.

Peri, G. (2012), `The Effect Of Immigration On Productivity: Evidence From U.S. States', The Review of
  Economics and Statistics 94(1), 348­358.


                                                      35
Peri, G. & Sparber, C. (2009), `Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages', American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 1(3), 135­169.

Pischke, J.-S. & Velling, J. (1997), `Employment Effects Of Immigration To Germany: An Analysis Based On
  Local Labor Markets', The Review of Economics and Statistics 79(4), 594­604.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2009), `On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy variables to control for
 unobservables', Economics Letters 104(3), 112­114.




                                                     36
Tables and Figures

                        Table 1: In-sample descriptive statistics.

                 year     # workers       # firms      # movers       Median
                           with ID                                    firm size
                 1996       92364          28115           739           198
                 1997       92299          28417          3328           190
                 1998       89982          27963          4359           190
                 1999       89525          28058          4929           186
                 2000       85748          27032          4746           194
                 2001       86609          26969          6294           196
                 2002      171263          39515          6717           192
                 2003      163119          39263          5401           193
                 2004      164486          38757          7674           187
                 2005      166719          39066          9465           182
                 Notes : In sample descriptive statistics on the number of workers
                with ID are based on DADS panel data. The number of firms
                and the number of movers are obtained after joining DADS panel
                and FICUS/FARE data.




                                               37
    Figure 1: Distribution of worker type (lifetime conditioned wage) by high- vs. low-productivity firms.
                        1.5
                        1
              Density
                        .5
                        0




                              -2           -1                        0                      1                  2
                                                Lifetime log wage conditioned on experience

                                           VAPW above 75th pct                     VAPW below 25th pct


Source : Authors calculations on DADS and Ficus/Fare data. Note : The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by
the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year
                                    fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects).




                                                                38
       Figure 2: Distribution of worker type (AKM decomposition) by high- vs. low-productivity firms.
                  1
                  .8.6
              Density
                  .4
                  .2
                  0




                         -2                -1                   0                       1                    2
                                                       AKM worker fixed effect

                                           VAPW above 75th pct                   VAPW below 25th pct


Source: Authors calculations on DADS and Ficus/Fare data. Note : Worker types are approximated here by worker fixed effects as
                                                 estimated in equation 12.




                                                             39
Table 2: Share of workers of ability i (with i=high, low) employed at a firm with high vs low Value Added
per worker. Worker ability: lifetime wage conditioned on experience. Top vs Bottom Immigrants intensive
departments.


                                                                        All Districts
                                            Year 1995                              Year                   2005
                                 High-Prod Firms Low-Prod Firms       High-Prod Firms                      Low-Prod Firms
    High-Ability workers              28.9%           21.0%                 28.9%                              21.0%
    Low-Ability workers               19.8%           30.2%                 20.0%                              30.0%
                                                   High immigrants intensive Districts
                                            Year 1995                              Year                   2005
                                 High-Prod Firms Low-Prod Firms       High-Prod Firms                      Low-Prod Firms
    High-Ability workers              28.7%           21.1%                 29.3%                              20.6%
    Low-Ability workers               19.7%           30.3%                 20.3%                              29.7%
                                                   Low immigrants intensive Districts
                                            Year 1995                              Year                   2005
                                 High-Prod Firms Low-Prod Firms       High-Prod Firms                      Low-Prod Firms
    High-Ability workers              29.1%           20.7%                 28.7%                              21.2%
    Low-Ability workers               20.0%           30.1%                 19.7%                              30.3%
    Notes : The calculations use the matched employer-employee French data provided by INSEE for the years 1995 and 2005.
   The classification of worker types in this table follows their lifetime wage (conditional on worker's experience), while Value
   Added per Worker is used as a proxy for the firm type. Each cell reports the percentage of workers of a given level of ability
   (high vs low) employed at a firm with high or low productivity. High- and low-type workers and firms refer respectively to
   workers and firm with type above and below the district average. The main diagonal represents the strength of assortative
   matching while the anti-diagonal represents the extent of mismatch in local labor market. The lifetime conditioned wage is
   the average wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by
   experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects).




             Table 3: Empirical distribution characteristics for immigrant and native workers types

                                                                                    Natives     Immigrants
                                                         Average                     0.01         -0.01
                     Lifetime conditioned Wage
                                                         Standard Deviation          0.38          0.42
                                                         Interquartile Range         0.43          0.46
                                                         Average                      0.01          -0.06
                     AKM decomposition                   Standard Deviation           0.45          0.53
                                                         Interquartile Range          0.53           0.59
                    Notes : The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by the worker over
                   his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience
                   effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects).




                                                                40
Table 4: Immigrants and the distribution of workers types (as revealed by lifetime conditioned wage) across
districts by moment of worker type distribution.

        Moment of worker          5th pctile    10th pctile      25th pctile     75th pctile      90th pctile     95th pctile
        type distribution
        Immi Share                -0.090**        -0.080**        -0.060**        0.081***         0.255***            0.056
                                   (0.043)         (0.033)         (0.023)         (0.027)          (0.057)           (0.082)
        Observations                1,056           1,056           1,056           1,056            1,056             1,056
        Note : All regressions include region-by-year fixed effects, the average worker type in the district, and the district-
       year specific controls described in the empirical strategy. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned
       by the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience effect,
       seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
       *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




               Table 5: Strength of assortative matching and value added per worker in the district.

                                                                             Value Added per worker
                                                                     (1)         (2)        (3)                 (4)
                Rank Corr. VAPW-Lifetime Wage                     0.198***
                                                                   (0.038)
                Rank Corr. VAPW-AKM                                             0.196***
                                                                                 (0.038)
                Strength PAM VAPW-Lifetime Wage                                               0.144***
                                                                                               (0.033)
                Strength PAM VAPW-AKM                                                                       0.159***
                                                                                                             (0.029)
                District FE                                          yes           yes           yes           yes
                Region-by-Year FE                                    yes           yes           yes           yes
                Observations                                        1,056         1,056         1,054         1,048
                R-squared                                           0.998         0.998         0.998         0.998
               Note : Dependent variable is the average Value Added per Worker across firms within a district.
              All regressions include district and region-by-year fixed effects. The lifetime conditioned wage is the
              average wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage
              always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed
              effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                               Table 6: Test for the validity of the Instrumental Variable.

                           Employment             Wage          Employment             Nat. Emp.            Wage             Wage Nat.
                           1995-1994            1995-1994       1990-1982             1990-1982           1990-1982         1990-1982
  IV (2005-1995)             218.1                -5.285          -242.6                -395.5              -0.875            -0.838
                            (151.6)              (8.455)          (1080)                (1010)             (1.601)           (1.696)
 Source                      DADS                 DADS             LFS                   LFS                 LFS               LFS
 Observations                 92                    92               92                    92                 92                92
 R-squared                   0.552                0.414            0.302                 0.306              0.749             0.746
 Notes : All regressions include region fixed effects. Difference in the average wage 1990-1982 form LFS data bases on difference in wage
bin based on decile of hourly wage distribution. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                                  41
           Figure 3: Change in migrant population and Worker-Firm match across districts.




(a) Change in immigrant share and Worker-Firm type          (b) Change in immigrant share and Worker-Firm type
correlation. Worker type: lifetime conditional wage.        correlation. Worker type: AKM fixed effects.




(c) Change in immigrant share and strength of PAS.          (d) Change in immigrant share and strength of PAS.
Worker type: lifetime conditional wage.                     Worker type: AKM fixed effects.

                               Note: Variables conditioned on region fixed effects
                       Source: Authors' calculation DADS data for the period 1995-2005.




                                                       42
Table 7: Baseline regressions using Value Added per worker as proxy for firm type. OLS estimations

       Dep Var:                       Rank Correlation                  Strength PAM                 Firm Profit
                                        (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)                 (5)
       Immi Share                       0.440        -0.013          0.931***        -0.111              2.096
                                      (0.290)       (0.295)           (0.265)       (0.307)             (1.959)
       Employment (ln)                 -0.086        0.012           -0.117**        0.032             -0.936**
                                      (0.066)       (0.069)           (0.058)       (0.063)             (0.476)
       Firms Concentration           1.846***      1.865***          1.653***      1.551***           18.078***
                                      (0.437)       (0.532)           (0.383)       (0.534)             (3.742)
       Skilled share                    0.286        -0.110           0.298**        -0.101              0.655
                                      (0.185)       (0.220)           (0.151)       (0.191)             (1.030)
       Worker Type                   Lifetime        AKM             Lifetime        AKM
                                        wage                           wage
       District FE                       yes          yes               yes           yes                 yes
       Region-Year FE                    yes          yes               yes           yes                 yes
       Observations                    1,012         1,012             1,012         1,012               1,003
       R-squared                       0.672         0.675             0.589         0.643               0.961
       Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker and firm type, the
      strength of positive assortative matching, and the average firms' profits in each district-year. District-
      year specific controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii) concentration of firms and (iii) the
      share of skilled workers in the districts. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by
      the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience
      effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors
      in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.



Table 8: Baseline regressions using Value Added per worker as proxy for firm type. 2SLS estimations

       Dep Var:                       Rank Correlation                  Strength PAM                 Firm Profit
                                        (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)                 (5)
       Immi Share                     2.423**      5.105***          3.361***      4.718***           16.613**
                                      (1.191)       (1.722)           (1.184)       (1.619)             (7.560)
       Employment (ln)                 -0.081        0.025           -0.111**        0.044             -0.886**
                                      (0.058)       (0.068)           (0.053)       (0.067)             (0.409)
       Firms Concentration           1.880***      1.951***          1.694***      1.632***           18.320***
                                      (0.391)       (0.498)           (0.339)       (0.526)             (3.064)
       Skilled share                  0.500**       0.441*           0.560***       0.420*              2.237*
                                      (0.197)       (0.257)           (0.183)       (0.241)             (1.167)
       Worker Type                   Lifetime        AKM             Lifetime        AKM
                                        wage                           wage
       District FE                       yes          yes               yes           yes                 yes
       Region-Year FE                    yes          yes               yes           yes                 yes
       Observations                    1,012         1,012             1,012         1,012               1,003
       First stage coeff             0.121***      0.121***          0.121***      0.121***            0.122***
       F-stat                          16.18         16.18             16.18         16.18               15.00
       Partial R-sq                    0.046         0.046             0.046         0.046               0.045
       Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker and firm type, the
      strength of positive assortative matching, and the average firms' profits in each district-year. District-
      year specific controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii) concentration of firms and the (iii)
      share of skilled workers in the districts. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by
      the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience
      effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors
      in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                             43
Table 9: Baseline regressions using Value Added per worker as proxy for firm type. Alternative IV, i.e. ge-
ographic distribution of immigrants across districts in 1982 augmented by the observed migration inflows in
France by origin country (i.e. standard shift-share approach).

           Dep Var:                       Rank Correlation                  Strength PAM                 Firm Profit
                                            (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)                 (5)
           Immi Share                      2.896*        1.899            3.620**       3.425**            24.390**
                                          (1.511)       (1.735)           (1.540)       (1.728)            (12.413)
           Employment (ln)                 -0.080        0.017           -0.110**        0.041             -0.860**
                                          (0.059)       (0.059)           (0.054)       (0.060)             (0.422)
           Firms Concentration           1.888***      1.897***          1.698***      1.610***           18.449***
                                          (0.396)       (0.454)           (0.344)       (0.496)             (3.099)
           Skilled share                  0.551**        0.096           0.588***        0.280              3.085*
                                          (0.230)       (0.236)           (0.225)       (0.252)             (1.663)
           Worker Type                   Lifetime        AKM             Lifetime        AKM
                                            wage                           wage
           District FE                       yes          yes               yes           yes                 yes
           Region-Year FE                    yes          yes               yes           yes                 yes
           Observations                    1,012         1,012             1,012         1,012               1,003
           First stage coeff             0.284***      0.284***          0.284***      0.284***            0.278***
           F-stat                           9.29          9.29              9.29          9.29                8.58
           Partial R-sq                    0.031         0.031             0.031         0.031               0.030
           Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker and firm type, the
          strength of positive assortative matching, and the average firms' profits in each district-year. District-
          year specific controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii) concentration of firms and (iii) the
          share of skilled workers in the districts. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by
          the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience
          effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors
          in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                                 44
Table 10: Robustness check controlling for the total exports, capital intensity and intermediate inputs intensity
in each district. 2SLS estimations

          Dep Var:                            Rank Correlation                  Strength PAM                 Firm Profit
                                                (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)                (5)
          Immi Share                        2.877**        4.776***          3.299***      4.583***           22.043***
                                             (1.136)        (1.564)           (1.090)       (1.473)             (7.644)
          Employment (ln)                     -0.078          0.017          -0.117**         0.048            -0.880**
                                             (0.059)        (0.066)           (0.053)       (0.065)             (0.422)
          Firms Concentration               1.544***        1.496**          1.946***         0.830           7.676***
                                             (0.530)        (0.620)           (0.425)       (0.653)             (2.482)
          Skilled share                     0.555***        0.431*           0.556***       0.421*             3.245***
                                             (0.200)        (0.244)           (0.180)       (0.230)             (1.175)
          Exports                              0.010         0.013             -0.006      0.021***            0.301***
                                             (0.007)        (0.008)           (0.006)       (0.008)             (0.039)
          K/L                                 -0.002       -0.007**            -0.001        -0.004           -0.099***
                                             (0.002)        (0.003)           (0.002)       (0.003)             (0.026)
          Intermediates/Tot Prod              0.006          -0.002             0.003       -0.006*            0.083***
                                             (0.004)        (0.003)           (0.003)       (0.003)             (0.024)
          Worker Type                       Lifetime         AKM             Lifetime        AKM
                                               wage                             wage
          District FE                           yes           yes                yes          yes                 yes
          Region-Year FE                        yes           yes                yes          yes                 yes
          Observations                        1,012          1,012              1,012        1,012               1,003
          First stage coeff                 0.135***       0.135***          0.135***      0.135***            0.136***
          F-stat                              20.64          20.64             20.64         20.64               19.17
          Partial R-sq                        0.053          0.053             0.053         0.053               0.052
          Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker and firm type, the strength
         of positive assortative matching, and the average firms' profits in each district-year. District-year specific
         controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii) concentration of firms, (iii) share of skilled workers in
         the districts, (iv) total exports of firms in the district, (v) average capital intensity of firms in the district,
         and (vi) the average intermediate input intensity of firms in the district. The lifetime conditioned wage
         is the average wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage
         always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects).
         Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                                  45
Table 11: Native vs. Migrant workers assortative matching. Regressions using Value Added per worker as proxy
for firm type. 2SLS estimations.

                      Dep Var:                Rank Correlation                   Strength PAM
                                                (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)
                                                      Native workers only
                      Immi Share              2.495**      5.667***         2.590**        4.358***
                                              (1.262)       (1.791)          (1.161)        (1.598)
                      Observations             1,012         1,012            1,012          1,012
                      First stage coeff      0.120***      0.120***         0.120***       0.120***
                      F-stat                   16.18         16.18            16.18          16.18
                      Partial R-sq             0.046         0.046            0.046          0.046
                                                      Migrant workers only
                      Immi Share              4.723*       5.401**          9.356***       11.263***
                                              (2.459)       (2.735)          (3.016)         (3.532)
                      Observations             1,012         1,012            1,005           1,005
                      First stage coeff      0.120***      0.120***         0.117***        0.117***
                      F-stat                   16.18         16.18            15.05           15.05
                      Partial R-sq             0.046         0.046            0.042           0.042
                      Worker Type            Lifetime        AKM            Lifetime          AKM
                                               wage                           wage
                      District FE               yes           yes              yes             yes
                      Region-Year FE            yes           yes              yes             yes
                      District controls         yes           yes              yes             yes
                     Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between na-
                    tive/migrant worker and firm type and the strength of positive assortative match-
                    ing in each district-year. District-year specific controls are: (i) number of workers
                    in the district, (ii) concentration of firms and (iii) the share of skilled work-
                    ers in the districts. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned
                    by the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage
                    always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector
                    specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***
                    p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                             46
Table 12: Wage inequality regressions. Dependent variable: difference in log wage between high- and low-type
workers (i.e. workers with type above and below the average in the district). 2SLS estimations.

                    Dep Var:                                 Ln(wageHigh
                                                                    dt   ) - Ln(wageLow
                                                                                    dt )

                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
                    Immi Share                       1.682**     1.886**         2.107**    2.143**
                                                     (0.790)     (0.760)          (0.908)   (0.838)
                    Worker Type                         Lifetime wage                    AKM
                    District FE                        yes         yes              yes       yes
                    Region-Year FE                     yes         yes              yes       yes
                    District controls                  yes         yes              yes       yes
                    Other district controls             no         yes              no        yes
                    Observations                      1,012       1,012            1,012     1,012
                    First stage coeff               0.120*** 0.135***            0.120*** 0.135***
                    F-stat                            16.18       20.64            16.18     20.64
                    Notes : Dependent variable is the difference in (log) average wage between high- and
                   low-type workers in each district-year. District-year specific controls always included
                   are: number of workers in the district, concentration of firms and the share of skilled
                   workers in the districts. Other district specific controls included in columns 2 and 4
                   are: (i) district's total exports, (ii) average capital intensity, and (iii) intermediate
                   inputs intensity. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by the
                   worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always
                   purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities
                   (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p <
                   0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                              47
     Table 13: The heterogeneous effect of migration on Positive Assortative Matching. Regressions using Value Added per worker as proxy for firm type.
     2SLS estimations.

               Dep Var:                                                      Rank Correlation                                            Strength PAM
                                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
               Immi sh x below median IQR                       -0.248                     2.700                          0.713                     3.304*
                                                               (1.254)                    (1.977)                        (1.326)                    (1.924)
               Immi sh x above median IQR                      3.004**                   5.817***                       3.996***                   5.147***
                                                               (1.247)                    (1.912)                        (1.282)                    (1.774)
               Immi sh x below median min-max                               2.138                    8.931*                           3.901                    8.266*
                                                                           (2.879)                  (4.859)                          (3.080)                  (4.729)
               Immi sh x above median min-max                              2.486**                 4.665***                         3.343***                 4.253***
                                                                           (1.063)                  (1.770)                          (1.098)                  (1.623)
               Worker Type                                        Lifetime wage                  AKM                        Lifetime wage                  AKM
               District FE                                       yes         yes            yes        yes                 yes         yes            yes        yes
               Region-Year FE                                    yes         yes            yes        yes                 yes         yes            yes        yes
               District controls                                 yes         yes            yes        yes                 yes         yes            yes        yes
               Observations                                     1,012       1,012          1,012      1,012               1,012       1,012          1,012      1,012
               First stage coeff below    IQR   median        0.164***                   0.164***                       0.164***                   0.164***




48
               First stage coeff above    IQR   median        0.130***                   0.130***                       0.130***                   0.130***
               First stage coeff below    IQR   min-max                    0.076**                  0.076**                          0.076**                  0.076**
               First stage coeff above    IQR   min-max                   0.136***                 0.136***                         0.136***                 0.136***
               F-stat                                            8.19        1.91           8.19       1.91                8.19        1.91           8.19       1.91
              Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker and firm type, and the strength of positive assortative matching in each
             district-year. District-year specific controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii) concentration of firms and (iii) the share of skilled workers in
             the districts. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage
             always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***
             p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.
Table 14: Number of movers by worker-type across firms of different type. Firm type based on value added per
worker above (high type) or below (low type) the median. 2SLS estimations.

                                                                  # High-type movers
                                                      from low to high         from high to low
                                                          type firm                type firm
                                                             (1)                      (2)
                        Immi Share                         31.126***                  18.690
                                                            (12.790)                 (11.570)

                                                                  # Low-type movers
                                                      from high to low from low to high
                                                          type firm          type firm
                                                              (1)                (2)
                        Immi Share                       36.544***              8.036
                                                           (13.635)           (11.564)
                        Worker Type                                 Lifetime
                        Firm Type                            Value Added per Worker
                        District FE                           yes                yes
                        Region-Year FE                        yes                yes
                        District-Year controls                yes                yes
                        Observations                         1,012              1,012
                        First stage coeff                           0.120***
                        F-stat                                        16.18
                        Partial R-squared                             0.046
                       Notes : Dependent variables are the number of high- and low-type worker (in
                      log) changing employer (i.e. siren code) and moving across firms of different
                      type. High (low) type firms are firms with value added per worker above
                      (below) the median. District-year specific controls are: number of workers
                      in the district, concentration of firms and the share of skilled workers in the
                      districts. The lifetime conditioned wage used to approximate the worker
                      type is the average wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed ca-
                      reer (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience effect,
                      seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects).
                      Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                             49
A     Appendix tables

Table A1: Immigrants and the distribution of workers types (as revealed by lifetime conditioned wage) across
districts.

                                               Std Dev            Inter-quartile      Min-Max diff.
                                              Worker Type         Worker Type         Worker Type
                          Immi Share            0.082**             0.261***            2.434***
                                                (0.035)              (0.061)             (0.909)
                          Observations           1,056                1,056               1,056
                          Note : All regressions include region-by-year fixed effects and the district-
                         year specific controls described in the empirical strategy. The lifetime condi-
                         tioned wage is the average wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed
                         career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience effect,
                         seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects).
                         Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




Table A2: Baseline regressions using Value Added per worker as proxy for firm type. Weighted OLS and 2SLS
estimations (weights are the number of firms in the district as a share of total French firms)

               Dep Var:                 Rank Correlation                Strength PAM                Firm Profit
                                          (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)                   (5)
                                                                     Weighted OLS
               Immi Share               0.471**       -0.261          0.590***    -0.034                2.006
                                        (0.207)      (0.243)           (0.204)   (0.279)               (2.137)
                                                                     Weighted 2SLS
               Immi Share              1.754**       3.392**          1.634** 3.537**                  12.639
                                       (0.774)       (1.540)           (0.716)   (1.549)               (8.091)
               Worker Type             Lifetime       AKM             Lifetime    AKM
                                        wage                            wage
               District FE                yes          yes               yes        yes                  yes
               Region-Year FE             yes          yes               yes        yes                  yes
               District controls          yes          yes               yes        yes                  yes
               Observations             1,012         1,012             1,012     1,012                 1,003
                Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker and firm type,
              the strength of positive assortative matching, and the average firms' profits in each district-year.
              District-year specific controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii) concentration of firms
              and (iii) the share of skilled workers in the districts. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average
              wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage
              always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector
              fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                                50
                Figure A1: Total employment and Positive Assortative Matching across districts.




 Source: Authors calculations on DADS and Ficus/Fare data. Note : Positive Assortative Matching approximated with the rank
correlation between worker and firm type within a district. Worker type approximated by conditioned lifetime wage. Firm type
approximated by value added per worker. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by the worker over his/hers
observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector
                                              specificities (sector fixed effects).




                                                               51
Table A3: Robustness check using firm fixed effects from AKM decomposition as a proxy for firm type. 2SLS
estimations.

                      Dep Var:                 Rank Correlation                Strength PAM
                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)
                                                            Within specification
                      Immi Share               0.708       1.800***         0.132         1.670*
                                              (1.231)       (0.669)        (0.956)        (0.939)
                      District FE               yes           yes            yes            yes
                      Region-Year FE            yes           yes            yes            yes
                      District controls         yes           yes            yes            yes
                      First stage coeff                           0.135***
                      F-stat                                        20.64
                                                            Pooled specification
                      Immi Share             1.284***      0.997***       0.713***         0.153
                                              (0.272)       (0.291)        (0.256)        (0.325)
                      District FE               no            no             no             no
                      Region-Year FE            yes           yes            yes            yes
                      District controls         yes           yes            yes            yes
                      First stage coeff                           0.174***
                      F-stat                                       122.14
                      Worker Type             Lifetime       AKM             Lifetime      AKM
                                               wage                           wage
                      Observations             1,012         1,012            1,012        1,012
                      Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between
                     worker and firm type and the strength of positive assortative matching in
                     each district-year. District-year specific controls are: (i) number of workers
                     in the district, (ii) concentration of firms, (iii) share of skilled workers in
                     the districts. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by
                     the worker over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage
                     always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector
                     specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***
                     p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                           52
Table A4: Robustness check using alternative proxies for firm and worker type. 2SLS estimations.

               Dep Var:                  Rank Correlation                    Strength PAM
                                          (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)
                                             Co-worker type as proxy for firm type
               Immi Share                0.446       19.988***            0.598         2.671***
                                        (4.483)       (5.402)            (0.522)         (0.715)
                                                    TFP as proxy for firm type
               Immi Share                1.129          0.408            1.659*           0.076
                                        (1.192)        (1.175)           (0.863)         (0.977)
                                       Worker type conditioned on worker's occupation
               Immi Share                0.025          0.566             0.690         2.532***
                                        (0.968)        (1.124)           (1.013)         (0.915)
               District FE                yes            yes               yes             yes
               Region-Year FE             yes            yes               yes             yes
               District controls          yes            yes               yes             yes
               First stage coeff                                 0.135***
               F-stat                                              20.64
               Worker Type             Lifetime         AKM              Lifetime         AKM
                                        wage                              wage
               Observations             1,012           1,012             1,012           1,012
              Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker
             and firm type and the strength of positive assortative matching in each district-
             year. District-year specific controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii)
             concentration of firms, (iii) share of skilled workers in the districts, (iv) total export
             of firms in the district, (v) average capital and (iv) intermediates intensity of firms in
             the district. The lifetime conditioned wage is the average wage earned by the worker
             over his/hers observed career (period 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by
             experience effect, seasonality (year fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed
             effects). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01; p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                        53
Table A5: Robustness check excluding micro and very large firms from the calculation of the rank correlation
and the strength of PAM. 2SLS estimations.

                     Dep Var:                        Rank Correlation                  Strength PAM
                                                       (1)           (2)               (3)           (4)
                     Immi Share                     2.962**      5.146***          4.963***       3.815***
                                                    (1.429)       (1.722)           (1.635)        (1.334)
                     Employment (ln)                 -0.001        0.108             -0.083         0.088
                                                    (0.066)       (0.072)           (0.059)        (0.060)
                     Firms Concentration           2.127***      3.012***          2.146***       2.255***
                                                    (0.450)       (0.522)           (0.413)        (0.475)
                     Skilled share                  0.518**        0.211            0.558**         0.253
                                                    (0.226)       (0.252)           (0.224)        (0.220)
                     Worker Type                   Lifetime        AKM             Lifetime         AKM
                                                      wage                            wage
                     District FE                       yes          yes                yes           yes
                     Region-Year FE                    yes          yes                yes           yes
                     Observations                    1,012         1,012             1,012          1,012
                     First stage coeff             0.121***      0.121***          0.121***       0.121***
                     F-stat                          16.18         16.18              16.18         16.18
                     Partial R-sq                    0.046         0.046             0.046          0.046
                      Notes : Dependent variables are respectively the rank correlation between worker
                    and firm type and the strength of positive assortative matching in each district-year.
                    District-year specific controls are: (i) number of workers in the district, (ii) concen-
                    tration of firms, (iii) share of skilled workers in the districts. The lifetime conditioned
                    wage is the average wage earned by the worker over his/hers observed career (pe-
                    riod 1995-2005). Worker's wage always purged by experience effect, seasonality (year
                    fixed effects) and sector specificities (sector fixed effects). Robust standard errors in
                    parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




Table A6: Estimated impact of immigrants share on assortative matching with plausibly exogenous instrument.

                                                                               Local-to-Zero estimations
           Dep Var                                                                   Coeff        Min          Max
                                                                                                 95% CI       95% CI
           Rank Correlation Lifetime Wage VAPW                          0.25       2.423**           -               -
           Rank Correlation AKM worker FE VAPW                        0.64***      5.105***        0.058          11.206
           Strength Matching Lifetime Wage VAPW                       0.30**       3.361***        0.330           6.779
           Strength Matching AKM worker FE VAPW                       0.60***      4.718***        0.017          10.473
           Notes : LTZ based on   [-2 ; 2 ]. Assortative Matching approximated by rank correlation between
          residual lifetime worker and value added per worker are not reported because of perfect exclusion restric-
          tion validity ( =0).




                                                                54
Table A7: Number of movers by worker-type across firms of different types. High (low) type firms are firms
with value added per worker above (below) the median.

                    # High-type movers across firms          # Low-type movers across firms
           year   from low to high   from high to low      from high to low   from low to high
                      type firm          type firm             type firm          type firm
           1996           52                 60                   69                 45
           1997          375                191                  144                310
           1998          354                233                  172                300
           1999          303                283                  232                259
           2000          359                217                  274                273
           2001          438                343                  274                349
           2002          397                316                  226                362
           2003          306                249                  325                207
           2004          565                434                  294                437
           2005          490                488                  500                410




                                                      55
B        AKM decomposition orthogonality conditions and results

As explained in the data section, we use use worker fixed effects from AKM decomposition as an additional

proxy for worker type. To this end, we employ longitudinal matched employer-employee data (DADS panel ) to

estimate the standard mincerian wage equation as in AKM:




                                        ln(wage)i,t   = i + J(i,t) + Xi,t + ri,t                                 (18)


where ln(wage)i,t is the log annual wage of worker i at time y ; J(i,t) is a firm fixed effects (representing the firm

specific component in standard additive wage setting equation), i is a set of worker fixed effects that we will

use as proxy for the worker type and Xi,t is a set of worker-time controls capturing life-cycle and other aggregate

factors that affect the wage of workers with specific characteristics (i.e. experience) in a given geographic area

(i.e. Ile di France). Namely, the set of observable characteristics (Xi,t ) includes the quartic polynomial in

experience, Ile-de-France dummy, department of residence dummy, gender interacted with experience, Ile-de-

France, and year dummies. The error term ri,t consists of three separate random effects: (i) a match component

iJ(i,t) representing the idiosyncratic wage surplus earned by the worker i when matches a specific firm j , (ii) a

unit root component      it   representing the time-varying component of the individual-specific earning power (such

as human capital accumulation, health shocks, etc), and (iii) the pure idiosyncratic individual wage component

it .

       To estimate equation (18) we follow Card et al. (2013) and adopt an iterative conjugate gradient algorithm.

The correct identification of the OLS coefficients for i , J(i,t) and Xi,t bases on their orthogonality with respect

the error component ri,t . The orthogonality between individual fixed effects, time-varying covariates and the

error component is standard and widely recognized as valid. However, the orthogonality condition between the

firm fixed effect and the three components of the error term must be discussed and verified. In other words, for

a proper identification of equation (18) we need exogenous mobility.

       To this end, we follow Card et al. (2013) and perform an event study analysis of the effect of job changes

on wages (see section IV.B in Card et al.2013). This proceeds in four steps. First, for each individual i at

time t we calculate the average co-worker wage. Second, for each job changer (or mover) with at least two-year

employment spell in the new employer we classify the quartile of co-worker wage in old and new employer.

Third, each job changer is assigned to one of the 16 possibles job transitions (from of the four quartiles in

co-worker wage of the old employer to the new employer). Finally, we calculate the average observed wage

of job-changers for each specific job transition before and after the job change. Figure B1 shows the results

of this exercise. The first reassuring feature of Figure B1 is the approximate symmetry in the patter of wage



                                                           56
for workers that move between quartile 1 and 4 (similar symmetry is observed for other mover category - in

particular for those moving from 4th to 2nd and from 1st to 3rd ).53 This suggests that the choice to work for

a specific firm does not depend on the expected surplus component of the worker-firm match (allowing us to

not explicitly include worker-firm match fixed effects in the AKM decomposition). In other words, we do not

observe sorting of workers based on the match component. This qualitative evidence supports the validity of

the the simple model with additive worker and firm effect at the base of the AKM decomposition.

   To obtain unbiased estimations of worker and firm effects from AKM decomposition, we need to check that

job moves do not depend on drift in worker's expected wage (included in the residual term of the additive

model in AKM). The absence of any substantial trend in wage before the move towards a better firms, suggests

the absence of a learning process (drift) that may bias the estimations. Finally, unbiased estimation of worker

and firm effects also requires that the transitory error component of the additive model is not associated with

systematic movements across firms of different quartiles. The fact that pre-move wage dynamics are almost

flat, and the symmetry in the wage pattern across firms of different quartiles reduce any concern of job mobility

related to transitory wage fluctuations.

   An additional validity check for the AKM decomposition (and the underlying additive wage model) is testing

the improvement in the fit of the data after explicitly including match fixed effects in the estimation of equation

(18) as done in Card et al. (2013) and Dauth et al. (2018). Consistently with the additive nature of equation

(18), we find that the inclusion of job-specific fixed effects only marginally improves the R-square of the AKM

estimation: from 0.947 to 0.950 (Root MSE from 0.114 to 0.111). Finally, in table B1 we report some descriptive

statistics of the parameters obtained from the AKM decomposition computed over the period 1995-2005. We

have approximately 2 million worker-firm observations, and the average (ln) wage is equal to 9.8 with a standard

deviation equal to 0.46. In line with results in table III in Card et al. (2013), we also obtain a standard deviation

of worker effects larger than firm effects.




 53 The   patter shown in figure B1 emerges after adjusting wage dynamics for time trend.


                                                               57
Figure B1: Mean Wages of Job Changers Classified by Quartile of Mean Wage of Coworkers at Origin and
Destination Firm.




  Source : Authors calculations on DADS and Ficus/Fare data. Note : The figure shows wage levels of job movers in the period
 1995-2005 at old firm two years prior to the move (t=-2 and t=-1); and the wage levels at the new firm in the year of the move
(t=0) and the year after (t=1). These have been obtained by average wage of movers classified by the quartile of co-worker wages
                                                    in the old and new firm.




                                     Table B1: Estimation results for AKM model.

                                                                                    Period 1995-2005
                       Worker and firm parameter
                       Number worker effects                                              408666
                       Number firm fixed effects                                          95942
                       Summary of parameter estimates
                       Mean worker effects (across worker-year obs)                       0.000
                       Mean firm effects (across worker-year obs)                         0.000
                       Median worker effects (across worker-year obs)                     -0.038
                       Median firm effects (across worker-year obs)                       -0.002
                       Std. Dev. worker effects (across worker-year obs)                   0.990
                       Std. Dev. firm effects (across worker-year obs)                     0.246
                       Correlation(worker FE, firm FE)                                    -0.182
                       R-squared                                                           0.954
                       Other statistics
                       Average log wage                                                   9.863
                       Std dev log wage                                                   0.465
                       Sample size                                                       1904423




                                                              58
C      Rotemberg weights and validity tests

The identification of the shift-share IV adopted here bases on the exogeneity of the initial shares of migrants

used to allocate origin-specific and time variant migration inflows (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. 2019). This

section aims at strengthening the credibility of our empirical design by applying some specification tests on the

initial (origin-specific) migrants shares that have the highest impact on our baseline 2SLS results. Namely, we

calculate the Rotemberg weights for each origin-specific share of immigrants in 1982 and apply the specification

validity tests prescribed by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) for the top-5 origins in terms of Rotemberg weights.

Such weights depend on the covariance between the fitted value of each origin-specific migration share on the

endogenous variable and the endogenous variable itself, and intuitively tell how sensitive is the overidentified

estimate of the coefficient of interest (Immmi sh in our setting) to the mispecification in any of the origin-

specific migrant share. In practice, such weights reveal which specific migrants communities (in 1982) have more

importance in the overall 2SLS estimate. So testing the specification validity for the sub-sample of origin-specific

shares that affect the most the overall 2SLS estimation will reassure on the general validity of our estimations.

    In line with the LFS data in 1982 used to build the origin-specific shares of migrants in 1982, we have 22

origins o.54 Panel 2 of table C1 shows that the top-origin in terms of weights is the "Other Countries n.e.c."

(covering mainly South American and other Asian countries) which receives itself almost half of the weight.

The top-5 countries (in order of Rotemberg weights: Other Countries n.e.c., Other African countries, Portugal,

Ex-Yugoslavian countries, Algeria) account for almost the 80% of the overall weight. The large weight for the

macro origin "Other Countries n.e.c." is not surprising as it includes big migrants communities in France (such

as the Chinese, the Indian and the South American ones) and mimic the big Rotemberg weigth associated to

Mexico obtained by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) for the US immigration example. Also, in panel 1 of table

C1 we show that the correlation between weights and the migrants inflows is very high (0.96), suggesting that

weights are considerably explained by shocks (another feature in common with the enclave IV applied to the

US case in Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. 2019).

    With the list of top-5 migrants origins in terms of Rotemberg weights we can test the plausibility of our

identifying assumption. First, in table C2 we show the correlation between initial migration shares across

districts for each of the top-5 origins and the average district's wage in 1982 (we only have LFS data for the year

1982, and so very limited choices in terms of variables approximating the economic performance of districts in

1982). The absence of correlation suggests that the initial settlement of immigrants (by origin) across French

districts does not reflect the level of the economic performance of the local labor market.55 Second, we replicate
  54 The 22 origins in LFS data are: Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco, Other African countries, Vietnam-Laos-Cambodia, Italy, Germany,

Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, Ireland, Denmark, UK, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Switzerland, Austria, Poland, Ex-Yugoslavia,
Turkey, and Other Countries n.e.c.
  55 For a proper correlation test, as prescribed by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) we should have correlated initial migrants share

with the PAM measures in 1982. These are unfortunately not available for the year 1982 so we used average wage as a proxy for



                                                                 59
the pre-trend exercise as presented in Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) for each of the top-5 origins highlighted

here. Namely, we regress respectively our four measures of strength of PAM in the starting year (1995) on the

origin-specific share of immigrants in 1982 (including the same set of controls Xd included in equation C2 for

the year in 1995). Results reported in table C3 show that the variation in the initial origin-specific share of

immigrants did not predict statistically or economically larger strength of PAM across districts (no matter the

measure of PAM adopted). This, combined with our baseline results, suggests that there has been a shock in

the share of immigrants over the period 1995-2005 that improved the strength of PAM.

   Finally, in figure C1 we report the correlation between the point estimates for each of the origin-specific

instrument (^), and the first-stage F-statistics. The absence of a specific pattern suggests the overidentification

tests (for each of the IV) fails to reject the null. This is a further element in favor of the validity of the overall

IV used in our baseline estimations.

                                       Table C1: Summary of the Rotemberg weights

   Panel I: Correlations
                                                                                 ^k           gk           ^k
                                                                                                                     ^k
                                                                                                                     F        V ar(zk )
  ^k                                                                             1
  gk                                                                           0.958          1
  ^k
                                                                               0.087        0.056          1
  ^k
  F                                                                            0.217        0.222        0.050        1
  V ar(zk )                                                                    0.052       -0.114        0.008     -0.311          1
  Panel II: Top-5 Rotemberg weight origin countries
                                                                                 ^k         gk             ^k
  Other Countries n.e.c.                                                       0.585     2.17e+06        0.674
  Other African countries                                                      0.075     7.35e+05        1.425
  Portugal                                                                     0.047     5.28e+05        0.603
  Ex-Yugoslavia                                                                0.045     1.87e+05       -0.111
  Algeria                                                                      0.033     4.02e+05        1.790
   Panel III: Variation across years in ^k
                                                                               Sum         Mean
  1995                                                                         0.025       0.001
  2000                                                                         0.083       0.004
  2005                                                                         0.184       0.008
 Notes : This table reports statistics about the Rotemberg weights obtained following the procedure described in Goldsmith-
Pinkham et al. (2019) and adapted to our specific empirical framework. Panel I report the correlations between weights (         ^ k ), the
French inflow of migrants from a given origin k, (gk ), the just-identified point estimate    ^k , the first stage F-stat (F
                                                                                                                           ^k ), and the
variation in the origin country shares across districts (V ar(zk )). Panel II report the top-5 origin countries in terms of Rotemberg
weights. Panel III reports the variation in the weights across years.




the economic performance of the local labor market.


                                                                    60
             Table C2: Relationship between industry shares and labor market characteristic in 1982

                   Dep Var:                        Share of immigrants in 1982 originating from
                                            Other          Other
                                           countries       African       Portugal     Ex-Yugoslavia         Algeria
                                             n.e.c.       countries
                   Avg wage in 1982           -0.003        -0.000       0.005**           0.002             0.004
                                             (0.009)       (0.004)       (0.002)          (0.006)           (0.004)
                   Observations                 92            92            92               92                92
                   R-squared                  0.391         0.620         0.765            0.348             0.453
                  Notes : Each column shows the results of a regression of a given (origin-specific) share of immi-
                 grants in 1982 on the average wage across districts in 1982 (conditioned on region fixed effects).
                 Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                 Table C3: Pre-trend for high Rotemberg weight origins

 Dep Var:                                                                   Share of immigrants in 1982 originating from
                                                                      Other         Other
                                                                     countries      African      Portugal      Ex-Yugoslavia       Algeria
                                                                       n.e.c.      countries
 Rank Correlation (lifetime proxy for worker type)                      0.104        0.387         -0.958           -0.108          -0.111
                                                                       (0.166)      (0.420)       (0.852)          (0.245)         (0.397)
 Rank Correlation (AKM f.e. proxy for worker type)                      0.078        0.448         -0.794           -0.120           0.152
                                                                       (0.172)      (0.408)       (1.065)          (0.221)         (0.477)
 Strength of PAM (lifetime proxy for worker type)                       0.152       0.613*         -1.022            0.048          -0.013
                                                                       (0.166)      (0.329)       (0.955)          (0.249)         (0.298)
 Strength of PAM (AKM f.e. proxy for worker type)                       0.185        0.394         -1.035            0.011          0.061
                                                                       (0.141)      (0.341)       (0.996)          (0.230)         (0.414)
 Notes : Each entry of the table reports the results of a regression specification having a proxy for the strength of PAM in 1995 as dependent
variable and the 1982 share of immigrant for a given origin country. The same set of control as in eq. 13, and region fixed effects are
included in such specifications. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < 0, 01;   p < 0, 05; p < 0, 1.




                                                                  61
                                  Figure C1: Heterogeneity of ^ on origin-specific IVs.
                      1.5
                      1
             k estimate
                      .5
                      0




                            0               10                       20                   30                     40
                                                           First stage F-statistic

Note : This figure shows the relationship between each origin specific IV's point estimate  ^ and the first stage F-stat. Each point
 is a separate origin-specific IV estimate, and the size of the points reflects the magnitude of the Rotemberg weight. We report
                                   only instruments with high enough power, i.e. F-stat above 5.




                                                                 62
