                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                OCCUPATIONAL SKILL PREMIA AROUND THE WORLD

                                         David Kunst
                                      Richard B. Freeman
                                      Remco Oostendorp

                                      Working Paper 26863
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26863


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank Kathleen G. Beegle, Claudio E. Montenegro, David Newhouse and Aditi Mishra for
their help in accessing the World Bank I2D2 surveys. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Kunst, Richard B. Freeman, and Remco Oostendorp. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Occupational Skill Premia around the World
David Kunst, Richard B. Freeman, and Remco Oostendorp
NBER Working Paper No. 26863
March 2020
JEL No. F1,I2,J2,J3,J5,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

Firms hire workers to undertake tasks and activities associated with particular occupations, which
makes occupations a fundamental unit in economic analyses of the labor market. Using a unique
set of data on pay in identically defined occupations in developing and advanced countries, we
find that occupational pay differentials narrowed substantially from the 1950s to the 1980s, then
widened through the 2000s in most countries, creating a U-shaped pattern of change. The
narrowing was due in part to the huge worldwide increase in the supply of educated workers. The
subsequent widening was due in part to the weakening of trade unions and a shift in demand to
more skilled workers associated with rising trade. The data indicate that supply, demand, and
institutional forces are all drivers of occupational differentials, ruling out simple single factor
explanations of change. The paper concludes with a call for improving the collection of
occupational wage data to understand future changes in the world of work.


David Kunst                                      Remco Oostendorp
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam                     Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
De Boelelaan 1105                                De Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV Amsterdam                                1081 HV Amsterdam
The Netherlands                                  The Netherlands
and Tinbergen Institute                          and Tinbergen Institute
david.m.kunst@gmail.com                          r.oostendorp@vu.nl

Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org




A data appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26863
The Occupational Wages around the World 1953-2008 Database is available at
https://data.nber.org/oww/
1 Introduction
Occupations, dened by what people do at work and the knowledge required to do those

work tasks, are a fundamental unit in labor market analysis. They are a major determinant

of wages, accounting for a greater share of the variance of log wages or earnings than

education, arguably because occupations better signal what workers do at a job than does

education. The greater number of occupational than educational categories in survey data
                                                        1
adds to the explanatory power of occupations.

    Despite recognition of substantial dierences in labor outcomes across countries even

in an era of globalization, analyses of occupational dierentials worldwide are rare  a

gap that Ashenfelter (2012) attributes to the paucity of internationally comparable data

on occupational pay. This paper lls this gap by introducing and analyzing an extended

version of the Occupational Wages around the World" (OWW) database (Freeman and

Oostendorp, 2000) that reports wages in many detailed occupations in 192 countries, and

is based on the International Labor Organization's October Inquiry of pay. From 1953

to 2008, the October Inquiry gathered wages from national statistical oces on more

identically dened detailed occupations in more countries than any other data source, and
                         2
then was abandoned.

    To examine the determinants of occupational pay dierentials in the OWW, we sup-

plement the wage data with country level data on the distribution of workers by education

across occupations, which allows us to estimate the eect of the expansion of education on

the supply of workers by occupation in a country, country level data on GDP per worker

and merchandise exports plus imports over GDP as measures of the level and trade orien-

tation of aggregate demand, and country union density to reect the eect of institutions

on wages. Since we lack measures of demand and unionization at the country-occupation

level, we need a dierent strategy to assess whether these country level variables impact

the wages of more versus less skilled workers dierently and thus have an impact on occu-

pational dierentials. Our strategy is to estimate separate equations for occupations with

diering skill levels. All of our regression analyses include country-occupation and period

dummy variables so that estimates rely on within country-occupation changes over time.

    Section 2 documents the major nding in our data: surprisingly similar patterns of

   1 Appendix table A.1.1 shows that in the US in 2010, the nine one digit major occupation categories
account for a slightly greater share of the variance of ln wages than the nine main education categories.
Including 487 occupation dummies adds an additional 12.5 percentage points to the explained variance,
whereas including all 23 education dummies does not increase the explained variance. Autor and Handel
(2013) nd that occupation dummies give an R-squared of 0.61 in accounting for variation of wages
(column 3 of table 5), compared to 0.39 for education and demography variables (column 1), and that
both sets of variables give an R-square of 0.65. See also Bessen (2015).
   2 Freeman and Oostendorp (2020) give a detailed description of this updated data set. The data are
available for download at https://data.nber.org/oww/.




                                                    2
change in occupational dierentials among countries at dierent levels of economic devel-

opment. Dierentials narrowed substantially in most countries from the 1950s to 1980s

and then widened through the mid 2000s. Section 3 uses country data on the distribu-

tion of workers by educational attainment among occupations to estimate how increased

levels of education altered the supply of workers to occupations. Section 4 presents our

regressions of log wages by country-occupation on supply, demand and union drivers of

wages. The estimates indicate that shifts in labor supply narrowed wage dierentials be-

tween high and low skill occupations, while labor demand, reected in increases in trade

orientation, raised wages more in skilled than in less skilled occupations. The fall in union

density in most countries from the 1980s through the 2000s lowered pay primarily for less
                  3
skilled workers.      Section 5 shows that our estimates of the eect of demand, supply, and

unionism on occupational pay explain part but not all of the pattern of skill dierentials.

Section 6 reviews wage data on occupational dierentials from the period after the OWW

terminated through the mid-2010s and makes a case for new detailed occupation data to

aid analysis of the impact of new technologies on work. The appendices detail the sources

of the data and probe the robustness of results.




2 Measuring a Half Century of Occupational Skill Pre-
  mia, 1950s-2000s
To analyze the evolution of occupational skill premia around the world, we use the updated

2020 OWW database, originally developed from the ILO's October Inquiry" by Freeman

and Oostendorp (2000).         Beginning in 1953, the Inquiry asked the statistical oces of
                                                                                                      4
member states to report wages in 48 narrow (essentially 4-digit ISCO) occupations.                        In
                                                                                                 5
1983, it asked the oces to report on 161 occupations in all major industries.                        Forty-

ve occupations appear in both periods, although two of them are reported at a more
                                               6
disaggregated industry level since 1983.           Because the 45 occupations include only two of

   3 The trade result is consistent with Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) for developing countries, Wood
(1995) and Krugman (2008) for high income countries, Autor et al. (2013) on the China trade impact
on the US, and consistent with an increased recognition of the distributional eects of trade. The union
result is consistent with the nding that unions reduce pay dierentials in both advanced and developing
economies (Freeman, 1998).
   4 For a smaller number of occupations, the data collection of the October Inquiry started already in
1924.
   5 The ILO collects information on 159 occupations, but occupation 139 (`government executive o-
cial') has subsequently been split in three administrative levels (central, regional/provincial, local) (see
Appendix C in Freeman and Oostendorp, 2020).
   6 The occupations Mixing- and blending-machine operator and Labourer are reported for the entire
chemical industry in 1953-1982, and for the industrial chemicals and other chemical products industries
separately since 1983.




                                                     3
the university-level professional occupations that became more important in the 1980s-
                                                                                       7
2000s, most of our analysis focuses on the full sample of 162 occupations.

    Table 1 summarizes the coverage of the sample used in this paper. This diers from

the full OWW dataset available online in that it excludes the data from 21 non-sovereign

countries with current populations of less than one million inhabitants (such as Falkland
                            8
Islands, Gibraltar etc.).       The dataset has far fewer observations than if each of the re-

maining 171 countries had reported every occupation in all years.                  The reason is that

most countries responded to the Inquiry intermittently and reported pay for only some
                                                                                                        9
occupations. On average, countries reported wages for 22 years and for 78 occupations.

Even with the incomplete reporting by ILO member countries, the bottom rows of table

1 show that our sample contains 191,618 country-occupation-year data points on wages.

Somewhat over half of the observations (107,978) are for the 45 occupations overlap sam-

ple.

    We examine several related measures of skill dierentials. As the broadest measure,

we use the standard deviation of log wages of occupations. This measure covers the entire

distribution of reported wages in the same log wage units as human capital analysis of

earnings for individual workers. We calculate standard deviations for 5 year averages of

the available wage reports to smooth out measurement error and reduce the imbalance of
              10
the sample.        The left panel of gure 1 displays the time paths of the mean of dierentials

for the 45 occupations that are included in the dataset before and after the expansion in

all countries and in countries in the high income, medium income, and low income groups,

as dened by the World Bank. The right panel presents the corresponding averages for
                                                          11
all occupations in the dataset starting from 1980.

    Figure 1 summarizes the key pattern of change found in our data: a long-run decline of

occupational skill premia, with a partial rebound starting in the 1980s. Further analyses

showed that changes in the sample composition in the form of a disproportionate exiting

of countries with high pay dierentials decrease the sample averages in the rst and last

   7 Of which 3 are only available between 1953 and 1982, and 114 are only available between 1983 and
2008.    We note that the full OWW dataset described in Freeman and Oostendorp (2020) includes 164
instead of 162 (=3+45+114) occupations.     This is because for this paper, we have collapsed the wage
reports for the two occupations in the chemical industry that were reported at a more disaggregated
industry level only since 1983, to make their reporting more consistent over the full 1953-2008 reporting
period.
   8 Results are robust to including them (available upon request).
   9 Appendix C contains a full list of the occupations, industries and countries from OWW used in this
paper.
  10 Except for the 1953-54 and the 2005-2008 period averages, which are based on up to 2 and 4 wage
reports, respectively.
  11 The average standard deviation in the early 1980s is about 0.1 ln points larger in the right panel of
gure 1. This is due to the larger number of occupations at the upper end of the wage distribution in this
sample.




                                                    4
           12
periods.        To probe the U-shaped pattern of skill premia in the data further, we examined

decadal average wages for a balanced panel of countries, lling gaps in wage series of

one decade by means of log-linear inter- and extrapolations as described in the note of

appendix gure A.2.1. This balanced sample shows a U-shape relation similar to gure

1. From the 1950s to the 1980s the variance fell in 76 of the 91 countries (84%), whereas
                                                                                      13
from the 1980s to the 2000s the variance increased in 68 of them (75%).                    Each country
                                          14
grouping follows the same pattern.

    We further estimated pay dierentials in particular parts of the wage/skill distribution,

dividing occupations the ILO characterizes as more or less skilled in terms of the educa-

tion required to do the work.            We distinguish four skill groups: unskilled occupations

that require at most primary schooling, lower medium skilled occupations that require

lower secondary schooling, upper medium skilled occupations that use upper secondary
                                                                                                       15
education, and high skilled occupations that correspond to post-secondary education.

Table 1 reports the number of occupations per skill group. Using these categorizations,

the U-shaped pattern in dierentials occurs when we consider the top or top two skill

groups as skilled (see the top two panels of appendix gure A.2.2). At the bottom of the

skill distribution, however, the 16 unskilled occupations show a continuous narrowing in

the gap compared to the 146 more skilled occupations (bottom panel of appendix gure
          16
A.2.2).

    Even though the dierent measures show some variation, the basic pattern is narrowing

followed by a partial rebound among occupations higher in the skill distribution. What

caused the substantial narrowing and partial rebound of dierentials?

  12 Only 64 countries are represented in the rst period, and 58 countries the last period.
  13 The other panels of gure A.1.2 show that the pattern is similar when we weight occupations by their
estimated share of covered employment (see appendix B.2 for details), and when we weight each country
by its population.
  14 14 of 21 high income countries (67%), 40 of 45 middle income countries (89%), and 22 of 25 low
income countries (88%) had declines in occupational dierentials between the 1950s-80s, while 71% of
high income countries, 76% of middle income countries, and 76 % of low income countries had increases
between the 1980s-2000s.
  15 Since the ILO does not distinguish between occupations requiring lower and upper secondary ed-
ucation, the distinction between lower and upper medium skilled occupations is based on the typical
ranking of relative wages: See appendix A.1 for details. Occupational wage ranks correlate highly over
time (appendix gure A.1.1), implying that relative skill requirements of occupations are quite stable over
the sample period. Note that while we base our assessment of the relative skill requirements of occupa-
tions on the ILO classication, there are large dierences across countries in the extent to which workers
with a specic education level actually work in the assigned occupations. Our supply variable takes such
dierences into account, see section 3.
  16 This pattern is reminiscent of the nding of declining average returns to schooling, driven by de-
clining returns to primary and secondary schooling, but increased dierentials for tertiary education, by
Montenegro and Patrinos (2014) in a sample of 139 countries and mostly after 1990.




                                                    5
3 Educational Expansion and Occupational Labor Sup-
  ply
The large increase in years of schooling in all countries post World War II oers a plau-

sible explanation for the narrowing of occupational dierentials. More education would

increase the supply of workers to the higher-skill and higher-paid occupations where they

presumably work, while decreasing the supply of workers in lower-skill and lower-paid

occupations.

    Figure 2 displays the upward trend in schooling worldwide in terms of the average

years of schooling for workers above 15 years of age.          Measured by absolute years, the

mean years of schooling increased by 5.3 years for all countries, with a modestly larger

increase for middle income countries and a smaller increase for low income countries of

4.3 years. Measured in percentage increases, however, the increase is biggest for the low

income countries due to their extremely low level of education in the initial year, and

decelerated over time.

    Because workers in the same occupation  say teacher or carpenter or laborer  have

higher levels of schooling in advanced countries, where most persons have at least a high

school degree, than in low income countries, where many persons have at most elemen-

tary school education, increases in education have dierential eects on occupational labor

supplies across countries. To measure these dierences requires country level information

on the occupational distribution of workers by education.           We obtained such data from

the World Bank's I2D2 database, a collection of harmonized and nationally representa-

tive household surveys developed by Montenegro and Hirn (2009).                  I2D2 allows us to

estimate the distribution of employees aged 15 to 64 in one-digit ISCO-88 occupations

for four educational groups:       no schooling, primary schooling, secondary schooling and
                                                                                 17
post-secondary/tertiary schooling in countries with household surveys.                Absent educa-

tion data for more detailed occupations, we develop our supply measures for occupations

at the one digit level and apply those measures to the more detailed occupations in each

one-digit group.

    Even at the one digit occupation/four education groups level, the data show huge

country dierences in the distribution of workers with the same education level across

occupations.     In countries where few workers possess post-secondary education, many

workers with secondary schooling are in professional and other high skill occupations. By

contrast, in countries where many workers have post-secondary education, few secondary

  17 The I2D2 distinguishes between incomplete and completed primary and secondary education for a
smaller sample. However, gures for more detailed occupations and education levels would be problematic
in many countries due to the size of the surveys.




                                                    6
school workers obtain such jobs. For example, in Honduras in 1998, where only 5 percent

of employees possessed any post-secondary education, 46 percent of secondary-educated

employees worked as professionals or managers whereas in the USA in 2010, where 67

percent of employees had post-secondary education, only 16 percent of employees with

secondary schooling worked in professional or managerial occupations.

    Figure 3 displays the general pattern across all countries. It shows that as the share

of employees with post-secondary education increases, the share of professionals and man-

agers among workers with secondary education decreases.                   Still, when we regressed the

share of professionals among secondary education workers on the national share of work-

ers with a secondary education, the regression explained only a modest proportion of the

cross-country variation, indicating dierences in the allocation of workers even among

countries with a similar supply of post-secondary educated employees. This illustrates the

importance of having country specic education-occupation matrices to link educational
                                                                18
attainment to occupational labor supply by country.

    We estimate occupational labor supplies in a country by applying a single country-

specic education-occupation matrix to the Barro-Lee estimates of the education distri-

bution in the country. Let      aio   be the share of workers in education category       i   in one digit

occupation    o   in a country, and let    Eit   be the share of workers in education group           i   in

a period. Then, our estimate of the change in the supply of an occupation's work force

relative to other occupations in the country between two periods is:




                                                      aio Ei                                          (1)
                                                  i

    With   aio    xed, shifts in the country's educational attainment distribution towards

higher educated groups shift supply outward in occupations that employ relatively more

educated workers, and shift supply inward in occupations that employ less educated work-

ers. The shifts dier across countries due to dierent changes in the educational distri-

bution and the dierent country-specic occupational employment distributions within

education groups. By using a xed education-occupation matrix to estimate the distri-
                                                               19
bution of workers by education across occupations,                  we focus our analysis on changes in

supply resulting from changes in the distribution of national education as opposed to po-

tentially endogenous changes of the        aio   coecients. We assign the change in labor supply

  18 Conversely, workers with post-secondary education have a slightly higher chance of ending up in
jobs below professional and managerial occupation in countries in which many employees possess post-
secondary education. However, this relationship is less robust, suggesting that as the supply of workers
with post-secondary education increases, the demand for professional occupations and managers often
expands at a sucient pace to absorb them.
  19 When I2D2 had more than one survey for a country, we averaged education-occupation percentages
across all available surveys. See appendix B.2 for a detailed description.




                                                      7
to the occupations in our dataset based on the one digit occupation group to which they

belong. This produces measurement error in the change in supply, which is likely to bias
                                                     20
downward the estimated supply coecients.

    For about one-third of the countries in OWW, the I2D2 did not have household sur-

veys from which to calculate education-occupation matrices. Rather than deleting these

countries from our study, we imputed the employment distribution based on nine income-

region specic averages as described in appendix B.2. We probed the robustness of our

supply estimates by analyzing only countries with a non-imputed employment distribution

in the sample and by using only income-region country group-specic averages and obtain

results similar to those in the dataset with imputed education-occupation matrices.

    Table 2 summarizes the resulting estimates of supply in the form of the average propor-

tion of the work force that would be supplied to the specied major occupations relative
                                             21
to the total work force in a country.             Since each periods' labor supply is allocated to

one of the main occupations, the labor supplies to the occupations sum to 100%.                        De-

spite our deriving the supply measures at the one digit occupational level and imputing

the education-occupation matrices for some countries, our technique produces consider-

able variation in the estimated shifts of labor supply to occupations over time and across

countries in dierent income groups.

    Taking the all country panel rst, the row for the early period (1950-55) shows that the

educational distribution would have put an average of 36.3% of workers into elementary

occupations, compared to 9% in the three highest skill occupations professionals, associate

professionals and managers.          As average schooling increased over time, the supply in

elementary occupations fell to 24.4% of the work force in 2005-2010, while the supply in

the three highly skilled occupations increased from 4.1 to 9% for associate professionals,

from 2.9 to 7.8% for professionals, and from 2 to 3.4% for managers. The global story is

clear: the expansion of educational attainments reduced supply to less skilled occupations

and increased supply to more skilled occupations across countries of all income levels.

    Figure 4 shows that the estimated supply to skilled occupations exceeds the proportion

with post-secondary school education, whereas the initial supply to elementary occupations

is below the proportion of workers without schooling. This reects the fact that in many

countries, even workers without post-secondary education work in skilled occupations,

while not all who are unschooled work in elementary occupations.

    Do the estimated shifts in occupational supply reduce occupational wages in the more

  20 Appendix gure B.3.1 shows that around 60-69% of the wage variation between the detailed OWW
occupations is related to the 9 major groups, suggesting that occupational labor supply shifts at this level
will have some explanatory power.
  21 Since the Barro-Lee dataset contains educational attainments every 5 years starting in 1950, we take
the average of two subsequent reports as our estimate for the respective 5 year-period between both years.




                                                     8
skilled occupations and increase wages in the less skilled occupations, as they should if

they indeed measure the shift in supply?




4 Estimating the Determinants of Occupational Wages
To answer this question, we estimate an occupational wage equation that links OWW

country-occupation wages to our estimated country-occupation labor supply, GDP per

worker, the trade orientation of an economy reected in merchandise export plus imports
                      22
relative to GDP            ) and to union density.       Wages and GDP per worker are deated to

constant national prices using the Penn World Table GDP deator. We use a log-log form

for wages, supply and GDP per worker, so that parameters estimate elasticities:




                  log (wcot ) =  + 1 log (supplycot ) + 2 log (GDP/wct )                                         (2)

                              + 3 unionct + 4 ((X + M )/GDP )ct + Dco + Dot + cot

Including dummy variables for country-occupation                 (Dco ) and for period-skill group (Dot ) in
equation 2 eliminates any country-occupation or global skill group-period factors. Thus,

we identify the            parameters from variation of wages within country-occupations over
        23
time.

    As noted, to deal with the fact that data on GDP per worker, trade openness and union

density are at the country-level, we estimate equation 2 separately for occupations in four

skill level groups: unskilled elementary occupations, lower medium skill occupations, upper

medium skill occupations, and high skill occupations. To the extent that changes in these

variables are associated with dierential changes in the demand for workers with diering

skills, the skill group regressions will yield dierent estimated coecients for the groups

  22 We focus on merchandise trade because of concerns about the consistency of total trade measures
that include service trade (Lipsey, 2009).
  23 We derive the estimating equation from an aggregate production function that depends on capital
and an aggregate labor measure of occupational labor inputs with occupation specic labor productivity
captured by the parameter     occo and with an elasticity of substitution between occupations of  < 1: Y =
                    /
AK  ( o occo L   o )    . Assuming  wages are proportionate to the marginal product of labor up to a wedge
Io , the log wage for occupation o is log (wo ) = log ( ) + log (Y /L) + log (occo ) - (1 - )log (Lo /L) + Io , where
                    1/
L = ( o occo L   o)    is aggregate labor input. Occupational wages vary with average labor productivity
Y /L and occupation-specic labor productivity occo . The  < 1 implies that the wage will fall as labor
supply increases, and increases with occupational labor productivity. The country-occupation xed eects
pick up the time invariant part of the occupational labor productivities         occo ,   and the period-skill group
xed eects control for global labor share changes as well as residual demand shifters for the four skill
groups.      Through the lens of this framework, trade openness can be thought of as aecting wages by
aecting eective labor supplies through the factor content of trade or by inuencing the production
technology and hence occupational labor productivities        occo ,   and union density as inuencing the wedge
between wages and the marginal product of labor.




                                                         9
that can help explain changes in dierentials within countries.

    Table 3 presents estimates of the impacts of the posited wage determinants on log real

wages using ve year-averages of all data, which gives us up to 12 time series data points
                                                                                      24
for each country-occupation from the early 1950s through the late 2000s.                   Columns (1)

and (2) examine a sparse supply-demand model, which has only two independent non-

dummy variables, the estimated supply of workers to the occupation from the analysis in

section 3 and GDP per worker. Column (1) covers the 45 occupations available over the

full period, while column (2) includes all 162 occupations in the OWW. The estimates in

both columns show a substantial negative eect of supply on wages, with elasticities of

response of wages to supplies of -0.41 and -0.32, respectively, and a large positive eect of

GDP per worker on occupational wages.

    We combine these elasticities with the table 2 estimates of changes in supply  an

increase in supply in the high skilled occupations by 81 log points (= 100*log 20.2/9) and

a decline in supply in the elementary occupations of 40 log points (=100*log 24.4/36.3)

that yields a net increase in the relative supply of workers to highly skilled occupations

versus the least skilled occupations of 121 log points  to assess the contribution of the

change in relative supply on the change in relative wages. At the elasticity of wages of

-0.32, the change in relative supply reduced the high skilled to elementary occupation

premium worldwide by 39 log points. At the elasticity of wages of -0.41, the reduction in

the occupation premium was 49 log points. The increased supply of education thus acted

to depress skill premia over the half century in the countries in our dataset much as it did

in Goldin and Katz (2008)'s analysis of educational dierentials in the USA.

    Columns (3) and (4) present estimates that include two additional factors that might

have impacted occupational skill premia independent of the increase in education and

growth of GDP per worker  the ratio of trade to GDP and the rate of union density.

Column (3) estimates the model on a sample which includes all country-periods with data
                                       25
on both trade and union density.            The eect of supply is negative but smaller than in

columns (1) and (2). Trade has an insignicant depressant eect on wages while union

density has a substantial positive eect.           Column (4) expands the sample by imputing

values for 21 countries lacking schooling, trade/GDP or unionism data with the mean
                                              26
value of those variables in the dataset.           The estimated eect of labor supply increases,

the coecient of trade/GDP turns positive while the coecient on unionization remains

  24 Appendix B.1 presents further information and summary statistics on the variables. The 1953-54
average is based on up to two wage reports, and the 2005-08 average is based on up to four wage reports.
  25 Low income countries are underrepresented in the augmented sample for a lack of union density data,
as they only represent 3 of 48 countries in this sample (next to 24 high and 21 middle income countries).
Among the 122 countries in the basic model, all income groups are well represented (29 high, 61 middle
and 32 low income countries).
  26 We also include dummy variables for whether a variable has been imputed.




                                                    10
positive and substantial. Column (5) gives results for the balanced sample of 45 identical

occupations. Here too, the estimates show that education-driven increases in supply reduce

wages, whereas GDP per worker and union density increase wages, while the trade variable

has a negligible eect. Conditional on GDP per worker, which presumably captures any

positive eects of trade via improved productivity, there is no reason to expect trade to

impact wages, which lends some support to the specication.

   The evidence of a substantial negative eect of labor supply at the occupation level

helps explain the downward pressure on skill premia in the 1960s and 1970s. But it cannot

account for the rebound of dierentials that began in the 1980s. To see if the country-

level demand and institutional factors can explain the rebound, we replicate the equation 2

regressions for separate groups of occupations diering in skill requirements. Dierences in

the estimated coecients between the higher and lower skilled occupations provide a way

to dierentiate the eect of the country-level factors on more or less skilled occupations.

If, say, GDP per worker has a larger impact on the wages of highly skilled workers than

on the wages of less skilled workers, increases in GDP per worker could counteract the

depressant eect of supply changes on wages, at least to some extent in some time periods.

Estimating the equations for dierent groups also allows for supply to have dierent eects

on wages for dierent skill groups, which further increases the potential for explaining the

observed pattern of change in the occupational dierentials.

   Table 4 presents the results of regressing log occupational wages on their posited deter-

minants for the four skill groups in the ILO categorization: (1) the unskilled/elementary

occupations; (2) lower medium skill occupations and (3) higher medium skill occupa-

tions; and (4) high skill professional, managerial, and technical occupations. The rst four

columns present estimates from a specication with only supply and GDP per worker as

explanatory variables. The -0.42 estimated supply impact for the two lowest skill groups

is substantially greater than the -0.10 estimated impact for the highest skill group, which

suggests the value of analyzing occupations at the bottom of the education distribution

as well as the more widely studied occupations of highly educated workers. By contrast,

the estimated coecient on log GDP/worker is larger for the high skilled workers than for

the low skilled worker, indicating that greater growth of GDP widened skill dierentials.

   Columns (5)-(8) add the trade ratio and union density variables. The addition of the

trade ratio complicates the demand side of the story. The coecients on GDP per worker

are greater for the unskilled occupations, as the trade ratio variable seems to pick up the

bigger demand eect on the highly skilled with a positive 0.16 coecient for the high

skill occupations compared to a near 0 coecient for upper middle skill occupations and

negative coecients for the low and lower-medium skilled occupations all, however, have

high standard errors. By contrast, the estimated coecients on union density show a larger




                                            11
union impact on the wages of workers in the low and lower-medium skilled occupations and
                                                                                                        27
in the higher medium skill occupations than on workers in the higher skilled occupations.

Given that trade has increased over time and unionization has fallen, the implication is

that these factors contributed to the widening of skill premia in the 1980s-2000s period.




5 Accounting for Occupational Skill Premium Changes
Taking the coecients in table 4 as our best estimate of the impact of the factors inu-

encing occupational wages, we assess the ability of our models to account for the changing

pattern of skill premia over time.         To obtain the longest possible period of change, we

select the two ve year periods that are furthest apart for each country which has data on

at least one occupation in both periods. On average, the selected early period is 1960-64,

and the selected late period is 1995-99. For occupations in the two periods, we compare

the observed real wage change in log points to the change predicted from changes in log

occupational labor supply and in log GDP per worker, and the period x skill group dummy
             28
coecients.

    Figure 5 shows the results of this calculation in terms of the ability of the average

predicted log wage change to explain the average observed log wage change, country by

country.   The model with labor supply and GDP per worker is relatively successful at

predicting wage changes, with a regression coecient of observed log changes on predicted
                                                   29
log changes close to one and an R2 of 0.48.              Given this pattern, we assess next how well

the model predicts changes in the wage premium for skilled occupations by country. To

obtain country-level skill premia, we identify occupations in the top two skill groups as

skilled and occupations in the bottom two skill groups as unskilled, and calculate a

skilled-unskilled premium as 100*(average log skilled wage-average log unskilled wage) for
                  30
each country.          Since this procedure requires occupations from both skill groups in each

  27 The dierence in the point estimates between the lowest and the highest skill group for trade to GDP
and union density is statistically signicant (p=0.05 for trade to GDP, and p=0.03 for union density).
Appendix table A.3.1 shows similar results by skill group for the 45 occupation sample, except for the
high skilled group for which we have only two occupations in this sample.
  28 We do this by calculating a predicted late period wage as the sum of the actual early period wage
and the point estimates from table 4, multiplied by the changes in the respective variable between both
periods. Our predicted wage change is the dierence between this predicted late period wage and the
actual early period wage. Put dierently, our prediction is the answer to the question, from the perspective
of the early period: Given the changes in the explanatory variables between the early and the late period
and our regression point estimates, how would we expect the early wages to change?
  29 Giving more weight to more precisely estimated wage level changes by weighting the countries by the
square root of the number of underlying wage reports increases the R2 slightly to 0.52.
  30 We focus on the skilled-unskilled premium since it gives us greater leeway to take account of the
dierential eect of country-level variables in contributing to the pattern, based on the table 4 regression
results. However, the pattern of narrowing followed by partially rebounding skill premia occurs in both
the standard deviation of ln wages and the skilled-unskilled premium, cf. appendix gure A.2.2.




                                                    12
                                                                                                   31
period, we exclude country-periods with very few occupations in either skill group.

    Panel A of table 5 summarizes the results. Columns (1) and (2) show that the model

predicts a decline of 6 log points in the average skill premium, whereas the actual decline
                                                32
was 4.7 log points over the full period.             The correlation between the actual and predicted

skill premium changes at the country-level is signicant, though noisier than the correlation

of changes in wages by occupation (see appendix gure A.3.1), as looking at changes in skill

premia dierences out common patterns of change shared by both skilled and unskilled

occupations in a country.         Columns (3)-(5) break down the predicted change into the

contributions of changes in supply, skill group x period dummy coecients, and GDP per

worker. Over the full period, occupational labor supply changes pushed down the average

skill premium by 11.3 log points, which the increase in log GDP per worker only partly
                                                                 33
oset, despite an increase of more than 100 log points.                The bottom row of panel A shows

that the skill premium-reducing supply eect is both due to increased supplies in skilled

occupations (+33.4 log points), and decreased supplies in unskilled occupations (-9.7 log

points).

    To account for the U-shape, our models must predict a turnaround in skill premia for

the two post-1980 periods that are furthest apart for each country and that also have

a sucient number of skilled and unskilled wage reports in both periods.                     The average

selected early period is 1985-89, and the average selected late period is 2000-2004. Panel

B of table 5 shows that the average skill premium (scaled to a 25 year period) increased

by 10.5 log points, of which the model predicts 6.7 log points. Columns (3)-(4) show that

supply pushed down skill dierentials by -6.6 log points in the post-1980 period. Working

in the opposite direction, the coecients of the period x skill group dummies increased for

the skilled occupations to raise skill dierentials by 9.9 log points. By contrast, increases

in GDP per worker are associated with a decreasing skill premium, reecting the stronger

eect of GDP per worker on the lower skilled wages in the full model.

    Columns (6) and (7) give calculations for our model which includes changes in trade to

GDP and union density. The results suggest that these factors contributed to the post-1980

  31 We exclude the 20% of country-periods with the fewest wage reports by skill group. This reduces the
number of countries and the average distance between the selected early and the late period slightly, while
raising the correlation between actual and predicted skill premium changes. Including these observations
gives similar results to those in the text (results available upon request).
  32 We scale the averages to a 55 year period, which corresponds to the approximate distance between
the mid-points of the rst and last sample period.
  33 We examined the robustness of the table 5 results to dierent weightings of observations: (1) weighting
the skill premium changes by the geometric mean of the square roots of the number of wage observations
that went into the cross country averages, on the notion that changes based on more occupations are more
reliable; and (2) weighting occupations by their employment share in the average skilled and unskilled
wages within countries, using employment weights per appendix section B.3. We obtained results similar
to those in table 5 (available upon request).




                                                        13
U-turn in skill dierentials. Trade to GDP increased on average by 25.8 percentage points,

which translates into an estimated increase of skill premia by 6.3 log points, whereas union

density declined by 21.7 percentage points, translating into an increase of skill dierentials

by 5.3 log points.

    Figure 6 plots the observed skill premium changes on the vertical axis against four

dierent sets of predicted skill premium changes on the horizontal axis, always for the

same sample. In the top left panel, which predicts changes in the basic model, we nd an

insignicant association with the observed changes. In the next two panels, which include

changes in trade/GDP or union density in the prediction, the association between actual

and predicted skill premium changes strengthens to produce an R2 of 0.17-0.29.                   The

association is strongest in the last panel where we include both trade to GDP and union
                                    34
density, giving an R2 of 0.42.           Thus, taken together, changes in trade to GDP and union

density account for the entire observed net increase in the average skill premium after

1980, and are also strong predictors of skill premium changes at the level of the individual

countries. As our estimated trade eect likely reects the impact of unmeasured factors
                                                  35
correlated with increasing trade openness              , and our estimated union density eect likely

reects spill-overs of declining union density on the wages of non-unionized workers, we

view these variables as representative of changes in the trade and institution domains

that contributed to the increase of skill premia after 1980 that occurred in most countries.




6 The Case for a Better Measurement of Occupational
  Dierentials Around the World, 2010s and Beyond
Did the U-shaped change in dierentials found in the OWW persist after 2008 when the

ILO terminated its October Inquiry of wages, or did occupational dierentials move in

a dierent direction in succeeding years?               As no organization or statistical agency has

gathered detailed occupational wage data for countries around the world, we answer this

question by examining more aggregate occupational wage data from the ILO and from the

Union Bank of Switzerland that come closest to the Inquiry data.

    Calculating the change in skill dierentials in the ILOSTAT and UBS data in a similar

way as we calculated the OWW skilled-unskilled premium, we nd that both sources
                                                                                                   36
show declining skill dierentials in a slight majority of countries from 2008 to 2017.

  34 Results for the post 1980-sample are similar if we count the upper medium skilled occupations as
unskilled instead of as skilled (results available upon request).
  35 Replacing ln GDP per worker with ln capital per worker and ln TFP as potentially more fundamental
indicators of the factors driving wages does not weaken the eects found for trade and union density
(results available upon request).
  36 See appendix table A.2.1. This is mostly driven by middle and high income countries, which the




                                                       14
This pattern is consistent with what changes in our main drivers would predict for the

period. Union density continued to decline after 2008 at an average rate of 3.2 percentage

points per decade, pushing up the skill premium, while the ratio of merchandise trade

to GDP declined at a rate of 5.6 percentage points per decade, pushing down the skill

premium. Weighting these changes by the table 4 estimated eect of the two variables on

wages suggests that dierentials should have narrowed modestly even absent the continued
                                                                                     37
expansion of education, which would further reduce skill dierentials.                     Thus the post-

2008 reductions in occupational skill dierentials weakened the U-turn that began in the

1980s but were neither as strong nor as wide-spread as to nullify it.

    Finally, while modern forms of digital data have outmoded the survey design and

statistical procedures by which the ILO obtained its October Inquiry data, we believe

that there is a strong case for seeking a new source of data on more detailed occupations

worldwide.     Such data would contribute to understanding two of the biggest areas of

concern in economics in recent years:           the increase of inequality in individual incomes

and the impact of technology on the future of work.                On the inequality side, measures

of pay in detailed occupations oer a lens into the underpinnings of the increased within

country inequality in incomes  the extent to which this inequality reects the divergence
                                                                           38
or polarization of income between skilled and unskilled work.                   On the technology side,

current analyses of the future of work focus almost exclusively on data on employment in

occupations, classied by job tasks and the likelihood that machines will automate routine

tasks.

    Analytically, in both areas, absence of wage data for detailed occupations and the

possibility of inferring shadow wages for particular tasks makes it dicult to disentangle

the shifts in supply from shifts in demand that invariably show up in both the quantity
                                                                                                 39
(occupational employment) and price (occupational wages) side in the market.                          Data

on wages at a high level of occupational detail across countries, perhaps from internet

ILOSTAT and UBS surveys also cover most extensively.
  37 In the Cohen and Leker (2014) database, average schooling increases increased at an average rate of
0.85 years of schooling between 1960 and 2010, and at a rate of 0.94 years in the same countries between
2010 and 2020. The trend estimates for trade and union density come from a regression of all available
data for the 2009-2017 period on country dummies and a trend.         The trend point estimates for both
variables are highly signicant, with standard errors clustered at the country level. To translate the trade
and union density point estimates for the four skill groups in table 4 into changes for the two coarse skill
groups, we take the weighted average of point estimates, using the number of occupations per sub-group
as weight.
  38 Acosta et al. (2019) nd that there is a close relationship between income inequality at the household
level and the dispersion in wages, proxied by the wage gap between skilled and unskilled labor (p. 5) in
a large number of Latin American countries between 1991 and 2013.
  39 For instance, see Kunst (2019), who combines occupational employment with OWW wage data to
document a decline in the demand for skilled production worker tasks in manufacturing around the world
since the 1950s due to automation.




                                                    15
surveys of rms and/or workers, with information on the job tasks and work activities in

occupations in dierent countries, would improve our ability to infer from shifts in the

value of tasks and work activities where technology has its bite. Analyses of labor markets

would benet greatly from a renewed eort to obtain such data updated to salient modern

occupations.




                                            16
References
Acosta, P., Cruces, G., Galiani, S., and Gasparini, L. (2019). Educational upgrading and

  returns to skills in Latin America: evidence from a supplydemand framework. Latin

  American Economic Review, 28(1):18.


Ashenfelter,   O. (2012).   Comparing real wage rates.      American   Economic   Review,

  102(2):617642.


Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., and Hanson, G. H. (2013). The China syndrome: Local labor

  market eects of import competition in the United States. American Economic Review,

  103(6):212168.


Autor, D. H. and Handel, M. J. (2013). Putting tasks to the test: Human capital, job

  tasks, and wages. Journal of labor Economics, 31(S1):S59S96.


Barro, R. J. and Lee, J. W. (2013). A new data set of educational attainment in the world,

  19502010. Journal of Development Economics, 104:184198.


Bessen, J. (2015). Learning by doing: the real connection between innovation, wages, and

  wealth. Yale University Press.


Cohen, D. and Leker, L. (2014).    Health and education: Another look with the proper

  data. mimeo.


Feenstra, R. C., Inklaar, R., and Timmer, M. P. (2015). The next generation of the Penn

  World Table. American Economic Review, 105(10):31503182.


Freeman, R. B. (1998). War of the models: which labour market institutions for the 21st

  century? Labour Economics, 5(1):124.


Freeman, R. B. and Oostendorp, R. (2000). Wages around the world: Pay across countries

  and occupations. Technical report, NBER Working Paper 8058.


Freeman, R. B. and Oostendorp, R. (2020). The Occupational Wages around the World

  1953-2008 Database.   https://data.nber.org/oww/.

Goldberg, P. K. and Pavcnik, N. (2007). Distributional eects of globalization in develop-

  ing countries. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1):3982.


Goldin, C. D. and Katz, L. F. (2008). The race between education and technology. Harvard

  University Press.




                                           17
ILO (2019).    ILOSTAT database.    https://ilostat.ilo.org/.      Retrieved on June 13,

  2019.


Krugman, P. R. (2008). Trade and wages, reconsidered. Brookings Papers on Economic

  Activity, 2008:103137.


Kunst, D. (2019). Deskilling among manufacturing production workers. Technical report,

  Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 19-050/VI.


Lipsey, R. E. (2009). Measuring international trade in services. In Reinsdorf, M. B. and

  Slaughter, M. J., editors, International trade in services and intangibles in the era of

  globalization. University of Chicago Press.


Montenegro, C. E. and Hirn, M. L. (2009). A new disaggregated set of labor market indi-

  cators using standardized household surveys from around the world. Technical report,

  World Bank, World Development Report Background Paper.


Montenegro, C. E. and Patrinos, H. A. (2014). Comparable estimates of returns to school-

  ing around the world. Policy Research Working Paper Series.


Union Bank of Switzerland (2018). UBS prices and earnings survey 2018.     https://www.
  ubs.com/microsites/prices-earnings/en/.         Retrieved on June 10, 2019.


Visser, J. (2019).   ICTWSS database. version 6.0.   http://uva-aias.net/en/ictwss.
  Amsterdam: Amsterdam Institute for Advanced Labour Studies (AIAS), University of

  Amsterdam. June 2019.


Wood, A. (1995). How trade hurt unskilled workers. Journal of Economic Perspectives,

  9(3):5780.


                                           https://databank.worldbank.org/
World Bank (2019). World Development Indicators.

  reports.aspx?source=world-development-indicators. Data retrieved in March
  2019.




                                            18
Figures and Tables

                                                  45 occupations                                                  159 occupations




                                                                                                      .6
                           .5




                                 Low income
                                 Middle income




                                                                                                      .5
                           .4
          Sd of ln wages




                                                                                     Sd of ln wages
                                 All countries




                                                                                                      .4
                           .3




                                 High income

                                                                                                      .3
                           .2




                                1950   1960      1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                          1980   1990       2000   2010




Figure 1: Evolution of Occupational Skill Premia for the 45 Occupations available for the
1953-2008 Period, and the 159 Occupations available for the 1983-2008 Period

The gure plots the (unweighted) cross-country average standard deviation of ln wages, for the
full sample and by income group. The standard deviations are calculated either for up to 45
occupations available throughout the full period (left panel) or for up to 159 occupations
available from 1983 onwards (right panel). The number of dierent countries across which
average standard deviations are calculated diers by period, depending on data availability in
OWW. In the left panel, a total of 170 countries enter in at least one period (ranging between
58 and 119 countries per period). In the right panel, a total of 157 countries are represented
(ranging between 58 and 109 countries per period). The income groups follow the World Bank's
income group assignment in 1990. See appendix C for a list of countries represented in OWW
by income group.




                                                                                19
                  12




                                                                                            11.0
                  10




                                                                                            8.8
                                                  High income
         Years of schooling
                        8




                                                                                             8.3

                                                        Middle income
                               5.5
              6




                                                                   All countries            5.4
                  4




                               3.0
                                                                            Low income
                  2




                               1.1

                              1950       1960       1970        1980       1990      2000   2010


                                     Figure 2: Evolution of Average Years of Schooling

Average years of schooling of the population above 15 years, taken from the Barro-Lee dataset.
Averages are calculated for the 139 countries which are represented in both Barro-Lee and
OWW.




                                                            20
                                                                    coeff=-.30, pval=0.00, r2=.08
                              .8
         skilled occupation | secondary education
                 .2          .4
                              0          .6




                                                    0              .2                    .4                .6
                                                        share of employees with post-secondary education


Figure 3:                       The Share of Secondary-educated in Skilled Occupations and the Supply of
Post-secondary Educated Workers

Skilled occupations include major groups 1-3 (managers, professionals, and associate
professionals). The gure shows averages across all I2D2 surveys of a country, using the square
root of the number of observations with the respective education level as weight if several
surveys are available. The red line shows the linear t, and the title presents the associated
coecient, p-value and R-squared of the regression.




                                                                            21
                             .5




                                                             No schooling
         Share of population aged 15 and above
                                          .4




                                                   Elementary supply
                     .2         .3




                                                   Skilled occupation supply
           .1




                                                  Post-secondary schooling
                             0




                                                 1950       1960         1970    1980   1990   2000   2010


Figure 4: The Share of Workers without Schooling vs. the Estimated Supply to Elementary
Occupations, and the Share of Workers with Post-secondary Schooling vs. the Estimated
Supply to Skilled Occupations

Averages for the 139 countries represented in both Barro-Lee and OWW. Elementary
occupations correspond to major group 9, skilled occupations to major groups 1-3. The
education series are taken directly from Barro-Lee, and the occupational labor supplies are
estimated based on the Barro-Lee educational attainments and the distribution of employees by
level of education across major groups, as described in section 3.




                                                                                22
                                                         coeff=1.03 (1.02), pval=0.00 (0.00), r2=.48 (.52)
                                                                 SYR
                     200



                                                                                                                     TWN
                                                                                                             JPN
                                                                                              HKG
                                                                                             DEU    THA
                                                                    ARG            DNK ESP                     KOR
                                                                                           AUT  CYP
                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                      BEL
                             100




                                                                                           MLT
                                                                                            ITA
                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                 GBRNLDTUR
                                                                                         GRC SGP
            Actual wage change




                                                                         JAMIDNFRA TTO ISL
                                                     GHA     URY
                                                       IRNSDN MDA           AUS
                                                                           HUN
                                                                            CHL
                                                                          MUS   LKA
                                                                                    ROUPRT
                                                                   ESTMAR NZL
                                                                           MRT  NORCHN
                                               ZWEUGA             BDI
                                                                BRB  BRA
                                                                   SWZ
                                                                  NPLCZECHE
                                                                       SVK   LTU
                                                                             TUN   PAK MYS
                                                                 COL POL          IRL
                                                             MNG           CAN
                                                                            LVAIND
                                              KWT      HND         FJI
                                                                 COG
                                                         KGZ BLZ    CRI        USA
                                                                        LUX GAB
                                                  TGO COD
                    0




                                                                    SVN             ISR
                                                                                   MMR
                                          NIC            HTI KEN  PAN  PRY     BWA
                                                               BGR
                                                              JOR PHL DOM
                                           SEN       CIV      MWI
                                                             BENGTM
                                                                 RUS
                                                           CMR           LSO
                                            CAF LBR KHM  BOL
                                                 PER                    ZAF
                                                                       ECU
                                                  RWA
                                                TJK         BGD
                                              NER         TZA
        -100




                                              BRN
                                               QAT VEN        MEX
                                              BHR                  EGY
                                                SLE ZMB

                                                        DZA
                                                             MLI
                                                         SLV
                     -200




                                   -100                         0                       100                            200
                                                                    Predicted wage change


Figure 5: Comparing the Actual Wage Changes over the Full Sample Period to the Pre-
dicted Changes

For the 122 countries in column (2) of table 3, the gure compares the actual average real wage
change between the rst and the last period in the sample to the wage change that would be
predicted based on the change in log occupational labor supply, the period x skill group dummy
coecients, and log GDP per worker.                                  The average early period is 1960-64, and the average
late period is 1995-99, so that the average period over which changes are calculated is around
35 years. The title presents the results from a regression of actual on predicted wage changes.
In brackets are the results from the same regression in which we weight wage changes from each
country with the square root of the number of occupations based on which the average wage
change has been calculated, to give more weight to more precisely estimated wage level changes.
The solid line plots the slope of the (unweighted) regression, and the shaded line is a 45 degree
reference line. On average, changes are calculated based on 34 occupations.




                                                                           23
                         ln GDP/w, ln supply + period x skill dummies                                       ...with trade/GDP
                                coeff=.56 (.61), pval=.25 (.2), r2=.04 (.05)                     coeff=.98 (1.14), pval=.01 (0), r2=.17 (.22)
                40




                                        ROU                                                                     ROU
                                                   BGR
                                                  MEX                                                                       BGR
                                                                                                                            MEX

                                              CZE                                                                                    CZE
         Actual change
                    20




                                                 IND                                                                   IND
                                       CHN LTU                                                                CHN LTU
                                         SVK
                                          POL  RUS ITA                                                               POLRUS SVK
                                            HUN
                                             DNK
                                               TUR      PHL                                                        DNK       HUN
                                                                                                                       TUR ITA             PHL
                                                  CANAUS
                                                NZL                                                               NZL CAN
                                                    PRT                                                                 PRT AUS
                                               BRA
                                          JPN LUX
                                        LVA                                                                JPNLVA    BRALUX
                                            NLD SWEARG                                                       NLD     SWE
                                                                                                                     ARG
            0




                                     SGP AUT
                                     DEU        HKGCRI                                                       DEU SGP AUT
                                                                                                                      CRI                   HKG
                                                GBR                                                                GBR
                                         FIN     NOR                                                           FIN   NOR
                                                 CYP                                                         CYP
                -20




                                                CHL                                                                     CHL
                             KOR                                                               KOR



                                        ...with union density                                   ...with trade/GDP + union density
                                coeff=1.21 (1.21), pval=0 (0), r2=.29 (.31)                      coeff=1.2 (1.27), pval=0 (0), r2=.42 (.47)
                 40




                                                       ROU                                                                      ROU
                                                      MEX               BGR                                                     MEX               BGR
         Actual change




                                                               CZE                                                                                 CZE
                   20




                                               LTUIND                                                                    IND
                                                                                                                          LTU
                                                 CHN                                                                        CHN
                                           POL SVK
                                                DNK
                                                 TUR      RUS
                                                  HUNITA PHL                                                           POL
                                                                                                                      DNKTUR   ITA
                                                                                                                                       SVK
                                                                                                                                         RUSPHL
                                                                                                                                        HUN
                                                  CAN NZL AUS
                                                    PRT                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                           NZL
                                                                                                                          PRT            AUS
                                              BRA
                                             JPN
                                           LVA LUX                                                            JPN LVABRALUX
                                              SWE
                                              NLD
                                              HKG ARG                                                           NLD SWE
                                                                                                                      ARG                HKG
             0




                                     SGP DEU   AUTCRI
                                                    GBR                                                            DEU CRI
                                                                                                                 SGP    GBRAUT
                                         FIN     NOR                                                           FIN    NOR
                                                     CYP                                                            CYP
                 -20




                                              CHL                                                                       CHL
                               KOR                                                             KOR

                         -20          -10           0        10                20        -20         -10            0                10             20
                                            Predicted change                                                Predicted change




Figure 6: Comparing the Actual Changes of the Skilled-Unskilled Premium within 1980-
2008 to the Changes Predicted by Factors

The gures plot the simulation results that are also summarized in panel B of table 5.                                                                    The
top left gure compares the actual skilled-unskilled wage premium change between both periods
with the change that would be predicted from only taking into account variation in log supply,
the skill group x period dummies, and ln GDP per worker.                                                     The further panels also take into
account changes in trade/GDP, union density, and in both variables jointly for the prediction of
wage premium changes. The title presents the results from a regression of actual on predicted
wage premium changes. In brackets are the results from the same regression in which we give
more weight to more precisely estimated wage premium changes, by weighting the wage premium
changes from each country with the geometric mean of the square root of the number of skilled
and unskilled occupations based on which it has been calculated. The solid line plots the slope
of the (unweighted) regression, and the shaded line is a 45 degree reference line.




                                                                                    24
        Table 1: The Occupational Wages around the World 1953-2008 Database


                                           Full Sample         Occupation available...
                                                           ...throughout    ...from 1983
        First year                         1953            1953             1983
        Last year                          2008            2008             2008

        Occupations                        162             45               159
        - unskilled                        16              8                14
        - lower medium                     74              25               73
        - upper medium                     37              10               37
        - high skilled                     35              2                35
        Industries                         39              16               39

        All countries                      171             170              153
        - high income                      30              30               28
        - middle income                    90              89               81
        - low income                       51              51               44
        - sovereign                        169             168              151

        Wage reports                       191,618         107,978          118,755

        Years with reports by country
        - average                          21.8            21.6             8.6
        - standard deviation               15.4            15.3             7.7
        Reported occupations
        - average                          78.1            33.7             103.9
        - standard deviation               44.2            9                36.8

The occupations can be matched to the International Standard Classication of Occupations
(ISCO-88) at the four digit-level, and to the `International Standard Industrial Classication of
all Economic Activities' (ISIC-88) at the two to four digit level. 3 occupations were only
included in the survey between 1953 and 1982, and 114 occupations only from 1983 onwards.
The middle column presents data on the sample of 45 occupations for which we have data over
the full 1953-2008 period, and the right column presents the sample from 1983 onwards. See
appendix C for a detailed description of the occupation, industry and country coverage. The
sample coverage in sections 4 and 5 diers according to the availability of covariates and price
level estimates from the Penn World Table for the conversion to real wages. The full OWW
database includes data from an additional 21 non-sovereign countries with current populations
of less than one million, and two additional occupations since it distinguishes between the
industrial chemicals and other chemical products industries for two occupations.




                                                25
          Table 2: Estimated Occupational Labor Supplies between the 1950s-2000s: All Countries
          and by Level of Income


          Ele-       Agricul-   Service   Operators        Craftsmen   Clerks   Assoc.          Profess-   Managers
          mentary    tural      & sales                                         professionals   ionals

All countries

1950-55   36.3       9.9        13.1      10.6             16.6        4.5      4.1             2.9        2
2005-10   24.4       6.5        14.7      10.2             15.7        8.3      9               7.8        3.4

High income

1950-55   29.4       2.2        15.7      14.6             16.5        8.4      6.9             3.4        2.8
2005-10   15.7       1.5        15.8      10.1             13.4        12.9     14.2            11.1       5.4

Middle income

1950-55   37.5       8.9        12.6      10.7             18          3.9      3.8             2.9        1.6
2005-10   24.2       5.2        14.9      11.1             16.9        8.3      8.8             7.7        3

Low income

1950-55   39.2       17.4       11.8      7.5              14.3        2.7      2.5             2.5        2.1
2005-10   31.2       12.7       13.3      8.8              15.1        4.8      5.5             5.7        2.7

          The occupational labor supplies in each row sum to 100. They are calculated based on the share
          of the population with no schooling, primary, secondary and postsecondary schooling from
          Barro-Lee, and the distribution of wage employment by education level across occupations from
          the I2D2 data base, as described in section 3.




                                                           26
Table 3: Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Occupational Wages: Basic model
and Augmented Model with Trade/GDP and Union density


                                Dependent variable: ln real wage


                                          (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)
                                                                                               +
           ln supply                    -0.41     -0.32         -0.17       -0.22      -0.21
                                        (0.10)        (0.08)    (0.07)      (0.05)     (0.11)
                                                                                            
           ln GDP/worker                0.79          0.76      0.85        0.75       0.93
                                        (0.07)        (0.07)    (0.13)      (0.07)     (0.13)
           trade/GDP                                            -0.09        0.14      -0.27
                                                                (0.13)      (0.09)     (0.16)
                                                                    +            +          
           union density                                        0.36        0.31       0.39
                                                                (0.19)      (0.16)     (0.17)
           Country-occup. FE
           Period x skill group FE
           Countries                     121           122       48          143         48
           Occupations                    45           162       162         162         45
           Industries                     16           39        39           39         16
           Intervals                    5 year    5 year        5 year      5 year     5 year
           R2 (within)                   0.33         0.27      0.53         0.25       0.64
           Observations                 28103         51113     19787       57065      8755

Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level.
                                                                       +p   < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.
Columns (1) and (2) present the results for the basic model, for the sample of 45 consistently
reported and all occupations.    Columns (3)-(5) present results for specications that include
merchandise trade/GDP and union density. In column (4), missing covariates have been set to the
sample mean, and the regression includes a dummy variable for each covariate that takes a value
of one for such observations (not shown). Trade data are available for 140 of the 143 countries,
occupational labor supply data for 122, and union density for 53 countries. Occupational labor
supplies are constructed as described in section 3 using data from Barro and Lee (2013) and
Montenegro and Hirn (2009), merchandise trade/GDP is taken from the World Bank World
Development Indicators, union density from Visser (2019), and all other variables (including the
GDP deator used for the conversion to real wages) are taken from the Penn World Table 9.0
(Feenstra et al., 2015). Column (5) includes only the 45 consistently reported occupations. Note
that data on trade/GDP and union density are only available from 1960 onwards, so that the
models in columns (3) and (5) do not include observations from the 1950s.




                                                 27
Table 4: Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Occupational Wages: Estimates by
Occupation Skill Group


                                 Dependent variable: ln real wage


                        (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)
                       low       l. med.   u. med.     high       low      l. med.    u. med.    high
                                                                                  +                  
 ln supply            -0.42      -0.42     -0.29       -0.10    -0.22       -0.19      -0.09    -0.18
                      (0.19)      (0.12)   (0.09)      (0.11)   (0.20)      (0.10)    (0.10)    (0.07)
                                                                                                     
 ln GDP/worker        0.68        0.76     0.77        0.81     0.92        0.89      0.73      0.81
                      (0.09)      (0.08)   (0.07)      (0.10)   (0.15)      (0.14)    (0.13)    (0.12)
 trade/GDP                                                      -0.13       -0.18      0.01     0.16
                                                                (0.13)      (0.14)    (0.13)    (0.14)
                                                                                 
 union density                                                  0.43        0.45       0.27      0.13
                                                                (0.20)      (0.20)    (0.19)    (0.21)
 Country-occ. FE
 Period FE
 Countries             121         122       121        114       47          48        48       44
 Occupations            16          74       37         35        16          74        37       35
 Industries             14          27       18         17        14          27        18       17
 Intervals            5 year      5 year   5 year      5 year   5 year      5 year    5 year    5 year
 R2 (within)           0.33        0.28     0.26       0.19       0.63       0.56      0.51     0.42
 Observations          6625       25890    11317       7281     2187         9866      4429     3305


Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level.
                                                                   +p    < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01.
Columns (1)-(4) present results for the basic model separately by skill group, and columns (5)-
(8) do the same disaggregation for the sample with trade and union density. The dierence in
the point estimates between the lowest and the highest skill group for trade to GDP and union
density is statistically signicant (p=0.05 for trade to GDP, and p=0.03 for union density).




                                                  28
               Table 5: The Estimated Impact of Changes in Supply, Demand, and Union Density on
               Changes in Skilled-Unskilled Premia



Panel A: Narrowing of dierentials, 1950s-2000s
Changes from 1950s-2000s:       Contribution of change in factor to change of skilled-unskilled premium:
(1)      (2)                    (3)                  (4)                         (5)           (6)             (7)
Actual   From model             ln supply            Period x skill dummies      ln GDP/w      Trade/GDP       Union density

-4.7     -6                     -11.3                1.6                         3.7           -               -

                                Change of factors:
                                ln skilled supply    ln unskilled supply         ln GDP/w      Trade/GDP       Union density

                                33.4                 -9.7                        106.5         -               -

Panel B: Widening of dierentials, 1980s-2000s
Changes from 1980s-2000s:       Contribution of change in factor to change of skilled-unskilled premium:
(1)      (2)                    (3)                  (4)                         (5)           (6)             (7)
Actual   From model             ln supply            Period x skill dummies      ln GDP/w      Trade/GDP       Union density

10.5     6.7                    -6.6                 9.9                         -8.1          6.3             5.3

                                Change of factors:
                                ln skilled supply    ln unskilled supply         ln GDP/w      Trade/GDP       Union density

                                20.9                 -14.2                       61.5          25.8            -21.7

               The estimates in panel A are based on the specications in columns (1)-(4) of table 4. The rst
               row compares the actual and the predicted average change of the skilled-unskilled premium in the
               sample, scaled to a 55 year-period, as well as how changes in ln supply, the period x skill group
               dummies and ln GDP/worker contribute to the prediction. The second row shows the underlying
               changes in the average ln supply of the skilled occupations, the unskilled occupations, and ln GDP
               per worker. To ensure that the skilled and unskilled occupations for each country are at least
               somewhat representative, we exclude the bottom 20% of country-periods with smallest number
               of wage reports by skill group, which means that there are at least 6 occupations by skill group
               for each country (on average, 12 skilled and 26 unskilled occupations). With this restriction, the
               average change in panel A is calculated based on 118 countries, and the average selected period is
               1960-1964 to 1990-1994. The estimates in panel B are based on the augmented models in columns
               (5)-(8) of table 4, and averages are scaled to a 25 year-period. Skilled-unskilled premia are based
               on at least 13 occupations by skill group for each country (on average, 36 skilled and 50 unskilled
               occupations), and the average selected period is 1985-1989 to 2000-2004. The average change is
               calculated based on 37 countries.




                                                               29
