                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        REASONABLE DOUBT:
   EXPERIMENTAL DETECTION OF JOB-LEVEL EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION

                                       Patrick M. Kline
                                     Christopher R. Walters

                                      Working Paper 26861
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26861


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2020, Revised August 2020




This paper previously circulated under the title "Audits as Evidence: Experiments, Ensembles,
and Enforcement." We thank Isaiah Andrews, Tim Armstrong, Kerwin Charles, Sendhil
Mullainathan, and Andres Santos for helpful conversations related to this project, and Eva Arceo-
Gomez, Ray Campos-Vasquez, and John Nunley for providing data. We also thank participants at
the UC Berkeley labor and econometrics seminars, the Y-Rise External Validity conference, the
2019 NBER Summer Institute, University of British Columbia, UC Irvine, Harris School of
Public Policy, the Tinbergen Institute, the Stockholm School of Economics, the University of
Oslo, the 2019 All California Economics Conference, the University of Michigan, Stanford
University, Harvard University, and Clemson University for useful feedback. Evan Rose and
Benjamin Scuderi provided outstanding research assistance. This project was supported by a
Russell Sage Foundation Presidential grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Patrick M. Kline and Christopher R. Walters. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reasonable Doubt: Experimental Detection of Job-Level Employment Discrimination
Patrick M. Kline and Christopher R. Walters
NBER Working Paper No. 26861
March 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. C14,C44,C9,J7,J71,K31,K42

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper develops methods for detecting discrimination by individual employers using
correspondence experiments that send fictitious resumes to real job openings. We establish
identification of higher moments of the distribution of job-level callback rates as a function of the
number of resumes sent to each job and propose shape-constrained estimators of these moments.
Applying our methods to three experimental datasets, we find striking job-level heterogeneity in
the extent to which callback probabilities differ by race or sex. Estimates of higher moments
reveal that while most jobs barely discriminate, a few discriminate heavily. These moment
estimates are then used to bound the share of jobs that discriminate and the posterior probability
that each individual job is engaged in discrimination. In a recent experiment manipulating racially
distinctive names, we find that at least 85% of jobs that contact both of two white applications
and neither of two black applications are engaged in discrimination. To assess the potential value
of our methods for regulators, we consider the accuracy of decision rules for investigating
suspicious callback behavior in various experimental designs under a simple two-type model that
rationalizes the experimental data. Though we estimate that only 17% of employers discriminate
on the basis of race, we find that an experiment sending 10 applications to each job would enable
detection of 7-10% of discriminatory jobs while yielding Type I error rates below 0.2%. A
minimax decision rule acknowledging partial identification of the distribution of callback rates
yields only slightly fewer investigations than a Bayes decision rule based on the two-type model.
These findings suggest illegal labor market discrimination can be reliably monitored with
relatively small modifications to existing correspondence designs.


Patrick M. Kline
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu

Christopher R. Walters
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
crwalters@econ.berkeley.edu
1        Introduction
It is illegal to use information on race, sex, or age to make employment decisions in the United
States.1 The voluminous empirical literature on labor market discrimination has focused primarily
on establishing whether markets discriminate against particular groups of workers on average
(Altonji and Blank, 1999; Guryan and Charles, 2013). However, a finding of market-level discrimination
provides little guidance to regulators tasked with enforcing anti-discrimination law, who must decide
which specific employers to investigate (US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 2016).
Indeed, classic models of discrimination emphasize that market-level outcomes provide limited
guidance regarding the underlying distribution of discrimination across employers (Becker, 1957).
This paper extends the frontier by developing new tools to characterize discriminatory behavior in
markets and detect discrimination by individual employers.
        Our approach adapts insights from the literature on empirical Bayes (EB) analysis of large
scale testing problems (Efron, 2012) to the study of correspondence experiments that submit
fictitious applications with randomly generated characteristics to actual job vacancies (Bertrand
and Duflo, 2017 provide a review). Since the influential work of Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004),
correspondence experiments typically sample thousands of jobs and send each a few applications
with distinctive names that signify race or sex. Our basic insight is that such studies are best viewed
as ensembles of exchangeable micro-experiments. From the ensemble, one can infer properties of
the distribution of discriminatory behavior which can, in turn, be used to form empirical posteriors
about the probability that any given job is discriminating.
        As in classic EB analyses of count data (Efron and Morris, 1975; Brown, 2008), we treat callback
outcomes as independent Bernoulli trials governed by job- and race (or sex)-specific callback
probabilities, a modeling choice we show closely approximates callback behavior in correspondence
experiments. Because few applications are sent to each job, the distribution of job-specific callback
probabilities is under-identified, invalidating standard non-parametric EB approaches (e.g., Efron,
2016). However, we establish identification of a set of moments of the joint distribution of white and
black callback probabilities determined by the number of applications sent to each job. To estimate
these moments, we propose a Shape-Constrained Generalized Method of Moments (SCGMM)
estimator that requires the estimated moments to be consistent with a proper bivariate probability
distribution. Applying this estimator to three experimental datasets reveals tremendous heterogeneity
across jobs in the extent to which callback probabilities differ by race or sex. Estimates of third
and higher moments reveal that while most jobs barely discriminate, a few discriminate heavily.
        Extending classic results on the identification of False Discovery Rates (Benjamini and Hochberg,
1995; Efron et al., 2001; Storey, 2002), we compute sharp lower bounds on the share of jobs engaged
in discrimination given the identified moments. In the Bertrand and Mullanaithan experiment, we
estimate that at least 13% of jobs discriminate against black applicants. The corresponding estimate
in a more recent study by Nunley et al. (2015) is 17%. In a study by Arceo-Gomez and Campos-
    1
    Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of race and sex, while
the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 prohibits certain forms of discrimination on the basis of age.


                                                         2
Vasquez (2014), we find that at least 6% of jobs discriminate against women, while at least 14%
discriminate against men. These population shares are then used to compute bounds on posterior
probabilities that particular jobs are discriminating given their callback patterns. We find that these
posterior bounds are often highly informative even with few applications per job. For example, we
estimate that at least 72% of jobs calling both of two white applicants and neither of two black
applicants in the Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) experiment are engaged in discrimination,
while at least 85% of such jobs in the Nunley et al. (2015) experiment are discriminating. In the
Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasquez (2014) experiment we find that at least 97% of the jobs that
call back four women and no men discriminate against men, while at least 88% of jobs that call
back four men and no women discriminate against women.
   To explore the potential policy implications of our findings, we assess the prospects for systematically
detecting discriminators based on callback evidence generated by alternative hypothetical correspondence
study designs. This investigation is based on detection/error tradeoffs that arise under a parametric
two-type model fit to the Nunley et al. (2015) data. With only two white and two black applications
per job, it is difficult to reliably identify discriminating employers. But with 10 applications per
job, we find that a regulator who knows the joint distribution of callback probabilities can correctly
identify 7% of discriminating jobs while incurring Type I error rates of less than 0.2%.
   Finally, to probe the sensitivity of these conclusions to our modeling assumptions, we consider
the problem of a hypothetical regulator who knows only the identified moments of the distribution
of callback probabilities. This regulator decides which jobs to investigate using a minimax decision
rule that minimizes the maximum risk consistent with the known moments. We develop a tractable
approach to estimating the maximum risk function and find that a minimax regulator investigates
only slightly fewer jobs than would a Bayesian regulator who knows the joint distribution of callback
probabilities. This robustness emerges because the risk function is nearly identified at realistic
posterior thresholds that might be used to trigger investigations.
   Our results illustrate the potential of experimental methods to assist with regulatory enforcement
of anti-discrimination laws. Because employers vary tremendously in their propensity to discriminate
against protected groups, regulators face a difficult inferential task. Our findings suggest correspondence
experiments can be paired with simple decision rules to reliably identify discriminators. More
generally, the methods developed here provide a tractable empirical framework for making decisions
when the population distribution of unit heterogeneity is only partially identified by an experiment.
Candidate applications of these methods include targeting of workplace safety inspections based
on experimental audit data (Levine et al., 2012), detecting violations of rationality with laboratory
choice experiments (Halevy et al., 2018), and evaluating the performance of individual teachers and
schools based upon student achievement data (Chetty et al., 2014a; Angrist et al., 2017).




                                                  3
2        Defining Discrimination
We now develop a formal notion of discrimination tailored to the analysis of correspondence
experiments. To simplify exposition we focus on race, which we code as binary ("white" / "black").
Suppose that we have a sample of J jobs with active vacancies. To each of these jobs, we send Lw
applications with distinctively white names and Lb applications with distinctively black names as
in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), for a total of L = Lw + Lb applications. Denote the race
associated with the name used in application               {1, ..., L} to job j  {1, ..., J } as Rj  {w, b}.
The potential callback function Yj : {w, b}  {0, 1} indicates whether job j would call back
application      as a function of that applicant's assigned race. Observed callbacks are then given by
Yj = Yj (Rj ).
        When Yj (w) = Yj (b) job j has engaged in racial discrimination with application . Notably,
even if racially distinctive names influence employer behavior only through their role as a proxy
for parental background (Fryer and Levitt, 2004), using the names at any point in the hiring
process is likely to be viewed by courts as a pretext for discrimination.2 While courts are typically
interested in establishing whether a particular plaintiff experienced discrimination in precisely this
sense, we will take the perspective of a regulator tasked with assessing prospectively whether an
employer systematically treats applicants differently based upon race. For example, the mission of
the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is to "prevent and remedy unlawful
employment discrimination and advance equal opportunity for all in the workplace" (emphasis
added). The following assumption formalizes this prospective notion of discrimination at the
employer level.

Assumption 1. Callbacks are race- and job-specific Bernoulli trials:

                                                iid
                           Yj (r) |Rj 1 ...RjL  Bernoulli(pjr )         for r  {w, b} .

Note that random assignment of racially distinctive names to applications guarantees independence
                                                                                               L
of Yj (r) from {Rjk }L
                     k=1 . The key behavioral restriction in Assumption 1 is that the {Yj (r )} =1
are iid, which rules out, for example, scenarios in which a job calls back the first qualified applicant
and disregards all subsequent applications.3 We discuss below how to test for such violations.
The probability pjr may be interpreted as the callback rate that would emerge in a hypothetical
experiment in which a large number of applications of race r are sent to job j .4
                        L
        Letting Cjr =    =1 1 {Rj   = r} Yj denote the number of applications of race r to job j that were
called back, Assumption 1 implies the probability Pr (Cjw = cw , Cjb = cb |pjw , pjb ) that employer j
    2
     See, e.g., the discussion in U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Target Corporation, 460 F.3d
946, 7th Cir. Wis. 2006 and footnote 27 of Fryer and Levitt (2004).
   3
     One could equivalently view such behavior as a violation of our specification of potential outcomes, which builds
in the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption of Rubin (1980).
   4
     If hundreds of applications were sent to a single job the employer would likely be overwhelmed and Assumption 1
would fail. We show below, however, that this assumption provides a suitable approximation to an experiment with
8 applications, which is an unusually large choice of L.



                                                          4
calls back cw white applications and cb black applications is:

                                           Lw       Lb cw
               f (cw , cb |pjw , pjb ) =               p (1 - pjw )Lw -cw pc
                                                                           jb (1 - pjb )
                                                                             b          Lb -cb
                                                                                               .           (1)
                                           cw       cb jw

    We are now ready to offer a job-level definition of discrimination, which we will henceforth refer
to simply as discrimination.

Definition. Job j engages in discrimination when pjb = pjw .

Discriminatory jobs are labeled with the indicator function Dj = 1{pjb = pjw }. This definition is
prospective in that an employer with Dj = 1 will eventually discriminate against an applicant even
if it has not done so yet.


3    Ensembles and Posteriors
The above framework treats each job's callback decisions as a set of race-specific Bernoulli trials.
We next consider what can be learned from an ensemble of experiments conducted at many jobs.
This idea is formalized in the following exchangeability assumption on the jobs.

Assumption 2. Race-specific callback probabilities are independent and identically distributed:

                                                         iid
                                                pjw , pjb  G (·, ·) .

    The distribution function G : [0, 1]2  [0, 1] describes the population of jobs from which a
study samples. In practice, audit studies usually draw small random samples of jobs from online
job boards. The iid assumption abstracts from the fact that there are a finite number of jobs on
these boards. Note that by virtue of random assignment pjw and pjb are independent of the racial
mix of applications to job j as well as any other resume characteristics that are randomized.
    Assumption 2 implies that the unconditional distribution of callbacks can be expressed as a
mixture of binomial trials. We denote the unconditional probability of observing the callback
vector (cw , cb ) by

                               ¯ (cw , cb ) =
                               f                    f (cw , cb |pw , pb ) dG (pw , pb ) .                  (2)

    The distribution G will serve as a key object of interest in our analysis. One reason for interest
in G is that it characterizes both the prevalence and severity of discrimination in a population.
Prevalence is captured by the proportion of jobs that are engaged in discrimination, which can be
written:
                                   ¯ = Pr (Dj = 1) =                    dG (pw , pb ) .
                                                               pw =pb

Likewise, the severity of discrimination can be summarized by moments of the form             (pw - pb )m dG (pw , pb ),
which will equal zero for any m  N if all jobs call back applicants independently of race.

                                                         5
         A second reason for interest in G lies in its potential forensic value as a tool for identifying
which jobs are discriminating. The quantity  (cw , cb ) = Pr (Dj = 1|Cjw = cw , Cjb = cb ) gives
the prevalence of discrimination among jobs with callback vector (cw , cb ). We can also think of
 (Cjw , Cjb ) as the posterior probability that a job is discriminating given the callback evidence
(Cjw , Cjb ). Invoking Bayes' rule,  (cw , cb ) can be expressed as a functional of the "prior" distribution
G:

                                              Pr (Cjw = cw , Cjb = cb |Dj = 1)        ¯
                               (cw , cb ) =                  ¯
                                                            f (cw , cb )
                                               pw =pb f (cw , cb |pw , pb ) dG (pw , pb )
                                         =                   ¯ (cw , cb )
                                                            f
                                                                   

                                         = P cw , cb ,        G .
                                                   direct indirect

         The dependence of  (cw , cb ) on G is an example of what Efron (2010) refers to as "indirect
evidence." To understand the logic of incorporating indirect evidence, suppose ¯ = 0 so that no
jobs discriminate. Then  (Cjw , Cjb ) = 0 with probability one ­ any seemingly suspicious callback
decisions are due to chance. Likewise, if ¯ = 1, all jobs are discriminators and there is no need
for direct evidence on the behavior of particular jobs. But in intermediate cases, where some share
of jobs are discriminators, and some are not, it is rational to blend the direct evidence from a
particular job with contextual information on the population from which that job was drawn.
   Empirical Bayes approaches seek to form empirical posteriors P cw , cb , G  ^ that substitute
the unknown G with an estimator G   ^ . Important applications of this idea arise in the literature
on multiple hypothesis testing, where a key concept is the False Discovery Rate (Benjamini and
Hochberg, 1995), which can be thought of as a posterior estimate of the probability that a given
null hypothesis is true (Efron et al., 2001; Storey, 2002, 2003). In our setting, the False Discovery
Rate corresponds to the proportion 1 -  (cw , cb ) of jobs with evidence vector (cw , cb ) that are not
discriminating. Appendix A develops this connection in more detail.


4         Identification of G
Each job's realized callback rates (Cjw /Lw , Cjb /Lb ) provide noisy estimates of the latent callback
probabilities (pjw , pjb ). The binomial structure of this noise is not classical which leads point
identification of G to fail when the number of applications per job is small.5 In this section we
establish that certain moments of G are nonetheless identified by simple linear transformations of
unconditional callback probabilities. We then proceed to derive bounds on the posterior probability
     5
    If L were to grow large, one could invoke a normal approximation on each job's sample callback rates and then
apply a variance stabilizing transform to make the noise approximately homoscedastic, as in classic EB studies of
batting averages (Efron and Morris, 1975; Brown, 2008). With homoscedastic normal estimation error, G could
then be estimated via deconvolution (e.g., as in Efron, 2016). However, Brown (2008) cautions against using such
approximations with 10 or fewer observations per group.


                                                         6
function  (cw , cb ) consistent with these moments.

Moments
From (2) we can write

                          Lw     Lb                 Lw -cw cb
       ¯(cw , cb ) =
       f                            E pc
                                       jw (1 - pjw )
                                        w
                                                          pjb (1 - pjb )Lb -cb
                          cw     cb
                                       Lw -cw Lb -cw
                          Lw     Lb                                 Lw - cw     Lb - cb      w +m cb +n
                   =                                   (-1)m+n                          E pc
                                                                                           jw    pjb    ,    (3)
                          cw     cb                                   m            n
                                        m=0    n=0

where E [·] denotes the expectation with respect to G. Hence, the reduced form callback rates can
be written as linear functions of uncentered moments of the latent callback probabilities.
    We index these moments via the function:

                                  µ (m, n)  E pm   n
                                               jw pjb             for (m, n)  N2 .

        ¯= f
Letting f  ¯ (1, 0) , ..., f
                           ¯ (Lw , 0) , ..., f
                                             ¯ (Lw , Lb )       denote the vector of frequencies for all possible
callback outcomes excluding (0, 0) and µ = (µ (1, 0) , ..., µ (Lw , 0) , ..., µ (Lw , Lb )) the corresponding
list of moments, we can write the equations in (3) as a linear system f        ¯ = Bµ, where B is a known
non-singular square matrix of binomial coefficients. Inverting the linear system yields

                                                     µ = B -1 f
                                                              ¯,                                             (4)

which immediately implies the following Lemma.

Lemma 1 (Identification of Moments). Under Assumptions 1 and 2 and for a given application
design (Lw , Lb ), all moments µ(m, n) for 0  m  Lw and 0  n  Lb are identified.

    Lemma 1 formalizes the sense in which the identifying power of a correspondence experiment
is increasing in the number of applications of each type sent to each job. As min {Lw , Lb } grows
large, the entire joint distribution of black and white callback probabilities becomes identified,
which motivates non-parametric deconvolution approaches such as Efron (2016). With a finite
number of applications per job, Lemma 1 establishes which moments of G are identified from (4).
    For example, when Lw = Lb = 2 as in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), Lemma 1 establishes
identification of the first two moments of black and white callback probabilities. From these
moments, one can identify the following measure of job-level heterogeneity in discriminatory behavior:

         V [pjb - pjw ] = µ (0, 2) + µ (2, 0) - 2µ (1, 1) - µ (0, 1)2 - µ (1, 0)2 + 2µ (0, 1) µ (1, 0) .

With more applications per job, higher moments of the distribution of job level discrimination
become identified. Furthermore, when the application design (Lw , Lb ) varies randomly across jobs,
some moments of G will be over-identified. We later exploit these over-identifying restrictions in
estimation to improve precision and test our modeling assumptions.

                                                            7
Analytic Bound on Posterior Probabilities
Though the study of moments of the callback distribution G can shed light on underlying heterogeneity
in callback behavior, the posterior probability  (cw , cb ) need not admit a representation in terms of
a finite number of moments. However, a simple analytic bound on the posterior can be derived from
an application of Bayes' rule that conditions on the total number of callbacks Cjb + Cjw to job j . Let
¯
ft (cw ) = Pr (Cjw = cw , Cjb = t - cw |Cjb + Cjw = t) denote the probability mass function for white
                                                                               ¯0 (cw ) =
callbacks in the stratum of jobs that call back t applicants in total, and let f                    Lw    Lb
                                                                                                                /   L
                                                                                t                   cw   t-cw       t
denote the corresponding probability mass function that would arise under Assumptions 1 and 2 if
no discrimination were present in this stratum. Finally, let ¯t = Pr (Dj = 1|Cjb + Cjw = t) denote
the share of jobs calling back t total applicants that are engaged in discrimination.
   One can write the posterior probability of discrimination in terms of these objects as follows:

                        (cw , cb ) = 1 - (1 -           ¯0
                                              ¯cw +cb ) f               ¯
                                                         cw +cb (cw ) / fcw +cb (cw ) .
                                         prior that D = 0 likelihood if D = 0 marginal likelihood



                                      ¯
Because the probability mass function ft (cw ) is directly identified by the experiment, the only
nuisance parameters entering the posterior are the stratum specific priors {¯ t }L
                                                                                 t=0 . For example,
in an experiment with Lw = Lb = 2, the prevalence of discrimination among jobs that call back
only white applications is  (2, 0) = 1 - (1 -            ¯
                                              ¯2 ) (1/6)/f2 (2) . By contrast, in this design, the exact
p -value on the null hypothesis that a job calling back only white applications is not discriminating
is simply f¯0 (2) = 1/6. Note that  (2, 0) > f ¯0 (2) if and only if            ¯
                                                                     ¯ 2 > 1 - 5f2 (2), which highlights
           2                                        2
the crucial role of the stratum prior in drawing posterior inferences.
   The following Lemma, which is proved in Appendix B, provides a tractable bound on both the
stratum prior ¯t and, consequently, the posterior prevalence function  (cw , t - cw ).

Lemma 2 (Bounds on Stratum Prior and Posterior).

                               f¯0 (cw ) - f¯         ¯           ¯0
                                             t (cw ) ft (cw ) - ft (cw )
                                 t
      i) ¯t      max    max           ¯0 (cw )      ,         ¯0 (cw )   , t  {1, ..., L - 1},
              cw {0,...,t}           f t                1-f    t
                              ¯0 (cw )
                              f                            f¯             ¯
                                                             t (c ) 1 - ft (cw )
                               t
     ii)  (cw , t - cw )  1 - ¯            min min ¯0 w ,                ¯0 (c ) , t  {cw , ..., L - 1}.
                              ft (cw ) cw {0,...,t}        ft (cw ) 1 - f t   w

   Part i) of this Lemma shows that the experiment places a lower bound on the share of jobs
engaged in discrimination in each callback stratum that is increasing in the discrepancy between
the distribution of callback outcomes and the distribution predicted by the non-discrimination null.
Efron et al. (2001, p. 1154) proposed an analogous bound to control the False Discovery Rate in
a multiple testing analysis of a microarray experiment. Part ii) establishes via standard Bayesian
updating arguments that the bound on the prior translates into a corresponding lower bound on
the posterior.




                                                        8
Sharp Bounds
While the bounds in Lemma 2 are easy to compute, they need not be sharp, as restrictions across
callback strata have been ignored. A lower bound on the stratum prior ¯t that exploits all of the
logical restrictions in our framework can be written as the solution to the following constrained
optimization problem:

                                                 L
                                                  t
                            min 1 -      t                           pt (1 - p)L-t dG (p, p) ,                        (5)
                            GG                 ¯
                                         cw =0 f (cw , t - cw )



                                    Lw     Lb                   Lw -cw cb
                   ¯ (cw , cb ) =
              s.t. f                                pc
                                                     w (1 - pw )
                                                       w
                                                                      pb (1 - pb )Lb -cb dG (pw , pb ) ,              (6)
                                    cw     cb
                          for (cw = 0, .., Lw ; cb = 0, .., Lb ) .

        To make this problem computationally tractable, we consider a space G of discretized approximations
to the unknown distribution function G.6 Because both the objective and constraints are linear in
the probability mass function associated with G, we can apply linear programming (LP) routines
to compute bounds given an estimate of the callback probabilities f   ¯ (cw , cb )       . Details of
                                                                                   cw ,c               b
our computational procedure are given in Appendix C. Since the distribution G is not indexed
by t, the solution to (5) enforces constraints across callback strata. Consequently, we may obtain
informative bounds on the share of discriminatory jobs even among those jobs that call no (or all)
applications back.7
        Analogous LP formulations can be used to bound any linear functional of G. For example,
the lower bound on the unconditional prevalence of discrimination ¯ is obtained by replacing the
objective in (5) with minG(·,·)G 1- dG (p, p). Likewise, we can bound from below the proportion of
jobs discriminating against whites by replacing the objective in (5) with minG(·,·)G                 pw <pb   dG (pw , pb ).
We leverage these insights to bound from below the prevalence of a variety of directional notions
of discrimination in the empirical work to follow.


5        Data
We apply our methods to data from three correspondence experiments summarized in Table I.
Bertrand and Mullainathan (BM, 2004) applied to 1,112 job openings in Boston and Chicago,
submitting four applications to each job. Of the four applications, two were assigned black-
sounding names while the remaining two were assigned white-sounding names. The callback rate
to applications with black sounding names was 3.1 percentage points lower than to applications
with white sounding names.
    6
    See Noubiap et al. (2001) for a closely related approach and an asymptotic analysis of the effects of discretization.
    7
    Suppose, for instance, that G is a two type mixture with Pr (pjw = 1, pjb = 1) = 1/2 and Pr (pjw = 1/2, pjb = 0) =
1/2. Then all jobs with zero callbacks must be discriminators.


                                                             9
                         Table I: Descriptive statistics for resume correspondance studies
                                              Bertrand &                       Arceo-Gomez &
                                             Mullainathan        Nunley et al. Campos-Vasquez
                                                   (1)               (2)              (3)
                       Number of jobs            1,112             2,305              799

                    Applications per job             4                 4                  8

                      Treatment/control        Black/white       Black/white        Male/female

                    Callback rates: Total         0.079             0.167               0.123

                                 Treatment        0.063             0.154               0.108

                                   Control        0.094             0.180               0.138

                                Difference        -0.031            -0.026              -0.033
                                                 (0.007)           (0.007)             (0.008)
                   Notes: This table reports sample characteristics based on data from three resume
                   correspondence experiments. Columns (1) and (2) show statistics from Bertrand
                   and Mullainathan's (2004) and Nunley et al.'s (2015) studies of racial
                   discrimination in the United States. Column (3) reports statistics from Arceo-
                   Gomez & Campos-Vasquez's (2014) study of gender discrimination in Mexico.
                   Standard errors for treatment/control differences, clustered at the job level, are
                   in parentheses.


       Nunley et al. (NPRS, 2015) studied racial discrimination in the market for new college graduates
by applying to 2,305 listings on an online job board, again sending four resumes per job opening.
Unlike BM, the names assigned to the four resumes were sampled without replacement from a pool
of eight names, four of which were distinctively black and four of which were distinctively white.
This led the share of black names sent to each job to vary randomly in increments of 25% from
0% to 100%. The overall callback rate in the NPRS study was more than twice as high as in the
BM study, perhaps because the fictitious applicants were more highly educated. On average, black
names had a 2.6 percentage point lower callback rate than white names.
       Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasquez (AGCV, 2014) applied to 799 job openings through an
online job portal in a study of race and gender discrimination in Mexico City, Mexico. AGCV sent
eight fictitious applications to each job, and the applicants were all recent college graduates. While
the AGCV experiment looks at a different context than BM or NPRS, this data set allows us to
demonstrate the gains from doubling the number of applications per job opening. To illustrate the
identifying power of sending four applications to each protected group, we focus on gender in this
experiment, as AGCV used a three-category definition of race.8 In the AGCV experiment, women
were 3.3 percentage points more likely to receive callbacks than men.
   8
     In principle the methods developed here could be extended to a multivariate distribution of callback probabilities
for three or more groups. Section 8 explores this possibility by allowing callback rates to differ by resume quality in
addition to race or gender.



                                                           10
6     Are Callbacks Independent Trials?
We begin by considering tests of the Bernoulli trials assumption that undergirds our econometric
framework. This assumption would be violated if the likelihood of a callback depends not just on
an application's own characteristics but also on the characteristics of other applications sent to the
same job. To assess this possibility, we fit linear probability models of the form:

                                                       ¯ 2 + j ,
                                       Yj = 0 + Xj 1 + X                                                         (7)
                                                        j


                                                        ¯ j = (L - 1)-1
where Xj is a vector of application characteristics and X                                    Xjk gives the "leave
                                                                                        k=
out" mean of those characteristics among the applications sent to job j excluding application .
While the coefficient vector 1 gives the direct effect of application characteristics on callbacks, the
coefficient vector 2 captures the "peer effect" of other applications to the same job on application
 's callback propensity. Assumption 1 restricts these peer effects to be zero (2 = 0).
    For OLS estimates of 2 to identify causal effects, X¯ j must be uncorrelated with any omitted
application characteristics Zj that influence callbacks. We therefore focus on the NPRS study
which assigned both race and a large number of other application characteristics independently of
each other and across applications.9
    Columns 1 and 2 of Table II report estimates of the parameters in (7) for the NPRS study, with
each row showing the coefficients from a separate regression. While applications with distinctively
black names are significantly less likely to be called back, we find no significant effect on callback
probabilities of changing the racial mix of the other 3 applications to the same job. Across the 12
covariates we consider only one (an indicator for 3+ months of unemployment) finds a significant
peer effect at conventional levels, and a joint test fails to reject that all of the leave out mean
coefficients are zero (p = 0.45). As another composite test, we report the results of a model in
which the peer effects are restricted to be proportional to the main effects of the application's own
characteristics Xj . The row titled "predicted callback rate" pools all the application characteristics
into an index X  ^ 1(j ) where ^ 1(j ) is the leave out OLS coefficient vector obtained from regressing the
                  j
callback indicator on application covariates after leaving out all applications to job j . A unit increase
in X   ^ 1(j ) is associated with roughly half of a callback on average. Though X           ^ 1(j ) strongly
     j                                                                                             j
                                                                                        -1             ^ 1(j ) has no
predicts callbacks, its average value among competing applications (L - 1)                    k=   Xjk 
statistically discernible impact on callbacks.


   9
     In contrast, BM assigned application characteristics according to their joint distribution in a training sample,
making it likely that the characteristics we study Xj are correlated with other omitted characteristics Zj that
predict callbacks. The application characteristics were also chosen to yield a good match with the job (see BM p.
996), leading Zj to be correlated with its leave out mean Z ¯j and hence with X ¯ j . The AGCV study includes only
a small number of randomized resume characteristics that are not predictive of callback outcomes.




                                                         11
                                                                          Table II: Tests for dependence
           Nunley et al. data: resume characteristics                                             Arceo-Gomez & Campos-Vasquez: resume order
                             Main effect     Leave-out mean                                Observations      2 statistic        d.f.       P -value                 Exact p- value
        Variable                   (1)                (2)                  Callbacks             (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)                        (7)
         Black                   -0.028             -0.019                                             Panel A. Four-application sequences
                                (0.010)            (0.027)                     1                142             1.4              3          0.708                        0.794
         Female                   0.010              0.009
                                (0.010)            (0.027)                      2                 99                10.0                5             0.075              0.155
       High SES                  -0.233             -0.674
                                (0.174)            (0.522)                      3                 64               3.2              3                 0.367              0.513
          GPA                    -0.043             -0.153                                               Panel B. Eight-application sequences
                                (0.066)            (0.198)                      1                 56               7.8              7                 0.347              0.504
    Business major                0.008              0.010
                                (0.008)            (0.021)                      2                 37                23.6               27             0.651              0.697
    Employment gap                0.011              0.034
                                (0.009)            (0.023)                      3                 36                58.4               55             0.352              0.397
    Current unemp.: 3+            0.013              0.005
                                (0.012)            (0.032)                      4                 39                75.2               69             0.286              0.457
                      6+         -0.008             -0.038
                                (0.012)            (0.029)                      5                 16                40.7               55             0.924              1.000
                    12+           0.001              0.021
                                (0.012)            (0.032)                      6                 20                28.6               27             0.379              0.469
      Past unemp.: 3+             0.029              0.065
                                (0.012)            (0.031)                      7                  6             8.4               7          0.300                      0.539
                      6+         -0.011             -0.016                                                      Panel C. Joint tests
                                                                                                                                 2
                                (0.012)            (0.033)                                 Independence in all callback strata:  (247) = 242.7, p = 0.565
                    12+          -0.004              0.019
                                (0.012)            (0.031)                                              No order effects: 2 (7) = 5.3, p = 0.622
  Predicted callback rate         0.476             -0.041
                                (0.248)            (0.626)                          Regression of callback on order: coef. = -0.0021, s.e. = 0.0015, p = 0.147
       Joint p -value                        0.452
       Sample size                           9,220                          Regression of callback on frac. females sent earlier: coef. = -0.003, s.e. = 0.013, p = 0.788
 Notes: This table reports results from tests of the assumption that applications at each job are independent Bernoulli trials with race-specific success probabilities. Columns
 (1) and (2) show tests based on resume characteristics using data from Nunley et al. (2015). Estimates come from regressions of a callback indicator on a resume
 characteristic and the mean of this characteristic across other resumes at the same job. The predicted callback rate is the fitted value from a regression of a callback indicator
 on all resume characteristics, leaving out the reference job. The joint p -value comes from a test of the hypothesis that coefficients on the leave-out mean are zero for all
 individual characteristics. Standard errors, clustered at the job level, appear in parentheses. Columns (3)-(7) show tests based on resume order in the Arceo-Gomez and
 Campos-Vasquez (2014) data. These results come from Wald tests of the hypothesis that all callback sequences leading to a particular total number of callbacks are equally
 likely. Column (3) shows the number of observed sequences in each callback stratum, column (4) shows the Pearson 2 goodness of fit statistic, column (5) shows the
 degrees of freedom for the test, column (6) shows the corresponding p -value, and column (7) shows an exact multinomial goodness of fit p -value obtained by
 summing probabilities of all sequence configurations that occur with probability less than or equal to the observed configuration under the null. Panel A constructs
 sequences separately for the first four and last four applications at each job, and panel B uses the full eight application sequence. The first two rows of Panel C show
 the results of a joint test of independence across all callback strata and a test that mean callback rates are equal across the eight resume order positions. The third row
 displays the slope coefficient from a linear regression of a callback indicator on order and a constant. The final row shows the slope coefficient from a regression of a
 callback indicator on the fraction of the four total female applications to the job that were sent prior to the reference application. This regression also includes a female
 indicator and a constant. Standard errors are clustered by job.


     A second set of tests for independence exploits data on the specific order in which resumes were
sent to jobs in the AGCV experiment (corresponding data were unavailable for BM and NPRS).
With independent trials, all callback sequences leading to a particular total number of callbacks t
                                                                                                                                      L -1
should be equally likely, so each such sequence should constitute a share                                                             t         of the sample calling
t applications in total. Many plausible forms of dependence would manifest as violations of this
condition. If employers stop calling after seeing enough high quality applicants, for example, we
should expect to see sequences with runs of callbacks followed by non-callbacks. Likewise, if some
employers detect the experiment after receiving several applications, we should see sequences with
early callbacks overrepresented and fewer callbacks at later positions in the order.
     Columns 3-7 of Table II provide tests of the independence assumption in each callback stratum
t of the AGCV data. We form Pearson (1900) 2 test statistics equal to quadratic forms in the
difference between observed and expected callback sequence frequencies, scaled by the covariance
matrix of these differences under the null that each sequence in a stratum is equally likely. Panel
A splits the sample of eight applications into two sequences of four at each job in order to increase

                                                                                        12
the expected frequency of each sequence, which may improve the power of the test against certain
alternatives. Panel B displays results using the full eight-application sequence. These tests fail to
reject the null hypothesis of independence in any callback stratum (p  0.07) or across all strata
jointly (p = 0.57). As shown in columns 7 and 8, the conclusions of this exercise are similar when we
base inference on an asymptotic approximation to the distribution of the 2 statistic and when we
use exact finite-sample p-values computed by summing probabilities of all sequence configurations
that are less likely than the observed configuration under the null.
     Tests based on the full set of callback sequences may have low power against some alternatives.
Panel C of Table II therefore reports the results of three additional tests for specific plausible forms
of dependence. A test that callback rates are equal across the eight resume order positions fails to
reject (p = 0.62). Similarly, a linear regression of a callback indicator on resume order suggests that
the callback rate declines slightly with order, but the slope coefficient is not statistically significant
at conventional levels (p = 0.15). Finally, to test if earlier application influence an employer's
perception of resume quality, the bottom row of panel C regresses a callback indicator on the share
of the four total female applications to the job sent prior to the current application, controlling for
whether the current application is female. This test again fails to reject the null of independence
(p = 0.79). These results indicate that the independent Bernoulli trials model provides a good
approximation to correspondence studies sending eight or fewer applications to each job. While
we are not aware of any existing experiments sending more than eight applications to each job, a
potentially interesting topic for future research is to study the nature of any dependence that arises
as additional applications are sent to a given employer.


7     Moment and Posterior Estimates
To estimate the identified moments in each experiment we compute shape-constrained GMM
(SCGMM) estimates that require the callback frequencies to be rationalizable by a proper discretized
probability distribution defined on a 150 × 150 grid of support points. Imposing shape constraints
serves two goals. First, we need the moment estimates to be rationalizable by some G  G in
order to subsequently use them as constraints when estimating bounds via our linear programming
method. Second, when the constraints bind, the resulting estimates are typically closer to the truth
and more precise (see Chetverikov et al., 2018 for a review). Details of the SCGMM estimation
procedure, which involves solving a Quadratic Programming (QP) problem, appear in Appendix
D.
     Table III uses the shape constrained estimates to summarize key features of the distribution
of callback probabilities in each experiment, and reports minimized SCGMM criterion functions
(J -statistics) and p -values from bootstrap tests of the shape constraints based on the methods of
Chernozhukov et al. (2015). The full set of unconstrained moment estimates appear in Appendix
Tables A.I-A.III. Because the shape constraints may make the criterion non-differentiable, we rely




                                                   13
                                  Table III: Non-parametric estimates of treatment effect variation in resume correspondence studies
                                          Bertrand & Mullainathan                           Nunley et al.                  Arceo-Gomez & Campos-Vasquez
                                     pb            pw           pb - pw           pb              pw         pb - pw         pm         pf       pm - pf
                                     (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)       (8)         (9)
Mean                                0.063         0.094          -0.031          0.153          0.177         -0.023       0.109      0.137      -0.028
                                   (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.005)      (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.008)
Standard deviation                  0.152        0.199         0.082          0.290        0.308         0.102          0.229         0.257         0.178
                                   (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.016)        (0.008)      (0.007)       (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.014)
Correlation with p w or p f         0.927        1.00          -0.717         0.944        1.00          -0.336         0.738         1.00          -0.498
                                   (0.051)         -          (0.119)        (0.017)         -          (0.066)        (0.039)          -          (0.058)
Skewness                              -            -              -            3.76         3.65          -4.45          4.04         3.74           -1.64
                                                                              (0.08)       (0.08)        (0.82)         (0.13)       (0.10)         (0.56)
Excess kurtosis                       -            -              -             -            -             -             8.59         5.91           13.6
                                                                                                                        (1.13)       (0.71)          (3.5)
                  J -statistic:                  0.0                                       23.1                                        2.7
                     P -value:                   1.00                                      0.190                                     0.891
Note: This table reports shape-constrained generalized method of moments (SCGMM) estimates of key features of the joint distribution of treatment and
control callback rates in three resume correspondence studies. Columns (1)-(3) show estimates for black and white callback rates in Bertrand and Mullainathan
(2004), columns (4)-(6) display estimates for black and white callback rates in Nunley et al. (2015), and columns (7)-(9) show estimates for male and female
callback rates in Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasquez (2014). Standard errors are computed using the numerical bootstrap procedure described by Hong and
Li (forthcoming). J -statistics are minimized SCGMM criterion functions. P -values come from bootstrap tests of the hypothesis that the model restrictions are
satisfied.
on the "numerical bootstrap" procedure of Hong and Li (forthcoming) to construct pointwise valid
estimates of standard errors.10
       Table IV reports LP estimates of the lower bound probability that a given employer is discriminating.
In computing both the analytic bounds of Lemma 2 and the sharp bounds of (5), we replace the
                                                ^
                               ¯ with estimates f
unknown callback probabilities f                ¯ = Bµ
                                                     ^, where µ
                                                              ^ is the relevant vector of shape-
constrained moment estimates produced by our SCGMM procedure. Because the LP algorithm
used to solve (5) scales efficiently to large problems, we use a finer discretization with 36 times as
many points as the grid used in our earlier SCGMM step.11

Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004)
The first rows of columns 1 and 2 of Table III show the mean callback probabilities of white and
black applications across jobs. The J -statistic of zero reported in column 2 of Table III indicates
that the shape constraints do not bind in the BM data, i.e. that the sample frequencies can be
rationalized to numerical precision by a discretized probability distribution. Because the shape
constraints do not bind and the BM application design is balanced, the mean callback probabilities
match the callback rates reported in Table I perfectly. More interesting are the second moments:
there is substantial over-dispersion in callback probabilities, with standard deviations across jobs
for each race-specific probability more than double the mean probability. As expected, there is also
a strong positive correlation between white and black callback rates, reflecting that some employers
simply call back more applications of all types.
       Column 3 of Table III reveals substantial heterogeneity in the difference in race specific callback
rates pjb -pjw across jobs, with a standard deviation more than twice as large as the mean. The third
row shows a strong negative correlation between the discriminatory gap in callback rates pjb - pjw
and the white callback probability pjw , suggesting that discrimination tends to be stronger when
jobs have higher chances of calling back more white workers. This reflects, in part, a mechanical
boundary effect, as an employer with very low callback rates has little opportunity to discriminate.
Since the white callback rate in this study is only around 10%, boundary effects are likely to be a
quantitatively important phenomenon.
       Column 1 of Table IV reports lower bounds on the share of jobs engaged in discrimination by
the number of total callbacks in the BM experiment. The analytic bounds in Lemma 2 (presented
in brackets) imply that at least 38% of the jobs that call back 2 applications are engaged in
discrimination, while at least 44% of jobs that call back 3 applications are discriminating. The
sharp LP bounds are somewhat tighter than their analytical counterparts, revealing that at least
44% of the jobs calling back two applicants are discriminating. Among jobs that call back three

  10
      Because the asymptotic distribution of the shape constrained estimator will tend to be non-normal (Fang and
Santos, 2018), standard errors provide only a heuristic guide to the uncertainty associated with each moment estimate.
   11
      Appendix Table A.IV assesses the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative discretization schemes. The results
show that the moment estimates are not sensitive to the number of grid points used in the SCGMM step (as evidenced
by the goodness of fit statistic) and that the bounds stabilize with a sufficiently large number of grid points in the
linear programming step.


                                                         15
                                             Table IV: Lower bounds on probabilities of discrimination
                         Bertrand & Mullainathan                           Nunley et al.                        Arceo-Gomez & Campos-Vasquez
                 Pr(p w  p b ) Pr(p w < p b ) Pr(p b < p w ) Pr(p w  p b ) Pr(p w < p b ) Pr(p b < p w )       Pr(p f  p m ) Pr(p f < p m ) Pr(p m < p f )
  Callbacks          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)                (7)            (8)            (9)
     All            0.130         0.000          0.130          0.358         0.154          0.173               0.207         0.064           0.142
      0            0.038          0.000          0.038            0.152           0.093          0.048           0.065          0.023          0.042
      1            0.424          0.000          0.424            0.672           0.185          0.433           0.721          0.307          0.414
                  {0.363}                                        {0.176}                                        {0.071}
      2            0.442          0.000          0.442            0.691           0.016          0.675           0.708          0.226          0.481
                  {0.379}                                        {0.282}                                        {0.524}
      3            0.508          0.000          0.508            0.821           0.067          0.736           0.584          0.050          0.533
                  {0.440}                                        {0.126}                                        {0.502}
      4            0.212          0.000          0.212            0.421           0.257          0.128           0.518          0.053          0.465
                                                                                                                {0.492}
      5                                                                                                          0.320          0.153          0.167
                                                                                                                {0.286}
      6                                                                                                          0.372          0.176          0.197
                                                                                                                {0.308}
      7                                                                                                          0.453          0.122          0.331
                                                                                                                {0.170}
       8                                                                                                         0.069          0.008          0.062
 J -statistic:     29.3             0.0           29.3             62.6            23.5           62.6           427.8           27.1          421.0
  P -value:        0.000           1.00          0.000            0.000           0.120          0.000           0.000          0.018          0.000
Notes: This table reports lower bounds on the probability that jobs discriminate based upon race or sex. Bounds are computed via linear
programming. Where possible, corresponding analytic bounds based on the formula in Lemma 2 appear in brackets. The first row shows bounds in
the population of all jobs, and the remaining rows display bounds conditional on the total number of callbacks. Columns (1)-(3) show results for
racial discrimination in the Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) data, while columns (4)-(6) show results for racial discrimination in the Nunley et al.
(2015) data. Columns (1) and (4) display lower bounds on the fraction of jobs with equal callback rates for white and black applicants, columns (2)
and (5) report lower bounds on the fraction discriminating against white applicants, and columns (3) and (6) report lower bounds on the fraction
discriminating against black applicants. Results for the Nunley et al. (2015) data that condition on the number of callbacks refer to jobs receiving two
white and two black applications. Columns (7)-(9) show results for sex discrimination in the Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasquez (2014) data.
Column (7) reports a lower bound on the fraction of jobs with equal callbacks for men and women, column (8) shows a lower bound on the fraction
discriminating against women, and column (9) reports a lower bound on the fraction discriminating against men. J -statistics and p -values come
from bootstrap tests of the hypothesis that the lower bound equals zero for all jobs.
applications, at least half are discriminating on the basis of race. Hence, in this callback stratum,
our estimates suggest jobs should not logically be presumed "innocent" of discrimination.
   The LP approach also generates informative bounds in callback strata for which analytical
bounds are not available. Overall, at least 13% of jobs discriminate on the basis of race. Notably,
at least 4% of jobs that call back no applications are engaged in discrimination, while at least
21% of jobs that call back all four applications discriminate on the basis of race. Since neither of
these strata exhibit any difference in black-white callback rates, all of the relevant information on
discrimination in these strata comes from the total number of callbacks blended with the indirect
evidence from the population distribution G.
   Column 2 of Table IV reports LP-based lower bounds on the proportion of jobs with white
callback probabilities less than their black callback probabilities.                           We find a lower bound of
exactly zero in each callback stratum, indicating that the callback probabilities can be rationalized
without any employers engaging in "reverse discrimination" against whites. Column 3 reports
lower bounds on the proportion of jobs with white callback probabilities greater than their black
callback probabilities. These lower bound estimates coincide exactly with those reported in column
1. Accordingly, we easily reject the null hypothesis of no discrimination against blacks.
                         Figure I: Lower bounds on posterior probabilities of discrimination, BM data




         Notes: This figure displays lower bounds on the probability that jobs in the Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004)
         data discriminate based upon race given their callback configurations. Each bar reports a lower bound on the
         posterior probability of discrimination conditional on ( C w ,C b ), where C w is the number of white callbacks
         and C b is the number of black callbacks.


   Figure I converts the lower bound estimates in column 3 of Table IV to lower bound posterior
probabilities of discrimination. Overall, at least 13% of jobs engage in discrimination. However, at
least 72% of jobs that call back two white and no black applications are discriminating, while a job

                                                               17
that calls back one white and no black applications has at least a 58% chance of being engaged in
discrimination.

Nunley et al. (2015)
Moment estimates from the NPRS study are reported in columns 4-6 of Table III. Recall that NPRS
employed five distinct application designs with (Ljw , Ljb )  {(4, 0) , (3, 1) , (2, 2) , (1, 3) , (0, 4)}.
Appendix Table A.II reports design-specific method of moments estimates of all identified moments
for the three designs with the largest sample sizes.12 As expected, the design-specific estimates are
generally close to one another and we cannot reject that they are identical. To pool the designs
efficiently, we again use an SCGMM estimator that requires the moments be rationalizable by
a proper probability distribution G  G . The minimized SCGMM criterion function provides a
measure of the goodness of fit of our model. Applying the bootstrap method of Chernozhukov et al.
(2015) yields a p -value of 0.19 for the null hypothesis that the results for all experimental designs
are jointly rationalized by a common distribution G.
   Consistent with our findings for the BM data, columns 4-6 of Table III reveal substantial
heterogeneity in race-specific callback rates in the NPRS experiment, with standard deviations
roughly twice their mean. The imbalanced designs used by NPRS allow us to identify higher
moments than the earlier BM study even though the two studies sent the same number of applications
per job. While race-specific callback rates are right skewed, racial gaps in callback probabilities
pjb - pjw are left-skewed, indicating a long tail of heavy discriminators.
   Columns 4-6 of Table IV report estimated lower bounds on the probability of discrimination
from the NPRS study for the full population of jobs as well as bounds conditional on total callbacks
in a balanced design with Ljw = Ljb = 2. In column 1, our analytic bound formula suggests at
least 28% of the jobs calling back two applicants in this design are discriminating ­ slightly lower
than the corresponding estimate in BM. Applying the LP approach tightens the analytic bounds
dramatically and provides additional bounds on the prevalence of discrimination among jobs that
make no callbacks or that call every application. We estimate that at least 36% of all jobs have
different white and black callback probabilities, with that share rising to 69% among employers
who call back two applicants in a balanced (2, 2) design.
   Some of this discrimination is estimated to be against whites. Column 5 shows that the shape
constrained callback probabilities f^
                                    ¯ imply that at least 15% of employers have white callback
probabilities less than their black probabilities. These moments are estimated with error, however,
and a bootstrap test of the null hypothesis that all employers have white callback probabilities
weakly exceeding their black callback probabilities yields a p -value of 0.12. If we attribute the
evidence of reverse discrimination to sampling error, we can take the estimates in column 6 as the
relevant lower bounds on discrimination. These results imply that at least 17% of jobs discriminate
against black applicants. We decisively reject the null hypothesis that this lower bound is zero.
  12
     The remaining designs were omitted from this analysis due to small sample sizes. Only 22 jobs were in the
(Ljw = 0, Ljb = 4) design while 43 jobs fell in the (Ljw = 4, Ljb = 0) design.



                                                     18
                         Figure II: Lower bounds on posterior probabilities of discrimination, NPRS data




          Notes: This figure displays lower bounds on the probability that jobs in the Nunley et al. (2015) data
          discriminate against black applicants for the 10 callback configurations with highest posterior bounds. Each
          bar reports a lower bound on the posterior probability that p w > p b conditional on (C w ,C b ), where C w is the
          number of white callbacks and C b is the number of black callbacks. Orange bars correspond to an
          experimental design with 3 white and 1 black application, green bars correspond to a design with 2 white and
          2 black applications, and red bars correspond to a design with 1 white and 3 black applications. The blue bar
          reports the lower bound on the prior probability of discrimination.



   Figure II converts these lower bound priors into posterior estimates of the share of employers
with selected callback configurations engaged in discrimination against black applicants.                                      We
estimate that at least 85% of the employers calling back two white and no black applicants in
a balanced (2, 2) design are discriminating against blacks. Interestingly, calling back three whites
and no blacks in a (3, 1) design is estimated to be even more suspicious, with at least 90% of the
employers generating this callback evidence engaged in discrimination against black applicants.

Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasquez (2014)
The full set of moment estimates for the AGCV experiment (reported in Appendix Table A.III)
reveal that the shape constraints bind strongly in this case, presumably because the design of
the AGCV experiment involves many small cells. Despite substantial movement in some moment
estimates, the bootstrap p -value from a test of the null hypothesis that the callback frequencies are
generated by the model is 0.89, indicating that the raw callback frequencies are rationalizable by a
well-behaved underlying joint distribution of callback probabilities.
   Columns 7-9 of Table III report key moment estimates from the AGCV data. The behavior of
the first two moments is similar to that reported in the prior two experiments, with gender-specific


                                                                 19
standard deviations roughly twice their mean callback probabilities. However, the greater number
of applications used in this design helps enormously with the precision of higher moment estimates.
We find strong evidence of left-skew in the distribution of gender gaps in callback probabilities as
well as evidence of excess kurtosis in the distribution of gaps. While many jobs discriminate little,
there is a thick tail of heavy discriminators.
   Columns 7-9 of Table IV report estimated lower bounds on the probability of discrimination
in the AGCV experiment. Focusing on the sharp bounds reported in column 7, we find that at
least 21% of jobs are engaged in discrimination. Remarkably, this share rises to 72% among jobs
calling back one applicant and 71% among jobs calling two. These shares are much higher than
the corresponding analytic bounds, showing that cross-stratum restrictions in a design with eight
applications are useful for tightening bounds in strata with few callbacks. Evidently, jobs that call
back few applicants in the AGCV experiment are very likely to engage in discrimination.

                                                    Figure III: Lower bounds on posterior probabilities of discrimination, AGCV data
                                1
              .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
             Lower bound on posterior probability
                                .1
                                0




                                                     (4,0)   (3,0)   (0,4)   (2,0)   (0,2)     (1,4)   (1,0)   (0,1)   (4,1)   (0,3)     All

                                                                     Pr( pf > pm | Cf , Cm )                   Pr( pm > pf | Cf , Cm )


         Notes: This figure displays lower bounds on the probability that jobs in the Arceo-Gomez and Campos-
         Vasquez (2014) data discriminate based upon sex for the 10 callback configurations with highest posterior
         bounds. Each bar reports a lower bound on the posterior probability of discrimination conditional on ( C f ,C m ),
         where C f is the number of female callbacks and C m is the number of male callbacks. Blue bars report lower
         bounds on the probability of discriminating against men, and red bars report lower bounds on the probability
         of discriminating against women.


   Some of this discrimination appears to be "reverse" discrimination against women. Column
8 shows that at least 6% of jobs discriminate against women and a bootstrap test of the null
hypothesis that this bound equals zero is decisively rejected (p < 0.02). An employer that calls
back a single application has at least a 31% chance of discriminating against women. Column
9 shows that at least 14% of jobs discriminate against men, and the bootstrap p -value indicates


                                                                                          20
this bound is also statistically distinguishable from zero. The mean difference in callback rates
in the ACGV experiment therefore masks gender discrimination operating in both directions. An
employer that calls back a single application has at least a 41% chance of discriminating against
men.
    Figure III plots lower bound posterior probabilities of discrimination against men and women,
respectively, for selected callback configurations. At least 97% of the jobs that call back four women
and no men are estimated to discriminate against men, and at least 88% of jobs that call back four
men and no women are estimated to discriminate against women. But even an employer that calls
back a single woman and no men has at least a 74% chance of discriminating against men. Likewise,
at least 66% of jobs that call back a single man and no women are estimated to discriminate against
women. That we obtain such informative posteriors in settings with a single callback demonstrates
the tremendous value of indirect evidence in this setting.


8      Experimental Design and Detection Error Tradeoffs
The above analysis demonstrated that it is possible to achieve high posterior certainty that individual
jobs are engaged in discrimination when callback rates at those jobs differ dramatically across
protected groups. Can such evidence be used to reliably detect a non-trivial share of discriminating
jobs? We address this question by studying the tradeoff between Type I and II errors that arises
under a simple two-type mixture specification calibrated to match callback rates in the NPRS data
given race and other resume characteristics. We then consider how the resulting detection error
tradeoffs change as the experimental design is altered to send more applications to each job.

A Mixed Logit Model
We work with a mixed logit model for callbacks of the form:

                   Pr (Yj = 1|Rj , Xj , j , j ) =  j - j 1 {Rj = b} + Xj  ,

                 exp(·)
where  (·) =    1+exp(·)   is the standard logistic CDF, Xj is a vector of de-meaned application
covariates, and (j , j ) are random coefficients governing the odds of a white callback and discrimination
against blacks, respectively. To allow for heterogeneity in white callback rates we assume that
    iid  2 . Discrimination is modeled as a two-type (conditional) mixture:
j  N 0 , 
                                     
                                            w/ prob.  (0 +  j ),
                                       0
                              j |j =
                                     0      w/ prob. 1 -  (0 +  j ).

This specification allows for some share of jobs to not discriminate at all, while the remaining
jobs depress the odds of calling back blacks relative to whites by roughly 0 %. When  = 0,
the probability of discrimination depends on j , which governs the white callback rate. Note that



                                                 21
random assignment of the covariates Xj implies they are independent of (j , j ) and therefore
excludable from the type probability equation.

Model Estimates
Table V shows the results of fitting the above model to the NPRS experiment by simulated
maximum likelihood. Column 1 provides a standard "random effects" logit model with heterogeneity
confined to the intercept as in Farber et al. (2016). We find substantial variability across jobs in
the overall odds of a callback: a 0.1 standard deviation increase in the intercept j is estimated
to raise the odds of a callback by 47%. We also find clear evidence of market-wide discrimination:
black applications have roughly 46% lower odds of being called back than their white counterparts.

                            Table V: Mixed logit parameter estimates, NPRS data
                                                                           Types
                                                 Constant      No selection      Selection
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)
                 Distribution of logit(pw): 0      -4.71           -4.93           -4.93
                                                  (0.22)          (0.24)          (0.28)

                                                      4.74            4.99              4.98
                                                     (0.22)          (0.25)            (0.29)

                Discrimination intensity: 0          0.456            4.05              4.05
                                                    (0.108)          (1.56)            (1.58)
                    Discrimination logit:      0       -              -1.59             -1.56
                                                                     (0.42)            (1.10)

                                                       -                -              -0.005
                                                                                      (0.180)

                   Fraction with p w  p b :          1.00            0.168             0.170

                       Log-likelihood              -2,792.1         -2,788.2          -2,788.2
                        Parameters                    15               16                17
                        Sample size                  2,305           2,305              2,305
              Notes: This table reports simulated maximum likelihood estimates of mixed logit
              models for callback probabilities in the Nunley et al. (2015) data. Columns (2)-(3)
              allow for two discrete types of firms, one of which does not discriminate based
              upon race. All models include resume covariates. Covariates are de-meaned in the
              estimation sample. Robust standard errors in parentheses.


   Column 2 allows the race effect j to vary across employers, which yields a significant improvement
in model fit. The types specification finds that only about 17% of jobs discriminate against blacks ­
very near the non-parametric lower bound estimate produced earlier by our LP routine (see column
6 of Table IV). The degree of discrimination among such jobs is estimated to be severe: the odds
of receiving a callback are roughly exp (4) - 1  53 times higher for white applications than for
blacks. Column 3 allows the probability of discrimination to vary with the white callback rate,


                                                      22
which yields a negligible improvement in model fit. Surprisingly, j and j are found to be nearly
independent, which implies that the negative correlation between pjb -pjw and pjw reported in Table
III is attributable to boundary effects. Again, this model finds roughly 17% of jobs discriminate
against blacks. Because we cannot reject the null hypothesis that  = 0, we work with the more
parsimonious model in column 2 in the exercises that follow. Appendix Figure A.I provides a
goodness of fit diagnostic for this model, plotting the empirical callback rates in each black / white
callback by application design cell against the logit model's predicted callback probability in that
cell. The empirical frequencies track the model predictions closely and a naive Pearson 2 test fails
to reject the null hypothesis that the model rationalizes the cell frequencies up to sampling error.

                     Figure IV: Mixed logit estimates of posterior discrimination probabilities, NPRS data




         Notes: This figure displays mixed logit estimates of the posterior probability that jobs in the Nunley et al.
         (2015) data discriminate against black workers conditional on (C w ,C b ), where C w is the number of white
         callbacks and C b is the number of black callbacks. Blue bars show posteriors for a design sending two low
         quality (LQ) white applications and two high quality (HQ) black applications, where low and high quality are
         defined based on a logit covariate index 1 standard deviation below or above the mean. Red bars show
         posteriors for a design sending two HQ white and two HQ black applications. Green bars show posteriors for a
         design sending two LQ white and two LQ black applications. Orange bars show posteriors for a design sending
         two HQ white and two LQ black applications.



Posteriors
Figure IV reports the distribution of posterior probabilities Pr(Dj = 1|{Yj , Rj , Xj  }L=1 ) implied
by the parameter estimates reported in column 2 of Table V. To summarize the influence of the
covariates, we evaluate the posteriors at two points within each race group, corresponding to the
estimated index X   ^ being a standard deviation above or below its empirical mean, which we refer
                     j
to as "high" and "low" quality applications. By construction, the mean posterior coincides with

                                                              23
the estimated share of jobs that discriminate. The types model finds that only 17% of jobs are
discriminating, yielding a strong prior that the typical job is not violating employment law. Yet
calling back only white applicants still justifies a substantial degree of suspicion: 62% of the jobs
that call back two whites and no blacks are discriminating.
   Imbalances in the covariate mix of applicants can substantially intensify this suspicion. For
example, 79% of the jobs that call back two low quality white applications and neither of two high
quality black applications are discriminating. Evidently, even in models with a strong presumption
of innocence, four applications can provide enough information to cast substantial doubt on whether
individual employers are in compliance with employment law. However, it is only under the most
extreme callback configurations that we can detect discriminators with reasonable certainty.

Detection Error Tradeoffs
Consider now a hypothetical regulator who forms posteriors taking as prior knowledge the two-type
estimates reported in Table V. One may think of the regulator as first learning the parameters of
the two-type model from a large experiment and then sending applications to additional vacancies
drawn from the same population from which the original study sampled.
                                                                 Figure V: Detection/error tradeoffs, NPRS data
              Share of non-discriminators not investigated
             .988 .99 .992 .994 .996 .998                1




                                                             0          .05                      .1                         .15
                                                                      Share of discriminators investigated

                                                                   2 pairs                                        5 pairs
                                                                   5 pairs (HQ black, LQ white)

         Notes: This figure displays detection/error tradeoff curves based on models fit to the Nunley et al. (2015) data.
         Estimates come from decision rules applied to experiments generated from the logit model in column (2) of Table
         V. The horizontal axis measures the share of discriminating jobs investigated by each decision rule, while the
         vertical axis measures the share of non-discriminating jobs not investigated. The curves are generated by varying
         the posterior threshold at which jobs are investigated. The green curve corresponds to an experiment that sends two
         white and two black applications to each job, and the red curve corresponds to sending five applications of each
         race. These two curves randomly assign a 2-valued covariate index of resume quality (high or low), defined as +/-1
         the empirical standard deviation of this index. The blue curve shows results from sending five low-quality white
         and five high-quality black applications. Bold points correspond to 80% posterior thresholds.




                                                                                      24
         Figure V displays a rescaling of the Type I and II error rates that arise from investigating all
jobs exceeding various posterior thresholds. The horizontal axis gives the share of jobs engaged in
discrimination that are investigated. The vertical axis plots the share of non-discriminators that
are not investigated, which can equivalently be viewed as one minus the False Discovery Rate. Each
point gives the values of these shares corresponding to a particular posterior decision threshold.
The bold point corresponds to a posterior threshold of 80%.
         In the canonical design with only two white and two black applications per job, the 80% posterior
threshold yields almost no false accusations. This control over Type I errors comes at the cost of
a high Type II error rate ­ few accusations of any sort are made, leading to a negligible share of
discriminators detected. Note that conducting a classical hypothesis test (e.g., Fisher's exact test)
at the 1% level is equivalent to controlling the share of non-discriminators that are not investigated,
which is depicted by the horizontal line at 0.99. This rule would yield more investigations but most
of these would be erroneous: the equivalent posterior threshold in the 2 pair design is only 33%.
         Expanding the design to 5 pairs of applications yields a substantial outward shift in the detection
error tradeoff curve. Using a posterior threshold of 80% keeps the share of employers erroneously
investigated for discrimination below 0.2% while allowing detection of roughly 7.5% of jobs that
discriminate. Lowering the posterior threshold further boosts the detection rate above 10% while
modestly increasing the Type I error rate. This shows that ten applications is enough to accurately
detect a non-trivial share of discriminators.
         The third line shows the results of an experiment where each job is sent 5 high quality black
applications and 5 low quality white applications.13 Modifying the experimental design in this way
yields additional improvements in Type I and II error rates. Using an 80% posterior threshold,
the share of non-discriminators investigated remains below 0.2%, while the share of discriminators
investigated rises to almost 10%.


9         Indirect Evidence and Policy
The findings of the previous section indicate that correspondence experiments with as few as 10
applications can reliably detect a substantial share of discriminating employers when the population
distribution of callback probabilities is known. We now consider how a Bayesian regulator might go
about deciding which jobs to investigate and then assess how partial identification of the callback
rate distribution affects this decision rule.14
    13
     Of course, the results of such an experiment would be difficult to interpret without an earlier experiment revealing
the model parameters, as one would not be able to parse the effects of race from those of quality.
  14
     Our analysis is based loosely on the functioning of the EEOC, which has the authority to conduct systematic
investigations into the discriminatory behavior of particular organizations. Because investigations are costly, the
EEOC uses a priority system based on human judgement to decide which complaints to investigate (US Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, 2016). The results below illustrate how direct callback evidence from a
correspondence experiment can be blended with indirect evidence to assist or replace informal human judgements.




                                                           25
The Regulator's Problem
Suppose the regulator must decide which jobs to investigate based on a vector of direct evidence
Ej = {Yj , Rj , Xj }L=1 revealed by a correspondence study. The regulator uses a deterministic
decision rule  (Ej ) that maps this evidence vector to a binary inquiry decision.15 Each job has a
pair of race specific callback probabilities {pjw (x) , pjb (x)} that may vary with applicant quality
x. We use H (·) to denote the iid randomization distribution of Xj . Consistent with our earlier
analysis of the NPRS experiment, we rule out the possibility of discrimination against whites by
assuming Pr (pjw (x)  pjb (x)) = 1 for all quality levels x  X .
       The regulator's loss from applying decision rule  (Ej ) = j  {0, 1} to job j is modeled as:


                   Lj (j ) = j  -              -1 (pjw (x)) - -1 (pjb (x)) dH (x)             .                  (8)


One can think of the parameter   (1/2, 1] as capturing the cost of conducting an investigation.
The term           -1 (pjw (x)) - -1 (pjb (x)) dH (x)  [1/2, 1] gives the benefit to the investigation,
which is increasing in the average log callback odds advantage of whites over blacks at job j across
quality levels. To ensure this benefit remains bounded, the racial difference in log odds is then
mapped back to the unit interval by the logistic CDF to produce the payoff to an investigation.
Note that under the logit model of the previous section this payoff reduces to  (j ). The regulator
would like to investigate whenever this payoff exceeds the investigation cost, in which case Lj (1)
is negative.
       Because the {pjw (x) , pjb (x)}xX are not known, the regulator minimizes expected loss (i.e.
risk). When the regulator knows the joint distribution of callback probabilities in the population,
the risk function can be written:

   Rj (G,  (·)) = E [Lj (j )] = E j (Ej )  -                 -1 (pjw (x)) - -1 (pjb (x)) dH (x)              ,


where G : [0, 1]2|X |  [0, 1] is the joint distribution of quality-specific callback rates. Because
{Ej , pjw (x) , pjb (x)}J
                        j =1 are iid across jobs, we can drop the j subscripts and refer to the risk
function as R (G,  (·)). Choosing  (Ej ) to minimize the risk function pointwise yields the following
Lemma, which characterizes the regulator's optimal decision rule in the case where G is known.

Lemma 3 (Optimal Decision Rule).


        (Ej ) = 1 E           -1 (pjw (x)) - -1 (pjb (x)) dH (x) |Ej >                 minimizes R (G,  ).

       One can think of Lemma 3 as offering an economically motivated standard of reasonable doubt :
when the posterior expected benefit of an investigation exceeds the investigation cost , it is rational
to conduct an investigation. Note that in the two-type logit model the difference in log odds at
  15
    We confine ourselves to deterministic rules because randomized decision rules violate commonly held horizontal
equity principles.


                                                       26
job j equals 0 Dj for all quality levels, so the optimal decision rule amounts to investigating when
the posterior probability of discrimination exceeds a cost-based threshold. In the logit model, for
example, the decision rule can be written  (Ej ) = 1 {P (Ej , Glogit ) > ( - 1/2)/((0 ) - 1/2)} .

Ambiguity
When G is only known to lie in some identified set  of distributions, many possible decision rules
are consistent with rationality. Among those rules, an important benchmark is the minimax decision
rule (Wald, 1945; Savage, 1951; Manski, 2000), which minimizes the maximum risk that may
arise from the regulator's decisions. We can define the maximum risk function and the associated
minimax decision rule respectively as:

                        Rm (,  ) = sup R (G,  )          and  mm = arg inf Rm (,  ),                              (9)
                                       G                                      D


where D is the set of deterministic decision rules. Unlike in the case where G is known, a regulator
that only knows G   cannot consult a single posterior expectation to make the decision of
whether to investigate. Rather, the maximum risk of each decision rule must be computed to
obtain the minimax decision rule.
       Relying on a discretized function space for G simplifies computation of the maximum risk
function Rm consistent with a set of experimental callback probabilities. As explained in Appendix
E, when  consists of a family of discrete distributions, Rm (,  ) can be computed numerically
as the solution to a linear programming problem. The minimax decision rule  mm (·) is found by
computing Rm (,  ) for each candidate rule   D and choosing the rule that yields lowest maximal
risk.

Bayes vs. Minimax Decisions
We now compare the decisions made by a Bayesian regulator with a minimax regulator in the
hypothetical 5-pair generalization of the NPRS experiment considered in Section 8. As in Figure
IV, we assume applications take on only two quality levels (high or low) with equal probability.
       We consider a restricted family D   D of decision rules of the form  (Ej ) = 1 {P (Ej , Glogit )  q } ,
where q  (0, 1) is a posterior cutoff and Glogit is the logit model reported in column 2 of Table V.
Computing the maximal risk for this family of decision rules can be thought of as a way of "second
guessing" the risk associated with each logit posterior threshold without debating the logit model's
ordering of the underlying evidence configurations.16 In computing Rm (,  ), we use the logit
model predictions of callback probabilities within each of the two quality bins as constraints (see
the Appendix for details) and calibrate  so that, under the logit DGP, an 80% posterior threshold
minimizes risk.
  16
    With Lw white and Lb black applications there are 2(1+Lw )(1+Lb ) logically possible decision rules which, in
practice, prohibits brute force enumeration when Lw + Lb > 4. Restricting attention to logit posterior threshold rules
allows us to circumvent this obstacle. In cases where multiple evidence configurations yield the same logit posterior,
we consider separate rules that investigate each of these configurations individually.


                                                         27
   Figure VI plots logit (i.e., Bayes) risk and Rm (,  ) against the nominal logit posterior threshold
q . As q approaches one, both the maximal and Bayes risks approach zero, as no jobs are investigated
in the limit. Conversely as the posterior threshold approaches zero ­ at which point all jobs are
investigated ­ the maximum risk diverges from the Bayes risk because the least favorable G is
one where nearly all jobs are engaged in trivial levels of discrimination that fail to justify the
investigation cost. Recall from Table IV, however, that some jobs in the NPRS experiment must
be discriminating, which limits the magnitude of this divergence.
                                 Figure VI: Bayes and minimax risk, NPRS data




     Notes: This figure displays risk functions generated by a hypothetical experiment sending five white
     and five black applications to jobs in the population studied by Nunley et al. (2015). Resumes are
     randomly assigned to high or low quality with equal probability, where quality is defined as +/-1 the
     empirical standard deviation of the logit covariate index. The horizontal axis plots the posterior
     threshold at which jobs are accused of discrimination. The grey curve displays risk based on the logit
     data generating process in column (2) of Table V. The cost of an investigation is calibrated so that a
     Bayesian regulator sets the posterior cutoff at 0.8. The blue curve plots maximum risk calculated by
     choosing the joint distribution of callback probabilities to maximize risk for each decision rule subject
     to the moments identified by the Nunley et al. (2015) experiment, restricted to decision rules that order
     jobs by the logit posterior threshold. Vertical lines indicate risk-minimizing thresholds. The window
     displays logit and minimax risk at threesholds of 0.75 and above, with risk-minimizing points indicated
     in red.


   While the Bayes risk function is minimized by the decision rule with a posterior threshold of
80%, Rm (,  ) is minimized by a rule with a logit-based threshold of 83%. This higher threshold
implies a minimax regulator would investigate fewer jobs than a Bayesian regulator with the same
preferences who believes G to be logit. The change in behavior is minimal, however, suggesting

                                                         28
that, at least for this specification of preferences, the Bayes decision rule is relatively robust to
ambiguity over the nature of the true DGP. As shown in Appendix Figure A.II, however, had we
considered a more aggressive Bayesian benchmark (e.g., a 40% threshold), the minimax and Bayes
rules would have departed more substantially, as the maximum risk can greatly exceed the Bayes
risk.
     That the Bayes and minimax thresholds are nearer each other for higher nominal thresholds
is to be expected, as our risk function must approach zero as the posterior cutoff approaches one.
In practice, state and regulatory agencies are likely to exhibit preferences requiring relatively high
posterior thresholds that, as in our example, make the bounds on the risk function relatively narrow
over the relevant range of decision rules. The concordance of maximum and Bayes risk over this
range suggests that flexible parametric models such as the mixed logit specification employed in
Section 8 may serve as a useful hueristic for decisionmaking by such entities.


10      Conclusion
Correspondence studies are powerful tools that have been extensively used to detect market-
level averages of discriminatory behavior.      Revisiting three such studies, we find tremendous
heterogeneity across jobs in the degree of discrimination. This heterogeneity presents authorities
charged with enforcing anti-discrimination laws with a difficult inferential task. Our analysis
suggests that when ensemble evidence is used, sending 10 applications per job enables accurate
detection of a non-trivial share of discriminatory employers. This finding opens the possibility that
discrimination can be monitored ­ perhaps in real time ­ at the employer level.
     Our results also provide a number of methodological lessons regarding the design and analysis of
correspondence studies, and of experimental ensembles more generally. First, we demonstrate that
indirect evidence can serve as a valuable supplement to direct evidence even when heterogeneity
distributions are not point identified. Using a few moments of the callback rate distribution in
conjunction with only four applications per job, we derived informative lower bounds on the share
of jobs engaged in illegal discrimination in the NPRS experiment. In the AGCV study, which sent
eight applications to each job, we deduced informative lower bound rates of discrimination against
men and women separately.
     Second, our results highlight that the appropriate use of indirect evidence depends critically on
the objectives of the investigator, formalized in our framework by the loss function of a hypothetical
regulator. While in point identified settings it is straightforward to characterize the tradeoffs
presented by different decision rules, partial identification of heterogeneity distributions tends
to undermine identifiability of this tradeoff itself. In our setting acknowledging the ambiguity
stemming from partial identification turns out to lead to only slightly more conservative decisions
with a realistic loss function. An important topic for future research is the extent to which the policy
implications of recent econometric evaluations of teachers, schools, hospitals, and neighborhoods
(e.g., Chetty et al., 2014b; Angrist et al., 2017; Hull, 2018; Chetty and Hendren, 2018; Chetty et al.,


                                                  29
2018) vary with alternative notions of risk.


References
7th Circuit Court of Appeals (2006): "EEOC v. Target Corp." 460 (F. 3d), 946.

Altonji, J. G. and R. M. Blank (1999): "Race and gender in the labor market," in Handbook of
  Labor Economics, ed. by O. C. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier, vol. 3C, chap. 48, 3143­3259.

Angrist, J. D., P. D. Hull, P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2017): "Leveraging lotteries
  for school value-added: testing and estimation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 871­919.

Arceo-Gomez, E. O. and R. M. Campos-Vasquez (2014): "Race and marriage in the labor
  market: a discrimination correspondence study in a developing country," American Economic
  Review: Papers & Proceedings, 104, 376­380.

Becker, G. S. (1957): The Economics of Discrimination, The University of Chicago Press.

Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg (1995): "Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
  powerful approach to multiple testing," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 57, 289­300.

Bertrand, M. and E. Duflo (2017): "Field experiments on discrimination," in Handbook of
  Field Experiments, ed. by E. Duflo and A. Banerjee, Elsevier, vol. 1.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2004): "Are Emily and Greg more employable than
  Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination," American Economic
  Review, 94, 991­1013.

Brown, L. D. (2008): "In-season prediction of batting averages: A field test of empirical Bayes
  and Bayes methodologies," The Annals of Applied Statistics, 2, 113­152.

Chernozhukov, V., W. K. Newey, and A. Santos (2015): "Constrained conditional moment
  restriction models," arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.06311.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. R. Jones, and S. R. Porter (2018): "The
  opportunity atlas: mapping the childhood roots of social mobility," Working paper.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014a): "Measuring the impact of teachers I:
  evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates," American Economic Review, 104, 2593­2563.

------ (2014b): "Measuring the impact of teachers II: teacher value-added and student outcomes
  in adulthood," American Economic Review, 104, 2633­2679.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018): "Impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility
  II: county-level estimates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 1163­1228.


                                                30
Chetverikov, D., A. Santos, and A. M. Shaikh (2018): "The econometrics of shape
  restrictions," Annual Review of Economics, 10, 31­63.

Efron, B. (2010): "The future of indirect evidence," Statistical Science, 25, 145­157.

------ (2012): Large-scale inference: empirical Bayes methods for estimation, testing, and
  prediction, vol. 1, Cambridge University Press.

------ (2016): "Empirical Bayes deconvolution estimates," Biometrika, 103, 1­20.

Efron, B. and C. Morris (1975): "Data analysis using Stein's estimator and its generalizations,"
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 70, 311­319.

Efron, B., R. Tibshirani, J. D. Storey, and V. Tusher (2001): "Empirical Bayes analysis
  of a microarray experiment," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96, 1151­1160.

Fang, Z. and A. Santos (2018): "Inference on directionally differentiable functions," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 86, 377­412.

Farber, H. S., D. Silverman, and T. von Wachter (2016): "Determinants of callbacks to job
  applications: an audit study," American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106, 314­318.

Fryer, R. G. and S. D. Levitt (2004): "The causes and consequences of distinctively black
  names," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 767­805.

Guryan, J. and K. K. Charles (2013): "Taste-based or statistical discrimination: the economics
  of discrimination returns to its roots," The Economic Journal, 123, F417­F432.

Halevy, Y., D. Persitz, and L. Zrill (2018): "Parametric recoverability of preferences,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 126, 1558­1593.

Hong, H. and J. Li (forthcoming): "The numerical bootstrap," Annals of Statistics.

Hull, P. D. (2018): "Estimating hospital quality with quasi-experimental data," Working paper.

Levine, D. I., M. W. Toffel, and M. S. Johnson (2012): "Randomized government safety
  inspections reduce worker injuries with no detectable job loss," Science, 336, 907­911.

Manski, C. F. (2000): "Identification problems and decisions under ambiguity: Empirical analysis
  of treatment response and normative analysis of treatment choice," Journal of Econometrics, 95,
  415­442.

Noubiap, R. F., W. Seidel, et al. (2001): "An algorithm for calculating -minimax decision
  rules under generalized moment conditions," The Annals of Statistics, 29, 1094­1116.

Nunley, J. M., A. Pugh, N. Romero, and R. A. Seals (2015): "Racial discrimination in the
  labor market for recent college graduates: evidence from a field experiment," B.E. Journal of
  Economic Analysis and Policy, 15, 1093­1125.

                                                31
Pearson, K. (1900): "On the criterion that a given system of deviations from the probable in the
  case of a correlated system of variables is such that it can be reasonably supposed to have arisen
  from random sampling," Philosophical Magazine, Series 5, 50, 157­175.

Rubin, D. B. (1980): "Randomization analysis of experimental data: the Fisher Randomization
  test comment," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75, 591­593.

Savage, L. J. (1951): "The theory of statistical decision," Journal of the American Statistical
  association, 46, 55­67.

Storey, J. D. (2002): "A direct approach to false discovery rates," Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 64, 479­498.

------ (2003): "The positive false discovery rate: a Bayesian interpretation and the q-value," The
  Annals of Statistics, 31, 2013­2035.

US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (2016): "Advancing opportunity: a review
  of the systematic program of the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission," Technical
  report.

Wald, A. (1945): "Statistical decision functions which minimize the maximum risk," Annals of
  Mathematics, 46, 265­280.




                                                32
Appendix A:              Connections to Large Scale Testing
The problem of detecting individual discriminators based on correspondence evidence is closely
related to the literature on large scale testing, which is concerned with deciding which hypotheses
to reject based upon the results of a very large number of tests (Efron, 2012 provides a review). A
seminal contribution to this literature comes from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995), who proposed
controlling the False Discovery Rate (FDR): the expected share of rejected null hypotheses that
are true. We next show that a decision rule based on the posterior probability  (cw , cb ) will control
an analogue of the FDR, while a decision rule based on classical hypothesis testing will not.
   As in Section 9, let  : {0, ..., Lw } × {0, ..., Lb }  {0, 1} represent an auditing rule that maps
                                                                                               J
the evidence vector (Cjw , Cjb ) to a binary investigation decision. Letting NJ                j =1  (Cjw , Cjb )
denote the total number of investigations in a sample of J jobs, we can define the Positive False
                                              -1             J
Discovery Rate (Storey, 2003) as: pF DRJ = E NJ              j =1  (Cjw , Cjb )(1   - Dj )|NJ  1 . In words,
pF DRJ gives the proportion of investigated jobs that are not discriminating, conditional on at least
one investigation taking place. The following Lemma establishes that a posterior cutoff decision
rule controls pF DRJ .

Lemma 4 (pF DRJ Control). If  (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1 { (Cjw , Cjb ) > p
                                                                ¯} then pF DRJ  1 - p
                                                                                    ¯.

Proof. Storey (2003, Theorem 1) showed that pF DRJ = Pr(Dj = 0| (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1) for any
deterministic decision rule  (·) obeying Pr ( (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1) > 0 . Then the posterior cutoff rule
 (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1 { (Cjw , Cjb ) > p
                                   ¯} yields

                          pF DRJ       = Pr (Dj = 0| (Cjw , Cjb ) > p
                                                                    ¯)
                                        Pr (Dj = 0| (Cjw , Cjb ) = p
                                                                   ¯) = 1 - p
                                                                            ¯.




   By contrast, consider an alternative decision rule   (Cjw , Cjb ) based on a classical hypothesis
test that controls size at a fixed level ~ < 1. To simplify exposition, suppose that the test is pivotal
under the null of non-discrimination so that

                      Pr   (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1|pjw = p, pjb = p = ~,         p  [0, 1] .

We can write the resulting pF DRJ of this rule

                                                           Pr   (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1|Dj = 0 (1 -   ¯)
Pr Dj = 0|  (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1       =                                                   
                                         Pr ( (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1|Dj = 0) (1 -  ¯ ) + Pr ( (Cjw , Cjb ) = 1|Dj = 1) ¯
                                            ~ (1 - 
                                                   ¯)
                                                        .
                                         ~ (1 - 
                                                 ¯) + ¯

                                                                              ~ (1-
                                                                                    ¯)
To see that   (Cjw , Cjb ) fails to control pF DRJ , note that lim¯ 0       ~ (1-
                                                                                  ¯ )+¯   = 1. That is, when
almost no jobs are discriminating, classical hypothesis testing will result in the vast majority of

                                                     33
investigations being false accusations.
    The False Discovery Rate of Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) can be written F DRJ = pF DRJ ×
Pr (NJ  1). Because Pr (NJ  1)  1, Lemma 4 implies that the posterior cutoff rule also controls
F DRJ .


Appendix B:               Proof of Lemma 2
By the law of total probability the share of jobs calling cw white and t - cw black applications
among those calling t total can be written:

                                    ¯
                                    ft (cw ) = (1 - 
                                                         ¯0 (cw ) + 
                                                    ¯ t )f             ¯1 (cw ),
                                                                    ¯t f
                                                          t             t

      ¯d (cw ) = Pr(Cjw = cw |Cjw + Cjb = t, Dj = d) for d  {0, 1}. Since f
where f                                                                   ¯1 (cw )  [0, 1] we have
       t                                                                   t

                         ¯
                         ft (cw )  (1 - 
                                             ¯0 (cw ), f
                                        ¯ t )f         ¯t (cw )  (1 - 
                                                                          ¯0 (cw ) + 
                                                                      ¯t )f          ¯t ,
                                              t                            t

which implies
                                                ¯0 (cw )-f
                                                f         ¯        ¯           ¯0
                                                           t (cw ) ft (cw )-ft (cw )
                                  ¯t  max
                                                  t
                                                     ¯0 (cw )
                                                     f
                                                                  , 1-f    ¯0 (cw )    .
                                                       t                    t


Taking the maximum of these lower bounds over cw  {0, ..., t} yields the bound on ¯t in part i) of
Lemma 2.
    By Bayes' rule the share of discriminators among jobs calling cw white and t - cw black
applications is given by:
                                                                ¯0 (cw )(1 - 
                                                                f             ¯t )
                                                                 t
                                     (cw , t - cw ) = 1 -            ¯             .
                                                                     ft (cw )
Plugging the bound on ¯t from part i) of the Lemma into this expression gives the bound on
 (cw , t - cw ) in part ii).


Appendix C:               Discretization of G and Linear Programming Bounds
To compute the solution to the problem in (5), we approximate the CDF G (pw , pb ) with the discrete
distribution
                                            K    K
                       GK (pw , pb ) =                ks 1 {pw  (k, s) , pb  (s, k )} ,
                                            k=1 s=1


where the {ks }K,K                                                   K,K
               k=1,s=1 are probability masses and { (k, s) , (s, k )}k=1,s=1 comprise a set of mass
point coordinates generated by the function

                                            min {k, s} - 1 max {0, k - s}2
                                 (k, s) =                 +                .
                                                 K          K (1 + K - y )
                                                diagonal               off-diagonal


                                                           34
This discretization scheme can be visualized as a two-dimensional grid containing K 2 elements.
The diagonal entries on the grid represent jobs where no discrimination is present. The first term
                                                                                                        K -1 K -1
above ensures the mass points are equally spaced along the diagonal from (0, 0) to                       K , K      . The
second term spaces off diagonal points quadratically according to their distance from the diagonal
in order to accomodate jobs with very low levels of discrimination while economizing on the number
of grid points. We use a spacing scheme that places more points near the diagonal because we are
particularly interested in the mass exactly on the diagonal. Note that lim                          (K, s) = 1, ensuring
                                                                                             K 
the grid asymptotically spans the unit square.
      With this notation, the constraints in (6) can be written:

                                   K    K
                      Lw      Lb
     ¯ (cw , cb ) =
     f                                       ks (k, s)cw (1 - (k, s))Lw -cw (s, k )cb (1 - (s, k ))Lb -cb , (10)
                      cw      cb
                                   k=1 s=1

for cw = (1, ..., Lw ) and cb = (0, ..., Lb ). Hence, our composite discretized optimization problem is
to
                                                L
                                                                      K
                                                t
                      min 1 -                            ¯                 kk (k, k )t (1 - (k, k ))L-t ,
                      {ks }
                                   (cw ,cb ):cw +cb   =t f cw , cb   k=1

subject to (10) and
                                                 K      K
                                                            ks = 1,        ks  0,
                                                k=1 s=1

for k = 1, ..., K and m = 1, ..., K . We solve this problem numerically using the Gurobi software
package. Because setting K too low will tend to yield artificially tight bounds, we set K = 900 in
all bound computation steps, which yields (900)2 = 810, 000 distinct mass points.
      Appendix Table A.IV reports linear programming bounds for various choices of K . As expected,
the bounds stabilize with a sufficiently large K , and the quadratic spacing described above produces
more accurate results than an equally-spaced grid: we obtain similar estimates for a quadratic grid
with 3002 grid points and a rectangular grid with 9002 points.


Appendix D:                   Shape Constrained GMM
To accomodate the Nunley et al. (2015) study which employs multiple application designs, we
introduce the variable Lj = (Ljw , Ljb ) which gives the number of white and black applications sent
to job j . Collecting the design-specific callback probabilities {Pr (Cjw = cw , Cjb = cb |Lj = l)}cw ,cb
into the vector f¯l , our model relates these probabilities to moments of the callback distribution via
                  ¯
the linear system f                                                                  ¯
                   l = Bl µ, for Bl a fixed matrix of binomial coefficients. Letting f denote the
vector formed by "stacking" the f ¯                                              ¯
                                   l across designs in an experiment, we write f = Bµ. Let  be
a K 2 × 1 vector comprised of the probability masses {ks }K,K
                                                          k=1,s=1 (see Appendix C). For GMM
estimation we set K = 150 (larger values yield very similar results). From (3), we can write µ = M 
where M is a dim (µ) × K 2 matrix comprised of entries with typical element (k, s)m (s, k )n . We

                                                                35
then have the moment restriction f¯ = BM  .
   Let f~ denote the vector of empirical call back probabilities with typical element:
                                                    J
                                             J -1   j =1   1{Cjw =cw ,Cjb =cb ,Lj =l}
                                                               J                         .
                                                       J -1    j =1   1{Lj =l}


Our shape constrained GMM estimator of  can be written as the solution to the following
quadratic programming problem:

                                                  ~ - BM  ) W (f
                                     ^ = arg inf (f            ~ - BM  )                                            (11)
                                                    


                                                    s.t.   0, 1  = 1,

where W is a fixed weighting matrix. Note that because G (·, ·) is not identified, there are many
possible solutions ^ to this problem, but these solutions will all yield the same values of BM ^.
Our shape constrained estimate of the moments is µ    ^ = M  ^ while our estimator of the callback
                 ^
                 ¯
probabilities is f = BM  ^. We follow a two-step procedure, solving (11) with diagonal weights
proportional to the number of jobs used in the application design and then choosing W =        ^ -1
where ^ = diag f   ^      ^
                   ¯(1) - f    ^
                          ¯(1) f
                               ¯(1) is an estimate of the variance-covariance matrix of the callback
                                                                                       ^(1) .
                                                                                       ¯
frequencies implied by the first step shape-constrained callback probability estimates f

Hong and Li (forthcoming) standard errors
Standard errors on the moment estimates µ
                                        ^ are computed via the numerical bootstrap procedure
of Hong and Li (forthcoming) using a step size of J -1/3 (we found qualitatively similar results with
a step size of J -1/4 ). Our implementation of the numerical bootstrap proceeds as follows: the
bootstrap analogue µ of µ  ^ solves the quadratic programming problem in (11) where f~ has been
            ~ + J -1/3 f  . The bootstrap probabilities f  have typical element:
replaced by f

                           J                                                J
                                    { jw =cw ,Cjb =cb ,Lj =l}
                                  1 C
                                  j                                                1{Cjw =cw ,Cjb =cb ,Lj =l}
                   J 1/2   j =1
                                      J       1{L =l}                  -    j =1
                                                                                       J                        ,
                                      j =1   j   j                                     j =1   1{Lj =l}


            J
      
where j            are a set of iid draws from an exponential distribution with mean and variance one.
            j =1
For any function  (^
                   µ) of the moment estimates µ
                                              ^ reported, we use as our standard error estimate
the standard deviation across bootstrap replications of J -1/3 [ (µ ) -  (^
                                                                          µ)].

Chernozhukov et al. (2015) goodness of fit test
To formally test whether there exists an  in the K 2 dimensional probability simplex such that
f = BM  holds, we rely on the procedure of Chernozhukov et al. (2015). Our test statistic (the
"J -test") can be written:
                                               ~ - BM  ) 
                                     Tn = inf (f         ^ -1 (f
                                                               ~ - BM  )
                                                



                                                                 36
                                              s.t.   0, 1  = 1.
                     ~ denote the (centered) bootstrap analogue of the callback frequencies f
    Letting F = f  - f                                                                      ~ and
W  a corresponding bootstrap weighting matrix, our bootstrap test statistic takes the form:

                                 
                                Tn = inf (F - BM h) W  (F - BM h)                                    (12)
                                         ,h


                     ~ - BM  ) W (f
               s.t. (f            ~ - BM  ) = Tn ,   0, 1  = 1, h  -, 1 h = 0.

As in the full sample problem, we conduct a two-step GMM procedure in each bootstrap replication,
                                                               -1
setting W  = diag(BM  (1) ) - (BM  (1) )(BM  (1) )                  where  (1) is a first-step diagonally
weighted estimate of the probabilities in the bootstrap sample. The goodness of fit p -value reported
                                              >T .
is the share of bootstrap samples for which Tn  n
    To simplify computation of (12), we re-formulate the problem in two ways. First, we define
primary and auxilliary vectors of errors for each moment condition. Letting h = F - BM h and
 = f ~ - BM  , the problem can be re-posed as:

                                               
                                              Tn = inf h W  h ,
                                                     h ,


       s.t.  W  = Tn , BM h + h = F , BM  +  = f
                                               ~, 1 h = 0, 1  = 1, h  -,   0.

Now letting h+ = h +  , we can further rewrite the problem as:

                                               
                                              Tn = inf h W  h ,
                                                     h ,


   s.t.  W  = Tn , BM h+ + h +  = F , BM  +  = f
                                               ~, 1 h+ = 1, 1  = 1, h+  0,   0.

Note that this final representation replaces a K 2 × K 2 + 1 (inequality) constraint matrix encoding
h  - and   0 with a 2K 2 × 1 vector encoding h+  0 and   0. Because this problem still
involves a quadratic constraint in  , we make use of Gurobi's Second Order Cone Programming
(SOCP) solver to obtain a solution.


Appendix E:             Computing Maximum Risk
We approximate G pH    L H L
                  w , pw , pb , pb with the discretized distribution

                            K    K   K        K
GK p H    L H L
     w , pw , pb , pb   =                         ksk s 1 pH            L
                                                           w  (k, s) , pw      k , s , pH             L
                                                                                        b  (s, k ) , pb     s ,k   ,
                            k=1 s=1 k =1 s =1


which has K 4 mass points. In practice, we choose K = 30, which yields the same number of points
as the approximation described in Appendix C.


                                                       37
   Generalizing the notation of Appendix D, let the vector Lj = LH     L     H     L
                                                                 jw , Ljw , Ljb , Ljb                                                       record the
number of high quality and low quality applications of each race sent to job j and let Cj =
  H , CL , CH , CL
 Cjw                     record the corresponding numbers of callbacks. The space of auditing rules
       jw   jb   jb
we consider is of the form  (Cj , Lj , q ) = 1 {P (Cj , Lj , Glogit ) > q }.With this notation, we can write
the risk function
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                         -1 (px
                                                                                              wj )-
                                                                                                    -1 (px )
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         bj
            R(q ) =          wl E  (Cj , l, q )  -                                                       2
                                                                                                                       | Lj = l ,
                      lA1
                                                                                                                      
                                                                           x{H,L)

where A1 is the set of all 25 = 36 binary quality permutations possible in a design with 5 white
and 5 black applications and wl =                     5
                                                      H
                                                     lw
                                                             5
                                                             H
                                                            lb      (1/2)10 is the set of weights that arise when quality is
assigned at random within race.
   To further evaluate the above risk expression we can write:
                                                                         
                                                 - 1 x   - 1 x
                                                 (pwj )- (pbj )
                                                                
                 E  (Cj , l, q )  -                    2
                                                                 | Lj = l =
                                                                
                                                               x{H,L)

               aH
                jw     aH
                        jb       aL
                                  jw      aL
                                           jb   K    K         K    K                                    H        H
                                                                                                                 lb       L        L
                                                                                                                                  lb
                                                                                                        lw               lw
                                                                           (c, l, q )ksk s
                                          s=1 k k s s
                                                                                                        cH
                                                                                                         w       cH
                                                                                                                  b      cL
                                                                                                                          w       cL
                                                                                                                                   b
              cH     H     L     L
               w =0 cb =0 cw =0 cb =0k =1


                                           H                        H      H                  H                       H -cH
                        × (k, s)cw (1 - (k, s))lw -cw                             (s, k )cb (1 - (s, k ))lb               b


                                     cL
                                      w
                                                                          L -cL
                                                                         lw   w                    cL                       L -cL
                                                                                                                           lb
                  ×     k ,s               1-        k ,l = s                           s ,k        b
                                                                                                         1-       s ,k          b



                                           -1 ( (k,s))--1 ( (s,k))                  -1 ( (k ,s ))--1 ( (s ,k ))
                      × -                             2                        +                 2                            .

   Using this expression, maximal risk can therefore be written as the solution to the following
linear programming problem:
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        -1 (px    -  -1 (px )
                                                                                                                )   
                                                                                                                              
      Rm (q ) =        max                 wl E  (Cj , l, q )  -                                             wj
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                          bj 
                                                                                                                               | Lj = l
                      {ksk       }
                             s
                                     lA1
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                         x{H,L)


subject to the constraint that the klk l are non-negative and sum to one and that the following
moment restrictions hold:

                                                 H        H          L          L       K      K        K    K
                                                lw       lb         lw         lb
      Pr (Cj = c|Lj = l) =                                                                                       ksk s
                                                cH
                                                 w       cH
                                                          b         cL
                                                                     w         cL
                                                                                b       k=1 s=1 k =1 s =1
                                                        H                           H     H                  H                    H -cH
                                     ×          (k, s)cw (1 - (k, s))lw -cw                       (s, k )cb (1 - (s, k ))lb           b

                                                          cL
                                                           w
                                                                                          L -cL
                                                                                         lw   w                  cL                        L -cL
                                                                                                                                          lb
                                     ×           k ,s              1-      k ,s                          s ,k     b
                                                                                                                      1-      s ,k             b
                                                                                                                                                   .

We impose these restrictions for the following set of designs, all of which are present in the Nunley
et al. (2015) experiment: A2 = {(2, 0, 2, 0) , (2, 0, 0, 2) , (0, 2, 2, 0) , (0, 2, 0, 2)} .To operationalize

                                                                          38
these constraints, we replace the unknown cell probabilities Pr (Cj = c|Lj = l) for all c and l in
A2 with their predictions under the logit model reported in column 2 of Table V. Using the logit
predictions serves as a form of smoothing that allows us to avoid problems that arise with small
cells when considering quality variation due to covariates.




                                                39
                                       Figure A.I: Mixed logit model fit




Notes: This figure compares mixed logit predicted frequencies for callback events in the Nunley et al. (2015)
data with corresponding empirical frequencies. The horizontal axis plots model-predicted probabilities for
each possible combination of white and black callback counts (excluding zero total callbacks), separately by
experimental design. Model predictions are calculated by simulating the logit model in column (2) of Table X
10,000 times for each job in the Nunley et al. data set. The vertical axis plots the observed frequency of each
event. Green dots show frequencies for a design with two white and two black applications, while orange,
blue, red, and grey points show frequencies for designs with 3 white and 1 black, 1 white and three black, 4
white and zero black, and 0 white and 4 black applications, respectively. The dashed line is the 45-degree line.
The chi-squared statistic and p -value come from a test that all model-predicted and empirical frequencies
match, treating the model predictions as fixed.
                                   Figure A.II: Bayes and minimax investigation thresholds




              1
              .9
              .8
    .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
      Minimax threshold
              .2
              .1
              0




                          0   .1      .2       .3       .4     .5      .6         .7         .8      .9        1
                                                         Bayes threshold


Notes: This figure compares Bayes and minimax decisions for various values of the investigation cost parameter .
The horizontal axis displays the posterior investigation threshold for a Bayes regulator for each value of , and the
vertical axis shows the corresponding threshold for a minimax regulator. The dashed line is the 45 degree line.
    Table A.I: Moments of callback rate distribution, BM data
                                         No             Shape
                                     constraints      constraints
            Moment                       (1)             (2)
              [! ]                      0.094           0.094
                                       (0.006)         (0.007)
              [" ]                        0.063             0.063
                                         (0.006)           (0.006)
                          #
        ! - [!]                           0.040             0.040
                                         (0.005)           (0.005)
                          #
        " - ["]                           0.023             0.023
                                         (0.004)           (0.004)
 (! - [! ] )(" - ["] )                    0.028             0.028
                                         (0.004)           (0.003)
                  #
 ! - [!]              (" - [" ] )         0.015             0.014
                                         (0.003)           (0.002)
                                #
 ! - [!]              " - ["]             0.023             0.012
                                         (0.003)           (0.002)
                 #               #
 ! - [!]              " - ["]             0.010             0.010
                                         (0.003)           (0.002)
                                          J -statistic:      0.0
                                             P -value:       1.00
            Sample size                            1,112
Notes: This table reports generalized method of moments (GMM)
estimates of moments of the joint distribution of job-specific white
and black callback rates in the Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004)
data. Estimates in column (2) come from a shape-constrained GMM
procedure imposing that the moments are consistent with a well-
defined probability distribution. The J -statistic is the minimized
shape-constrained GMM criterion function. The p -value come from
a bootstrap test of the hypothesis that the model restrictions are
satisfied.
                     Table A.II: Moments of callback rate distribution, NPRS data
                                                Design-specific estimates
                                      (2,2)          (3,1)           (1,3)                         Combined
                                     design         design          design    P -value             estimates
              Moment                   (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)                   (5)
              [! ]                   0.174          0.199           0.142      0.027                 0.177
                                    (0.010)        (0.025)         (0.015)                          (0.007)
               [" ]                       0.148          0.149          0.157         0.854          0.153
                                         (0.010)        (0.015)        (0.013)                      (0.007)
                        #
       ! - [!]                            0.089          0.108             -          0.097          0.095
                                         (0.007)        (0.009)                                     (0.005)
                        #
       " - [" ]                           0.085            -            0.083         0.857          0.084
                                         (0.007)                       (0.008)                      (0.005)
  (! - [!])(" - ["] )                     0.083          0.084          0.080         0.926          0.084
                                         (0.006)        (0.009)        (0.009)                      (0.004)
                        $
       ! - [!]                              -            0.051             -                         0.106
                                                        (0.008)                                     (0.007)
                          $
        " - [" ]                            -              -            0.044                        0.092
                                                                       (0.007)                      (0.006)
  ! - [!] #(" - ["] )                     0.044          0.043             -          0.875          0.040
                                         (0.004)        (0.007)                                     (0.002)
                                  #
 ! - [!] " - ["]                          0.047            -            0.045         0.819          0.042
                                         (0.005)                       (0.007)                      (0.002)
  ! - [!] $ (" - [" ] )                     -            0.034             -            -            0.035
                                                        (0.005)                                     (0.002)
                                  $
  ! - [!] " - [" ]                          -              -            0.037           -            0.037
                                                                       (0.006)                      (0.002)
                  #                #
 ! - [!]              " - ["]             0.036            -               -            -            0.038
                                         (0.004)           0                                        (0.002)
                                                                                   J -statistic:      23.1
                                                                                      P -value:      0.190
            Sample size                  1,146            544            550                         2,240
Notes: This table reports generalized method of moments (GMM) estimates of moments of the joint
distribution of job-specific white and black callback rates in the Nunley et al. (2015) data. Columns (1),
(2), and (3) show estimates based on jobs that received 2 white and 2 black, 3 white and 1 black, and 1
white and 3 black applications, respectively. Column (4) shows p -values from tests that the moments are
the same in each design. Estimates in column (5) come from a shape-constrained GMM procedure
imposing that the moments are consistent with a well-defined probability distribution. The J -statistic is the
minimized shape-constrained GMM criterion function. The p -value come from a bootstrap test of the
hypothesis that the model restrictions are satisfied.
                                     Table A.III: Moments of callback rate distribution, AGCV data
                                            No          Shape                                                       No           Shape
                                        constraints  constraints                                                 constraints   constraints
              Moment                        (1)          (2)                      Moment                            (3)           (4)
                                                                                            %
              [! ]                         0.136        0.137                ! - [! ]                              0.024         0.026
                                          (0.010)      (0.010)                                                    (0.004)       (0.003)
               ["]                         0.103         0.109                   " - ["]          %                0.019         0.023
                                          (0.009)       (0.009)                                                   (0.004)       (0.003)
                          #                                                                %
         ! - [! ]                          0.066         0.066                ! - [! ] (" - ["])                   0.012         0.012
                                          (0.006)       (0.006)                                                   (0.003)       (0.002)
                          #                                                                              %
         " - ["]                           0.047         0.052           ! - [! ] " - ["]                          0.013         0.013
                                          (0.005)       (0.006)                                                   (0.003)       (0.002)
                                                                                           $
    (! - [! ])(" - ["])                    0.043         0.043                ! - [! ]         " - ["]    #        0.012         0.011
                                          (0.005)       (0.004)                                                   (0.003)       (0.002)
                         $                                                             #
            ! - [! ]                       0.032         0.064                 ! - !       " - ["]    $            0.012         0.013
                                          (0.005)       (0.007)                                                   (0.003)       (0.002)
                          $                                                                %
         " - ["]                           0.025         0.048                ! - [! ]         " - ["]    #        0.010         0.010
                                          (0.005)       (0.007)                                                   (0.002)       (0.002)
                  #                                                                        #
 ! - [! ] (" - ["])                        0.021         0.018                ! - [! ]         " - ["]       %     0.010         0.010
                                          (0.004)       (0.003)                                                   (0.002)       (0.002)
                                 #                                                         $
  ! - [! ] " - ["]                         0.022         0.020                ! - [! ]         " - ["]       $     0.010         0.009
                                          (0.004)       (0.003)                                                   (0.002)       (0.002)
                  $                                                                        %
     ! - [! ] (" - [" ])                   0.015         0.015                ! - [! ]         " - ["]    $        0.008         0.008
                                          (0.003)       (0.002)                                                   (0.002)       (0.001)
                                 $                                                         $              %
  ! - [! ] " - ["]                         0.016         0.017                ! - [! ]         " - ["]             0.008         0.008
                                          (0.003)       (0.002)                                                   (0.002)       (0.002)
                 #                                                                         %
    ! - [! ]          " - ["]    #         0.016         0.016                ! - [! ]         " - ["]    %        0.007         0.001
                                          (0.003)       (0.002)                                                   (0.002)       (0.001)
                                                        J -statistic:                   2.7
                                                           P -value:                   0.891
                                                      Sample size:                      799
Notes: This table reports generalized method of moments (GMM) estimates of moments of the joint distribution of job-specific white
and black callback rates in the Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasques (2014) data. Estimates in columns (2) and (4) come from a shape-
constrained GMM procedure imposing that the moments are consistent with a well-defined probability distribution. The J -statistic is the
minimized shape-constrained GMM criterion function. The p -value come from a bootstrap test of the hypothesis that the model
restrictions are satisfied.
                      Table A.IV: Sensitivity of moments and bounds to discretization grid
                                                            Share      Share disc., Share disc.,        Share disc.,
                                           J -statistic discriminating   one call        two calls       three calls
                           Grid spacing        (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)
                                                                   A. Nunley et al. data
  K1 = 50      K2 = 200     Quadratic         23.13         0.266          0.483          0.549            0.678

 K1 = 100      K2 = 200       Quadratic        23.10          0.366           0.692         0.708          0.841
               K2 = 400       Quadratic                       0.329           0.611         0.643          0.783
               K2 = 600       Quadratic                       0.319           0.588         0.627          0.765

 K1 = 150      K2 = 300       Quadratic        23.09          0.401       0.765       0.770                0.880
               K2 = 600       Quadratic                       0.368       0.692       0.708                0.835
               K2 = 900      Quadratic                        0.358       0.672       0.691                0.821
                             Rectangular                      0.410       0.780       0.785                0.887
                                                          B. Arceo-Gomez & Campos-Vasquez data
  K1 = 50      K2 = 200       Quadratic         3.5           0.220       0.762       0.709                0.570

 K1 = 100      K2 = 200       Quadratic         2.8           0.218           0.738         0.717          0.599
               K2 = 400       Quadratic                       0.209           0.732         0.710          0.583
               K2 = 600       Quadratic                       0.209           0.730         0.708          0.579

 K1 = 150      K2 = 300       Quadratic         2.7           0.220           0.727         0.718          0.606
               K2 = 600       Quadratic                       0.208           0.722         0.709          0.587
               K2 = 900      Quadratic                        0.207           0.721         0.708          0.584
                             Rectangular                      0.215           0.713         0.707          0.590
Notes: This table explores the sensitivity of our shape-constrained generalized method of moments (SCGMM) and
linear programming bounds results to the number of grid points used to approximate the joint distribution of
callback probabilities. K1 refers to the number of mass points used in the quadratic programming SCGMM step,
while K2 refers to the number of mass points used in the linear programming bounds step. Quadratic grid spacing
refers to the scheme described in Appendix A, and rectangular spacing refers to a grid with equally spaced points.
Column (1) shows the minimized SCGMM criterion function for each value of K1. Column (2) displays the lower
bound on the fraction of discriminating jobs for each combination of K1 and K2. Columns (3)-(5) show
corresponding bounds conditional on the total number of callbacks. Panel A displays results for an application
design with two white and two black applicants in the Nunley et al. (2015) data, and panel B displays results for the
Arceo-Gomez and Campos-Vasquez (2014) data. Bold lines indicate the preferred specification used in the main text.
