                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                            LONG-TERM HEALTH INSURANCE:
                               THEORY MEETS EVIDENCE

                                        Juan Pablo Atal
                                         Hanming Fang
                                        Martin Karlsson
                                       Nicolas R. Ziebarth

                                       Working Paper 26870
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26870


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020

We thank Konstantin Beck, Paola Bertoli, Rudi Blankert, Florian Buchner, Keith Ericson,
Colleen Carey, David Dillenberger, Stefan Felder, Sebastian Fleitas, Leora Friedberg, Paul
Grieco, Kate Ho, Mathias Kifmann, Amanda Kowalski, Ethan Lieber, Tony Lo Sasso, Claudio
Lucarelli, Maria Polyakova, Andreas Ryll, Holger Strulik, Nicholas Tilipman, Jürgen Wasem,
Michael Whinston, Joachim Winter, Moto Yogo, and Peter Zweifel as well as seminar
participants at Lund University, Princeton University, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Conference of the American Society of Health Economists (2018), Annual Meeting of the
Southern Economic Association (2018), Health Economics Working Group Meeting of the
German Economic Association (Ausschuss für Gesundheitsökonomie, 2018), Essen Health
Conference (2019), Congress of the International Health Economics Association (iHEA, 2019),
NBER Insurance Working Group Conference (Spring 2019), New York Area Health Economics
Day (2019), and the GSE Forum in Microeconometrics for very helpful comments and
suggestions. We thank representatives of the German Association of Private Health Insurers as
well as Frank Bowert for invaluable comments on how well our modeling of German LTHI
reflects actuarial practices. We do not have financial interests that would constitute any conflict
of interests with this research. Generous funding by the German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research (FKZ: 01EH1602A) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Juan Pablo Atal, Hanming Fang, Martin Karlsson, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Health Insurance: Theory Meets Evidence
Juan Pablo Atal, Hanming Fang, Martin Karlsson, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth
NBER Working Paper No. 26870
March 2020
JEL No. G22,I11,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

To insure policyholders against contemporaneous health expenditure shocks and future
reclassification risk, long-term health insurance constitutes an alternative to community-rated
short-term contracts with an individual mandate. Relying on unique claims panel data from a
large private insurer in Germany, we study a real-world long-term health insurance application
with a life-cycle perspective. We show that German long-term health insurance (GLTHI)
achieves substantial welfare gains compared to a series of risk-rated short-term contracts.
Although, by its simple design, the premium setting of GLTHI contract departs significantly from
the optimal dynamic contract, surprisingly we only find modest welfare differences between the
two. Finally, we conduct counterfactual policy experiments to illustrate the welfare consequences
of integrating GLTHI into a system with a "Medicare-like" public insurance that covers people
above 65.

Juan Pablo Atal                                 Martin Karlsson
Department of Economics                         CINCH Health Economics Research Center
Ronald O. Perelman Center                       Weststadttürme Berliner Platz 6-8
for Political Science and Economics             45127 Essen
133 South 36th Street                           Germany
Suite 150                                       martin.karlsson@uni-due.de
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ataljp@econ.upenn.edu                           Nicolas R. Ziebarth
                                                Cornell University
Hanming Fang                                    Department of Policy Analysis
Department of Economics                         and Management (PAM)
Ronald O. Perelman Center                       426 Kennedy Hall
for Political Science and Economics             Ithaca, NY 14853
133 South 36th Street                           nrz2@cornell.edu
Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

     For decades, academics and policymakers alike have been studying options to regulate (short-

term) private health insurance markets. Such policy options strive to avoid outcomes that are con-

sidered undesirable, such as a high uninsurance rate, unaffordable premiums for sick individuals

or large premium fluctuations following changes in health status (Claxton et al., 2017). However,

standard regulatory tools to address these issues, e.g. community-rated premiums and guaranteed

issuance, involve cross-subsidization from the healthy towards the sick, and therefore typically imply

a trade-off with other unintended consequences such as adverse selection (cf. Akerlof, 1970).

     A fundamental alternative to regulated cross-subsidization is an individual long-term health in-

surance contract. Instead of relying on transfers across individuals with different health statuses,

long-term contracts leverage individuals' private intertemporal incentives over their lifecycle. Un-

der long-term contracts, sick individuals pay relatively low premiums and compensate by paying

relatively high premiums in healthy times of their life. In theory, a carefully designed long-term con-

tract can reduce the risk of premium fluctuations due to health shocks ("reclassification risk"), while

ensuring participation and eliminating adverse selection (cf. Pauly et al., 1999; Patel and Pauly, 2002;

Pauly and Lieberthal, 2008).

     In this paper, we study the largest and oldest individual private long-term health insurance mar-

ket in the world. In Germany, ten percent of the population (or 8.8 million individuals) hold in-

dividual long-term health insurance policies sold by private insurance companies. After an initial

risk-rating, the policies are guaranteed renewable until death (without an expiration date or enroll-

ment period) and future premium changes have to be community rated; that is, premium changes

over the lifecycle are independent of changes in the policyholder's health status.1

     The simple design of the German long-term health insurance contract (henceforth GLTHI) dif-

fers substantially from the welfare-maximizing contract derived by Ghili et al. (2019) (henceforth

GHHW). The German contract foresees the payment of constant real premiums over the lifecycle, re-

gardless of the evolution of an individual's income and health status. As a consequence, the GLTHI

contract almost entirely eliminates reclassification risk--at the expense of relatively high premiums

during the early life years ("front-loading"). In contrast, the optimal dynamic contract involves a

premium path that is income-dependent, and that changes over the lifecycle after the realization

of health shocks. The optimal contract considers the individual's lifecycle income profile to find

the welfare-maximizing balance between insurance against reclassification risk and consumption
    1 Germany   has no public insurance specifically for people above the age of 65, like Medicare in the United States.


                                                               1
smoothing over the lifecycle.2

    This paper first presents and discusses the main principles and functioning of GLTHI. It is a mar-

ket that, despite its stable existence for decades, has received very little attention outside Germany.

We formulate the theoretical foundations of GLTHI and contrast them with GHHW. Next, we lever-

age a unique panel of claims data from one of the largest German private insurers. In total, our data

include 620 thousand unique enrollees over 7 years, spanning all age groups and all German states.

For example, the oldest policyholder is 99 years and the most loyal client has been insured for 86

years. We then make use of the German version of the John Hopkins ACG© software, and propose

a novel risk classification method which allows us to categorize the expected health risk and study

health transitions over time. Because lifecycle income profiles play a crucial role when assessing the

welfare effects of GLTHI, we leverage more than three decades of lifecycle income panel data from the

representative German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP). For this purpose, we rely on household

income measures that consider all income streams, including social insurance benefits and consider

within-household redistribution.3

    We find that the simple GLTHI design generates only small welfare losses compared to the opti-

mal contract of GHHW. Under various parameterizations and scenarios, replacing the GLTHI con-

tract with the optimal contract would increase welfare by between zero and seven percent. Within

a plausible range of parameter values, we find that the welfare gains are smaller than four percent.

When delving deeper into an understanding the surprisingly small welfare loss of GLTHI relative to

the optimal contract, we find that, compared to the optimal contract, the GLTHI contract entails less

consumption smoothing over the lifecycle, but also less reclassification risk. On balance, compared

to the optimal contract, the welfare loss due to less consumption smoothing is almost entirely offset

by better reclassification risk insurance in the GLTHI contract. These results are robust to the incor-

poration of private savings, to a wide range of degrees of risk aversion, and to non-time-separable

                      ` la Epstein and Zin (1989).
recursive preferences a

    We also investigate the potential implications of our findings for U.S. health insurance reform.

We argue that the U.S. health insurance system, prior to the Affordable Care Act at least, could be

approximated by a hybrid system of private health insurance contracts for the working-age popu-

lation up to age 64 and payroll tax financed Medicare insurance for age 65 and higher; in addition,
   2 The contract derived by Ghili et al. (2019) is optimal under one-sided commitment and no-borrowing constraints. This

paper also maintains those assumptions. The first-best contract corresponds to a constant consumption profile over an
individual's lifecycle but is unattainable under these assumptions.
   3 We also show that the findings are robust to using more than three decades of lifecycle income data from the U.S. Panel

Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).



                                                             2
the market for private health insurance contracts is to a first order approximation a 60/40 mixture of

long-term contracts (employer-sponsored health insurance) and short-term contracts. We implement

the U.S. system using our estimates from the German data, and show that switching all short-term

contracts to long-term contracts (either in the form of GLTHI or the GHHW optimal contracts) could

result in substantial welfare gains. However, we also find that such a hybrid system of private in-

surance contracts and Medicare achieves lower welfare than a system in which private long-term

insurance contracts cover individuals throughout their entire lifecycle (as in the GLTHI sytem).

   This paper contributes to the literature on dynamic contracts for which vast theoretical work but

relatively little empirical evidence exists. Pauly et al. (1995) propose a "guaranteed-renewable" con-

tract with a pre-specified path of premiums that fully eliminates adverse selection and reclassification

risk. Similarly, Cochrane (1995) proposes a scheme of severance payments, made after the realiza-

tion of health shocks, which provides full insurance against reclassification risks. Hendel and Lizzeri

(2003) and Ghili et al. (2019) show that the optimal contract only partially insures reclassification

risk, because fully eliminating reclassification risks requires large front-loaded payments, preventing

consumption smoothing over the lifecycle. These results are mostly theoretical, and the proposed

contracts typically have complex designs that have high informational requirements to implement.

The main contribution of our paper is to provide a systematic welfare analysis of an existing, simple

real-world alternative long-term contract with a distinct advantage of low information requirements

for implementation. We show that, even though the GLTHI contracts are theoretically not optimal,

they provide a close approximation in terms of welfare to the optimal GHHW contracts by providing

better reclassification risk insurance at the cost of less intertemporal consumption smoothing.

   Several papers, including Hendel and Lizzeri (2003), Herring and Pauly (2006), Finkelstein et al.

(2005), and Atal (2019), investigated empirically the workings of long-term contracts in different con-

texts. Our paper also contributes to this empirical literature by introducing in Section 5.1 a method

of discrete classification of health risks. We base our method on the properties of homogeneity and

separation in the actuarial science literature (see Finger, 2006). Our proposed method is, in our view,

a more informative way of discrete classification of health risks than the mostly ad hoc method used

in the existing literature.

   Our paper is also related to a few papers that have previously studied the Germany long-term

health insurance market. Hofmann and Browne (2013) describe GLTHI contracts and show that

switching behavior in the market is consistent with its incentive structure. Christiansen et al. (2016)

empirically study determinants of lapsing and switching behavior. Baumann et al. (2008) and Eekhoff


                                                   3
et al. (2006) discuss the potential effects of higher switching rates on market competition if the capital

accumulated through front-loaded payments were to be made portable across insurers. While these

two papers discuss a hypothetical reform, Atal et al. (2019) theoretically and empirically study the

effects of the actual 2009 portability reform on switching behavior.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide the institutional details

of the GLTHI market; in Section 3, we derive the theoretical life-cycle premiums under the GLTHI

framework and contrasts them with the premiums of the optimal contract as derived in Ghili et al.

(2019). In Section 4, we describe our data and provide summary statistics; in Section 5, we model

the health risk and income dynamics over the lifecycle. Section 6 uses the theoretical and empirical

inputs to simulate the economy and to quantify welfare under different contracts. We also present

possible implications of our findings for U.S. health reforms. In Section 7, we discuss the robustness

of our main results to different values of risk aversion, and to Epstein and Zin (1989)'s recursive

preferences. Finally, in Section 8, we conclude.



2   Institutional Details

    Germany has a two-tier health insurance system where a statutory health insurance (SHI) and

an individual private health insurance market co-exist. SHI is a public insurance program that cov-

ers ninety percent of the population. SHI enrollees pay income-dependent contribution rates for a

standardized benefit package with very little cost-sharing, and they are enrolled in one of the 109

                                                        ¨
non-profit sickness funds (Schmitz and Ziebarth, 2017; Bunnings                                  ¨
                                                                et al., 2019; Bundesministerium fur

Gesundheit, 2020). However, for historical reasons, select population subgroups (see below for de-

tails) have the right to leave the public SHI system permanently and fully insure their health risks on

a private market. By opting out of the SHI, individuals no longer need to pay SHI taxes, but they

are mandated to purchase long-term private health insurance. In the private market, individuals can

choose among thousands of individual long-term plans. Karlsson et al. (2016) provide more details on

the general structure of the German health insurance market. Hofmann and Browne (2013) and Atal

et al. (2019) provide additional specific details on the individual private market. The uninsurance

rate in Germany is around 0.1 percent (German Statistical Office, 2016).

    Besides Chile (cf. Atal, 2019), Germany is the only country in the world with an existing private

long-term health insurance market. About 8.8 million enrollees in Germany are long-term insured

on this market (Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers, 2019b). For historical reasons,



                                                    4
GLTHI covers three main population subgroups: (a) the self-employed; (b) high-income earners with

gross labor incomes above a politically defined federal threshold (in 2020, the threshold is e 62,550,

or about $68,800 per annum); and (c) civil servants. These population subgroups have the option

to leave the public SHI system and insure their health risks privately with a long-term contract

                                                                            ¨
(Nuscheler and Knaus, 2005; Hullegie and Klein, 2010; Polyakova, 2016; Panthofer, 2016). This de-

cision to enter the private market is essentially a lifetime decision. Switching back to SHI is strictly

limited, so as to prevent individuals from strategically switching back and forth and gaming the

system; the basic principle is "once privately insured, always privately insured" (Schencking, 1999;

Innungskrankenkasse Berlin Brandenburg, 2018). We discuss the institutional specifics of this rule,

as well as the empirical evidence on the difficulty of switching from GLTHI back to SHI in Appendix

A1.

      The GLTHI market consists of 48 private insurers that sell comprehensive as well as supplemental

insurance coverage (Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers, 2019c). The focus of this

paper is the comprehensive or "substitutive" (to SHI) insurance, which is solely sold as individual

policies. Besides not paying the SHI taxes, other advantages for consumers to opt out of SHI and

getting private GLTHI coverage include that the GLTHI offers a lot of choice as well as actuarially

fair premiums in a lifecycle perspective (as we discuss in more detail below). Compared to the

post-ACA era in the U.S., the GLTHI market is less regulated. Applicants can freely choose their

level of coverage in terms of benefits and cost-sharing amounts, within some lax limits. This results

in thousands of different health plans among the 8.8 million policyholders, most of which are sold

across state lines and nationwide. The majority of private insurers operate nationwide and are open

to all applicants who opt out of SHI.


Provider Networks.       Provider networks and "Managed Care" are unknown in the public and pri-

vate system in Germany; that is, people can freely choose their providers in either system. Moreover,

in both the public and private system, reimbursement rates are centrally determined and do not vary

by insurers or health plans. While the fees for inpatient services are identical across the public and

private market, the fees for outpatient services are structurally higher in the private market, which is

why wait times for outpatient services, especially those of the specialists, are shorter for the privately

insured (Werbeck et al., 2019). Because they do not negotiate rates or build provider networks, the

main job of private insurers is to customize health plans and process, scrutinize, and deny claims.

Thus, different from the private insurance plans in the United States, the GLTHI contract primarily



                                                    5
constitutes a pure financial contract. This feature of the German health insurance system significantly

simplifies our welfare analysis of GLTHI versus the optimal contract and other alternative arrange-

ments.


Guaranteed Renewability and One-Sided Commitment. While an individual applies for a private

health insurance, the insurer can initially deny coverage to applicants with bad risks, however, the

insurers cannot terminate ongoing contracts. Contracts are not yearly contracts like in the U.S., but

permanent lifetime contracts without an end date. In other words, the GLTHI contracts are guaran-

teed lifetime renewable.4 Because enrollees can cancel their permanent contracts but insurers can-

not, the GLTHI is a market with a one-sided commitment. However, it is relatively common that

enrollees remain insured with their carrier until they die (recall that Medicare does not exist in Ger-

many).5 In addition, whereas the initial premium is risk-rated, all subsequent premium increases are

community-rated at the plan level, such that the contract provides insurance against reclassification

risk.


Premium Calculation and Old Age Provisions.                      The initial GLTHI premium is individually un-

derwritten.6 Premiums consist of several components whose exact calculations are regulated by the

Kalkulationsverordnung (KalV). The insurers' actuaries carry out the specific actuarial calculations

                                                                                       ¨ Finanz-
which have to be approved by a federal financial regulatory agency (the Bundesanstalt fur

dienstleistungsaufsicht, BaFin ). Specifically, Chapter 1 of the KalV specifies that premiums have to

be a function of the expected per capita health care claims or Kopfsch¨
                                                                      aden (which depend on the

plan chosen, age, gender, health risks),7 the assumed guaranteed interest rate (Rechnungszins ), the

probability to lapse (Stornowahrscheinlichkeit ), and the life expectancy (Sterbewahrscheinlichkeit ).

    One important and distinct characteristic of the GLTHI market is the legal obligation of insurers

to build up old-age provisions, typically until age 60 of the policyholder. The old-age provision accumu-
   4 In  fact, because there is no enrollment period and end date, contracts are permanent and do not have to be renewed.
   5 In  our sample, the policyholders' average age is 46 years and policyholders have been with the insurer for an average
of 13 years; the oldest client is 99 years old and the most loyal client has been with the insurer for 86 years, see Table A1
(Appendix).
    6 The only exception is the "Basic Plan" (Basistarif ). The Basic Plan must be offered by all carriers and is structured

after the SHI with the same essential benefits and actuarial values. For the Basic Plan, guaranteed issue exists for people
above 55 and those who joined the GLTHI after 2009. The maximum premium is capped at the maximum SHI contribution
(in 2020, it is e 935.94 per month). The legislature mandated the Basic Plan to provide an "affordable" private option for
GLTHI enrollees who cannot switch back to SHI, are uninsured, would have to pay excessive premiums, or would be
denied coverage. However, the demand for the Basic Plan has been negligible; thus henceforth, we will abstain from it. In
2018, in the entire GLTHI, only 32 thousand people, or 0.4 percent, were enrolled in the Basic Plan (Association of German
Private Healthcare Insurers, 2019c). In our data, only 1,006 enrollees chose the basic plan in 2010.
    7 Gender rating was allowed until December 21, 2012. After this date, for new contracts, all insurers in the European

Union (EU) have to provide unisex premiums as the EU Court of Justice banned gender rating as discriminatory (Schmeiser
et al., 2014)


                                                             6
lated early in the lifecycle serves as capital to cover higher health expenditures later in the lifecycle.

Premiums are calculated under the basic principle of a constant premium over the lifecycle that is

enough to cover expenses over the enrollee's lifecycle (we provide a formal treatment of this prin-

ciple in Section 3.1). Thus, in young ages, premiums exceed the expected claims; while in old ages,

premiums are lower than the expected claims--a phenomenon known as "front-loading" in long-

term insurance contracts (Nell and Rosenbrock, 2007, 2009).8

       Figure 1 provides an illustration of the front-loading for four combinations of age at initial en-

rollment and health risk: high and low health risk, and initial enrollment at either age 30 or 50. In

this illustration, we assume the health risk types to be constant over the lifecycle.9 . The low health

risk type corresponds to a hypothetical individual with no pre-existing conditions, and the expected

health expenditures by age conditional on survival is denoted by E(m|surv, low) in Figure 1; the high

health risk type corresponds to a hypothetical individual who has 50 percent higher expected health

care costs at each age, denoted by E(m|surv, high) in Figure 1. In Figure 1, P30,low (and respectively,

P30,high ) is the premiums under the GLTHI if a low (respectively, high) risk type starts its enrollment

into the long-term contract at age 30; similarly, P50,low and P50,high ) are the premiums under the GLTHI

if the two types start their enrollment into the contract at age 50.

       Figure 1 has the following important features. In principle, premiums remain stable over en-

rollees' life cycles. Front-loaded premiums allow to dampen increases in premiums via the capital

stock built through old-age provisions--the cumulative difference between the premium payments

and the expected claims in addition to the investment returns from these front-loaded payments.10

Second, premiums are higher for enrollees who joined the GLTHI later in their life, as the expected

yearly future expenditures increase with age.11 Third, because of the initial risk rating, high-risk

types (the "sick") pay higher premiums throughout their lives, relative to the low-risk types (the
   8   Such front-loading creates a "lock-in" effect, in addition to the lock-in induced by guaranteed renewability (Nell and
Rosenbrock, 2008; Atal, 2019). To strengthen consumer power and reduce this lock-in, the German legislature made a
standardized portion of these old-age provisions portable across carriers for contracts signed after Jan 1, 2009; see Atal
et al. (2019) for an evaluation of this reform. For existing contracts, Atal et al. (2019) do not find a significant impact on
external switching rates. However, they find a one-time increase in internal plan switching during the limited six months
period from January to June 2009 where portability was granted for existing contracts.
    9 Although the case with permanent health risk allows to illustrate the basic front-lading principle, allowing for a

stochastic health status is fundamental to the analysis: First, it allows to show that front-loading can dampen the reclassifi-
cation risk. Second, an evolving health status means that individuals who start unhealthy may lapse their contract, which
introduces (downwards) reclassification risk even if premiums are constant within a given contract. Also, lapsation needs
to be taken into account when calculating the premium level. We treat the case with evolving health status extensively in
Section 3.1 and in the rest of the paper.
   10 In 2018, the capital stock built through old-age provisions amounted to e 260 billion ($286 billion) for 8,736,400 policies,

or to e 29,760 ($32,737) per policy (Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers, 2019c).
   11 This is not necessarily true when health risk may change over time. With a stochastic health status, the initial premium

may start to decrease at very high ages as, over time, the need to front-load for future negative shocks to health status
decreases (see Section 6.1.)



                                                                7
              Figure 1: Premiums and Health Expenditures over the Lifecycle in the GLTHI
Source: German Panel Claims Data (see Section 4.1), own calculations, own illustration.


"healthy").12

    While, theoretically, the premium of a contract is constant over an individual's lifecycle, in reality

nominal and also real premiums do increase. The main factors that trigger such premium adjust-

ments (Beitragsanpassungen ) are the following: (i) structural changes in life expectancy; (ii) struc-

tural changes in health care consumption; (iii) structural changes in health care prices mostly due to

medical change, e.g. new expensive drugs;13 (iv) structural changes of the economic environment,

e.g. through capital markets or new financial regulation. An example of (iv) is the structural and un-

expected shift of central banks to a super-low interest rate environment over the past decade. Such

a structural shift implies a strong decrease in returns to risk-free capital investment. Because GLTHI

insurers (like life insurers) are heavily invested in the bond market, structural premium adjustments

have been the consequence.14

    Premium adjustments are not only allowed in some cases, but also required by the regulatory

financial oversight agency BaFin to ensure financial stability within the regulatory framework in the
  12 Again, this is not necessarily true when health risk may change over time.
  13 The Health Care Reform 2000 (GKV-Gesundheitsreformgesetz 2000 ) introduced a mandatory 10 percent premium
surcharge up to age 60 to dampen structural increases in health care spending due to medical progress. This surcharge
only applies to GLTHI contracts signed after January 1, 2000 (see article 14 of GKV-Gesundheitsreformgesetz (2000)).
  14 The KalV has traditionally capped the assumed return on equity, the so called "guaranteed interest rate" (Rech-

nungszins ) for the premium calculation at 3.5 percent. This has been the case for five decades. However, in 2016 for the first
time, the average net return on investment has dropped below 3.5 percent, which is why the German Actuary Association
                                                                                                      ¨
has issued a new guideline to calculate the new insurer-specific "maximum allowed interest rate" (Hochstrechnungszins        ),
see Deutsche Aktuarvereinigung (DAV) (2019).



                                                              8
Versicherungsvertragsgesetz (VVG), the Versicherungsaufsichtsgesetz (VAG), and the KalV.15 Most

insurers have to follow the Solvency II reporting requirements. Each year, insurers have to test

whether their underlying assumptions for their premium and old age provision calculations for each

health plan are still accurate. If they deviate by a certain amount, they have to adjust the premiums,

which can result in two-digit premium increases, bad press, and lawsuits (Krankenkassen-Zentrale

(KKZ), 2020).16 However, on average, nominal premium increases have been moderate--in 2018 at

1.8 percent and from 2009 to 2019 at an average nominal rate of 2.8 percent(Association of German

Private Healthcare Insurers, 2019a). Most important for our analysis is that the premium adjustments

of GLTHI after the initial purchase are not allowed to depend on the enrollee's possibly evolving

health status.



3      Premium Settings and Welfare Measures

3.1      Lifecycle Premiums in the German Long-Term Health Insurance (GLTHI)

      We start by formalizing the calculation of GLTHI premiums over the lifecycle. Then we compare

them to the lifecycle premium profile of the optimal dynamic contract as derived by Ghili et al. (2019)

(GHHW).

      Let Pt ( t ) be the premium offered when signing a GLTHI contract in period t. Pt ( t ) depends

on the individual's health risk in year t,  t , as GLTHI contracts are individually underwritten at

inception (see Section 2). We assume that  t   where  is a finite set of health states to be described

below. In subsequent periods, each contract is guaranteed-renewable. As such, individuals who sign

a contract in period t can renew the contract for the same premium, Pt ( t ), in all periods between

t + 1 and T , regardless of the evolution of their health status.

      As discussed in Section 2, the contract breaks even in equilibrium, given premium Pt ( t ). Conse-

quently, we express Pt ( t ) as the solution to a fixed-point problem in which Pt ( t ) covers exactly the

expected claims of enrollees who stay in the contract at premium Pt ( t ). We solve for Pt ( t ) recur-

sively, starting from the last period, t = T . In T , there is no uncertainty regarding future health shocks

and future lapsation. Let mt denote health care expenditures in year t. Assuming full coverage, it

follows that PT ( T ) = E(m T | T ).
    15 Effective   January 1, 2016 the KalV has been replaced by the Krankenversicherungsaufsichtsverordnung (KVAV).
    16 All premium adjustments have to be legally checked and approved by 16 independent actuaries who are appointed by

the BaFin. However, some plaintiffs in lawsuits argue that some of these actuaries would not be sufficiently independent.
Other reasons of courts to declare a premium increase as "not justified" were insufficient explanations by the insurers or a
deliberate initial underpricing of premiums in the first year to attract enrollees (Krankenkassen-Zentrale (KKZ), 2020).



                                                               9
    To calculate the equilibrium premium in t < T , we need to consider endogenous lapsation. En-

rollees will lapse their current contract if, given the evolution of their health status, they can obtain a

lower premium if they apply for a new policy in the market than their current guaranteed-renewable

premium. Formally, lapsing a contract signed in t < T at the risk-rated premium Pt ( t ) occurs at the

first  > t under health status   if P (  ) < Pt ( t ), where P (  ) is the premium that the individual

can get time  > t when his/her health status is   from a new long-term policy.17

Remark 1 Note that the lapsation decision under GLTHI is only driven by a comparison between one's current

guaranteed premium Pt ( t ) and the premium that he/she could obtain from a new contract P (  ). Neither

risk aversion nor income shocks play any role in the lapsation decision under GLTHI; also as we mentioned

previously, GLTHI is a pure financial contract, thus the lapsation decision is not driven by any differentiation

in provider networks associated with the policies.

    For a given t < T and  > t, we denote Pt+1  { Pt+1 (.), ..., P (.) } as the set of guaranteed premi-

ums from t + 1 to t +  . We can then recursively write the break-even GLTHI lifecycle premium for

time-t new enrollees applying for GLTHI with heath state  t , which we denote by Pt ( t ), as follows:



                                                    T
                                    E( m t |  t ) +     - t E( m  | z ) × q  ( z |  t , P t+1 , Pt (  t ))
                                                    >t z
                       Pt ( t ) =                   T
                                                                                                             ,               (1)
                                              1+             -t   × q (z| t , Pt+1 , Pt (  t ))
                                                    >t z


where the first element of the numerator, E(mt | t ), is expected health care costs in period t, given

 t ; the second element of the numerator is the sum of the expected future health care costs over all

remaining life years from t to T , which are discounted with rate , with the spending at a future time

 weighted by q (z| t , Pt+1 , Pt (  t )), the probability that (1)   = z, and (2) the individual does not

lapse (or die) between periods t and  , given the subsequent equilibrium premiums Pt+1 . These ex-

pected lifecycle health care claims are then normalized by the expected number of non-lapsing years

in the contract in the denominator.18 In other words, in the GLTHI market, the lifecycle premium

Pt ( t ) equals the average of today's expected health care spending and all expected future health

care spending, given the health risk today and in the future, weighted by the likelihood of non-lapse

in any of the future time periods until death.
  17 Notethat we abstain from horizontal differentiation across plans, and from switching costs.
  18 Ofcourse, q (z| t , P t+1 , Pt (  t )) depends on the evolution of the health status  t+1 , ...,   and death, conditional on
current health status  t . We describe how we model the health risk process in Section 5.




                                                                10
      Equation (1) implicitly determines the constant GLTHI equilibrium lifecycle premium for a con-

tract signed in period t. Note that the break-even constraint determines the GLTHI lifecycle premium

in any period for different health statuses, considering the likelihood to lapse in future periods. These

lifecycle premiums do not maximize any ex ante consumer objective functions; conceptually, they are

not designed to maximize any welfare criterion.


Remark 2 Note that the equilibrium premiums of the GLTHI recursively determined by Equation 1 do not

depend on the utility function, and the income profiles. Therefore, the GLTHI premiums do not depend on

educational achievement of the applicants even though the income profiles differ substantially across education

groups.


3.2     Lifecycle Premiums in the Optimal Dynamic Health Insurance Contract (GHHW)

      In contrast, Ghili et al. (2019) study the optimal dynamic health insurance contract that maxi-

mizes consumer welfare, subject to break-even, no lapsation, and no borrowing constraints, in an

environment where individuals have time-separable and risk averse preferences subject to stochastic

health expenditure shocks.Ghili et al. (2019) show that the optimal dynamic insurance contract pro-
                                        T ) that is a function of enrollees' current health risk as well as
                              ¯t ( t , yt
vides a consumption guarantee c
                                         T  {y , y
the vector of current and future income yt    t t+1 , ....y T }. The optimal dynamic insurance con-

                                                                     T ). Over time, the consumption of
                                                           ¯1 ( 1 , y1
tract establishes that the individual will start consuming c
                                  ¯ is bumped up in every period t such that a competing firm can
an individual holding a guarantee c
                                   T) > c
                         ¯t ( t , yt
offer a higher guarantee c              ¯ and still break-even in expectation.
                                                                      T ) is solved by backwards induc-
                                                            ¯t ( t , yt
      Analogous to the GLTHI lifecycle premium calculation, c
                                                                      ¯t ( t , y T ) = y T - E(m T | T ).
tion. Specifically, the consumption guarantee in period T is given by c

For any t < T and  > t, denote the set of future equilibrium consumption guarantees c
                                                                                    ¯ t +1 

{c              ¯ (.)}. Then an algebraic reformulation of the consumption guarantee in Ghili et al. (2019)
 ¯t+1 (.), ..., c

shows that the equilibrium break-even consumption guarantee under the optimal dynamic contract

for an individual purchasing a long-term optimal contract at time t under health status  t is recur-

sively determined by:

                                               T
                             yt - E(mt | t ) +    -t (y - E(m |z)) × q (z| t , c
                                                                               ¯                  T ))
                                                                                        ¯t ( t , yt
                                                                                 t +1 , c
                      T                        >t z
            ¯t ( t , yt
            c           )=                                                                               ,   (2)
                                                T
                                           1+            -t   × q (z| t , c                  T ))
                                                                                   ¯t ( t , yt
                                                                          ¯ t +1 , c
                                                 >t z

where q (z| t , c                  T )) is, with some slight abuse of notation, the probability that (1)  =
                         ¯t ( t , yt
                ¯ t +1 , c                                                                               


                                                          11
z, and (2) the individual does not lapse (or die) between periods t and  , given the set of future

                                   ¯
equilibrium consumption guarantees c t+1 . Again, as above, Equation (2) implicitly determines the

equilibrium consumption guarantee in period t under health status  t . As noted in Ghili et al. (2019),

these consumption guarantees can be re-interpreted as a series of contracts with guaranteed premium

paths P (  , y ) = y - c         T ) for   t; and the consumer would lapse at a time  > t under
                       ¯t ( t , yt

                         ¯ (  , y
health status   whenever c       T) > c         T ). That is, a consumer who chose an optimal long-
                                      ¯t ( t , yt

term contract at time t under health status  t will lapse at a future time  under health status   if

he/she is able to obtain a new long-term contract from the market that provides higher consumption

guarantees.


Remark 3 The consumption guarantees under GHHW's optimal long-term contracts, recursively character-

ized by Equation 2, do not depend on the utility function. What is important for the theoretical derivations

of the optimal contract is that the consumers' preferences are time separable and exhibit risk aversion. The

time-separability assumption is violated when we examine the Epstein-Zin recursive preferences in Section 7.


Remark 4 The consumption guarantees under GHHW's optimal long-term contracts, recursively character-

ized by Equation 2, do depend on income profiles. This implies that the corresponding guaranteed premium

paths P (  , y ) = y - c         T ) also depend on the income profiles. Since income profiles differ by education
                       ¯t ( t , yt

group, the GHHW premiums differ by education group. This differs from the GLTHI premiums (see Remark

2).


3.3    GLTHI vs. GHHW from a Welfare Perspective

      The design of the GLTHI contract differs substantially from the welfare-maximizing GHHW con-

tract, leading to different consumption profiles.19 On the one hand, GLTHI implies the payment of a

constant premium regardless of policyholders' income and the evolution of their health (with the ex-

ception of those who become healthy enough to switch to a contract with lower premiums; as shown

later, this is a rare occurrence). As a consequence, the GLTHI contract almost completely eliminates

the reclassification risk. However, the elimination of reclassification risk comes at the expense of large

premium payments at early ages to prevent future premium hikes. These large upfront premiums

have negative welfare implications when income is low and the marginal utility of consumption is

high at early ages. On the other hand, the optimal dynamic contract involves a path of consumption
  19 In the special case of flat income over the lifecycle, i.e., y = y0 for all t, then y0 - P (  ) = c
                                                                                                       ¯t ( t ), cf. Equations (1)
                                                                   t                           t t
and (2). That is, when income is flat over the lifecycle, then the guaranteed premium in GLTHI coincides with the implicit
guaranteed premium paths in GHHW.


                                                               12
guarantees (and therefore, a path of premiums) that is income-dependent, and that changes over the

lifecycle after health shocks. The reason is that the optimal contract penalizes high premiums when

the marginal utility of consumption is high.

      We quantify the welfare consequences under each contract from the perspective of lifetime utility

U defined as:
                                                               T
                                                  U=E          St  t - t u ( c t )
                                                                          0

                                                             t = t0

where St is an indicator of survival until period t, and ct is the consumption in period t that is speci-

fied by the contract, which may depend on the full history of health realizations up to t as well as the

individual's full lifecycle income profile. Expectation is taken over the individual's lifetime health

history ( 1 ,  2 , ...,  t ) and survival.20 With a parametric assumption for flow utility u(.), and knowing

income yt , we can summarize welfare with the "certainty income equivalent", denoted CE, such that:


                                                         E t
                                                           T
                                                             = t0 St 
                                                                      ( t - t0 ) u ( c )
                                                                                      t
                                             u(CE) =
                                                              E t
                                                                T
                                                                  = t0 St 
                                                                           t - t0



      This simple expression captures the main trade-offs in health insurance design for lifetime wel-

fare. Lifetime utility is higher when consumption is smoothed across health states and across periods.

In particular, the first-best consumption level is equal to the present discounted value of "net income"

yt - E(mt ), taking into account mortality risk. This constant optimal consumption level C  is given

by:
                                                   E t
                                                     T
                                                       = t0 St 
                                                                t-t0 ( y - E( m ))
                                                                        t      t
                                              
                                            C =                                                          (3)
                                                           E t
                                                             T
                                                               = t0 St 
                                                                        t - t0


      In contrast, under a series of actuarially fair short-term contracts, the premium at time t and health

status  t will simply be E(mt ) and the consumption will thus be ct = yt - E(mt | t ), the certainty

equivalent CE becomes:


                                                    E t
                                                      T
                                                        = t0 St 
                                                                 t-t0 u ( y - E( m |  ))
                                                                           t      t t
                                      u(CEST ) =                                                         (4)
                                                               E t
                                                                 T
                                                                   = t0 St 
                                                                            t - t0



4      Claims and Survey Panel Data from Germany

      This section describes the claims panel dataset and the survey panel dataset used in this paper.

The main working samples focus on the privately insured in the GLTHI market. We use the claims
    20 We   assume that there are no annuity markets, so mortality risk is still considered.


                                                                   13
panel data primarily to estimate individual health transitions and related medical expenditures over

the lifecycle. In contrast, we use the survey panel data primarily to estimate individual income

dynamics over the lifecycle.


4.1     GLTHI Claims Panel Data

      The claims panel data are administrative records for the universe of contracts and claims between

2005 and 2011 from one of the largest private health insurers in Germany. In total, our data include

more than 2.6 million enrollee-year observations from 620 thousand unique policyholders along with

detailed information on plan parameters such as premiums, claims, and diagnoses. Atal et al. (2019)

provide more details about the dataset. The claims data also contain the age and gender of all poli-

cyholders as well as their occupational group and the age when they first signed a contract with the

insurer. We converted all monetary values to 2016 U.S. dollars (USD).


Sample Selection.         We focus on primary policyholders. In other words, we disregard children in-

sured by their primary caregivers and those who are younger than 25 years (555,690 enrollee-year

observations).21 Moreover, due to the 2009 portability reform (see footnote 8), we disregard in-

flows after 2008 (253,325 enrollee-year observations).22 Hence, the final sample consists of 1,867,465

enrollee-year observations from 362,783 individuals.


Descriptive Statistics. Table A1 (Appendix) presents the descriptive statistics. The mean age of

the sample is 45.5 years and the oldest enrollee is 99 years old. Thirty-four percent of the sample

are high-income employees, 49 percent are self-employed and 13 percent are civil servants. The

majority of policyholders (72 percent) are male, because women are underpresented among the self-

employed and high-income earners in Germany. On average, policyholders have been clients of the

insurer for 13 years and have been enrolled in their current health plan for 7 years. Ten percent of all

policyholders have been with the insurer for more than 28 years and one policyholder has been with

the insurer for as long as 86 years, illustrating the existence of a real-world private long-term health

insurance system.23 The distribution of policyholders' age when joining the company is shown in

Figure B2. The mass of individuals signs their first GLTHI contract around the age of 30, at a time
  21 Children  obtain their own individual risk-rated policies. However, if parents purchase the policy within two months
of birth, no risk-rating applies. Under the age of 21, insurers do not have to budget and charge for old-age provisions.
   22 Below we show that the composition of enrollees has remained stable between 2006 and 2011.
   23 Our insurer doubled the number of clients between the 1980s and 1990s and has thus a relatively young enrollee

population, compared to all GLTHI enrollees. Gotthold and Gr¨     aber (2015) report that a quarter of all GLTHI enrollees are
either retirees or pensioners.



                                                             14
when most Germans have fully entered the labor market but are still healthy and face reasonable

premiums.

      Table A1 shows that the average annual premium is $4,749 and slightly lower than the average

premium for a single plan in the U.S. group market at the time (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019).

Note that the annual premium is the total premium--including employer contributions for privately

insured high-income earners.24 The average deductible is $675 per year.

      In terms of benefits covered, we simplify the rich data and focus on three plan-generosity indi-

cators provided by the insurer. These classify plans into TOP, PLUS, and ECO plans. ECO plans

lack coverage for services such as single rooms in hospitals and treatments by a leading senior M.D.

For ECO and PLUS plans, a 20 percent coinsurance rate applies if enrollees see a specialist without

referral from their primary care physician. About 38 percent of all policyholders have a TOP plan, 34

percent a PLUS plan, and 29 percent an ECO plan. Because these plan characteristics have mechani-

cal effects on claim sizes and correlate with policyholders' age, we control for them in our estimation

of health care costs in Section 5.


4.2     Socio-Economic Panel Study

      The German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP) is a representative longitudinal survey that

started in 1984. It collects annual information at the household and individual level from individuals

above the age of 17. Currently, the SOEP surveys more than 20,000 respondents from more than

10,000 households per year (Wagner et al., 2007). We use SOEPlong (SOEP, 2018), and all existing

waves as of this writing, from 1984 to 2016, in order to fully exploit the lifecycle dimension of this

panel survey.25 Table A2 (Appendix) provides summary statistics for our SOEP sample. Again, all

monetary values are in 2016 USD.


Sample Selection. We leave the representative sample as unrestricted as possible, but exclude ob-

servations with missings on core variables such as age, gender, employment status or the insurance

status. Other than that, we only exclude respondents below the age of 25 as many Germans have not

entered the labor market before that age.


Income Measures.          Our main income measure, equivalized post-tax post-transfer annual income

accounts for redistribution within households and controls for economies of scale by assigning each
  24 Employers  cover roughly one half of the total premium and the self-employed pay the full premium.
  25 Priorto 1990, the SOEP was not in the field in East Germany but started covering East Germans right after the reunifi-
cation in 1990 (Wagner et al., 2007).


                                                            15
individual a needs-adjusted income measure. Specially, equivalized post-tax post-transfer annual

income sums over all post-tax monetary income flows at the household level, such as income from

labor, capital, public and private retirement accounts, or social insurance programs.26 Then, the

total annual post-tax household income is divided by the number of household members, where we

use the modified OECD equivalence scale.27 As Table A2 shows, from 1984 to 2016, the average

annual income per household member was $26,433. Note that this measure has positive values for

all respondents, including those who are not active in the labor market.

      For completeness, Table A2 also shows statistics for two additional income measures: monthly

gross wage and monthly net wage. These measures have positive values for all working people with

labor earnings (58 percent of observations in Table A2). The SOEP Group generates and provides

these individual-level income measures to guarantee consistency over time. As seen in Table A2, the

average monthly gross wage was $2,940 and the average monthly net wage was $1,921 between 1984

and 2016.


Socio-Demographics.              Table A2 also provides the summary statistics of all other socio-demographic

variables. In the SOEP sample, the average age is 47, and 52 percent are female. About 27 percent are

white collar workers, 6 percent are self-employed, and 4 percent are civil servants. 42 percent work

full-time and 14 percent part-time.

      Below, we differentiate the lifecycle income processes by educational status. We do this because,

after age 25, schooling degrees are largely time-invariant and determine lifecycle income substan-

tially. Germany has a three-tier education system: Ed 13 is one for individuals with the highest

schooling degree after 13 years of schooling. Ed 10 is one for individuals with an intermediate de-

gree after 10 years of schooling. Ed 8 is one for individuals who earned a degree after 8 or 9 years of

schooling.



5      Modeling Health Risk and Income over the Lifecycle

5.1     Risk Classification

      Risk classification is a key ingredient for calculating the prices of and the welfare from the short-

and long-term insurance contracts. The risk classification variable represents the observed risk type
    26 The   SOEP group also generates and provides these single components in a time-consistent manner.
    27 The modified OECD equivalence scale assigns a value of 1 to the household head, 0.5 to other adults, and 0.3 to children

up to 14 years of age.



                                                              16
of an individual at the beginning of each year. In this section we introduce a procedure that borrows

insights from actuarial science, to produce an "efficient" classification. We consider our procedure

to be a significant improvement over the approach used in the state-of-the art literature of dynamic

contracts.

    Following the literature (e.g. Einav et al., 2013; Handel et al., 2015; Ghili et al., 2019), we construct

the risk classification variable using the (German version of) the John Hopkins ACG© software, which

is routinely used by commercial insurers for underwriting purposes. The ACG© software provides

a continuous risk score t . The commonly-used approach to risk classification would use an ad-hoc

criterion to partition the domain of t into different risk classes.
                                                                    28 We depart from the common


approach in two key ways: First, we allow the risk class to be a function of current and lagged values

of t ; t ( n )  { t , t-1 , .., t-n-1 }, where n is determined within our procedure. Our procedure
                                


can therefore allow for higher-order dependencies in the health dynamics in a parsimonious way.

Second, we propose and implement a method to discretize the vector of scores t ( n ). Our method

maximizes an efficiency criterion from the actuarial science literature, that we discuss in detail later

(cf. Finger, 2001).

    In the first step, we calculate the continuous score t , which is the unscaled total cost predicted

risk variable provided by ACG© . It is based on (a) diagnosis codes (pre-existing conditions and

claim diagnoses), (b) costs of treatments and (c) treatment episode dates. t is meant to represent the

expected costs in year t. In the reference population of publicly insured individuals in Germany, it

has a mean of 1.

    Figure 2 shows the empirical distributions of t for our working sample in 2006 (the first year)

and 2011 (the last year). Both distributions are approximately unimodal, and they appear stable over

time.29 Figure 2 also illustrates that the distribution of t is heavily skewed and has a long right

tail (consistent with stylized facts regarding the distribution of health expenditures, see French and

Kelly, 2016). For example, the top percentile of the  distribution has expected health expenditures

E (m|  P99 )= $63,422; the second highest percentile has E (m|P98   < P99 ) = $30, 027; and

the following three percentiles have E (m|P95   < P98 ) = $19, 253, where Pk denotes the k-th

percentile of the distribution of  plotted in Figure 2.

    Next we combine the continuous score t and its n - 1 lags into the vector of scores t ( n ),
                                                                                        


that we map into K different risk categories. These categories will be ultimately combined with the
  28 For example, Ghili et al. (2019) partition the health statuses measured by   t into seven mutually exclusive and exhaus-
tive bins, where each bin contain one-seventh of the overall sample.
   29 This suggests that excluding inflows in 2010 and 2011 due to the portability reform, see Section 2, poses no major issue.




                                                              17
                          2
                                                                                  2006 Distribution
                                                                                  2011 Distribution



                          1.5
                    Density
                          1
                          .5
                          0




                                0          2             4             6              8            10
                                                                        
                                                       ACG Score ( t)

                                    Figure 2: Distribution of t in 2006 and 2011

Source: GLTHI claims data, ACG© , own calculations. The distribution of t is truncated at 10; but 0.7 percent of the
analysis sample have  t > 10.



individual's age for the construction of discrete health types. Modeling risk types as a discrete state

serves two specific purposes. First, we allow the contract premiums to depend on the risk type.

Hence, the granularity in our model should capture the granularity of the information needed by

the underwriters, both in the actual environment and in counterfactual scenarios. Second, the model

should be parsimonious enough to allow for modeling health dynamics with a reasonable number

of parameters.

    The considerable skewness in Figure 2 implies that the amount of reclassification risk will strongly

depend on the granularity allowed for in the risk classification. We split the task of constructing

the risk categories into two sequential problems: (1) For a given number of classes K, and the n

most recent values of t , define the efficient partitioning of the scores vector t ( n ) into K discrete
                                                                                 


categories; (2) Find the values of K and n that lead to the best performance of the classification system.

We explain the details of each step below.


Efficient Classification. According to the actuarial science literature (cf. Finger, 2001), an efficient

risk classification system has two properties: homogeneity--meaning that individuals in one risk cat-

egory are similar in terms of risk, and separation--meaning that categories are sufficiently different in




                                                             18
terms of expected loss to warrant their specification as being a distinct category.30

    For any given number of risk categories (K) and number of current and lagged values of t (n),

we define a risk classification as a subjective function f K :             n
                                                                           +    {  Z : 1    K }, where                   n
                                                                                                                         +   is

the state space (i.e. t and its n - 1 lags). Denote this classification function t = f K ( t ( n )) where
                                                                                           


                                              ©
t ( n ) is the vector of the n most recent ACG scores available for an individual, and t  {1, . . . , K }

is the risk category assigned to a person with those ACG© scores. According to Finger (2001), the

efficient risk classification f K maximizes the "structure variance" defined as

                                                         K
                            SV ( f K ) = Var (mt ) -     Pr (t = k) Var (mt | t = k) ,                                    (5)
                                                        k =1

where mt is individual annual health expenditure. The structure variance SV ( f K ) is thus the total

variance less the weighted sum of within-class variances of health expenditures. Put differently, the

efficient classification maximizes the variance of mean expenditure across groups. Applying the law

of total variance to both terms in Equation (5), we can write the structure variance as:31

                                                         K
             SV ( f K ) = Var (E (mt | t ( n ))) -       Pr (t = k) Var (E (mt | t ( n )) | t = k ) .                     (6)
                                                        k =1


Note that the first term in Equation (6) is independent of the classification (as it is independent

of the classes t ); thus for a given K, finding the efficient classification system is equivalent to

finding the classes t that minimize the heterogeneity in expected expenditure within risk classes:

  =1 Pr ( t = k ) Var (E ( mt | t ( n )) | t = k ).
K                               
k
    Three things are worth noting about Equation (6). First, only the mean expenditure conditional on

ACG© scores E (mt | t ( n )) matter for the classification system, whereas the dispersion of mt around

this mean is inconsequential. Second, minimizing heterogeneity within classes is incidentally what

the k-means clustering method does (Lloyd, 1982; Athey and Imbens, 2019). Thus, we will apply k-

means clustering of E (mt | t ( n )) to determine the efficient classification system. Third, this implies

that the efficient classification also maximizes the coefficient of determination ( R2 ) in a regression of

expenditure on risk class indicators (Kriegel et al., 2017).

    Next, we determine the number of risk classes K and the history n (number of lags) of ACG©
   30 For instance, given the distribution of  in Figure 2, it is easy to see that equally-sized categories are unlikely to be
                                                   t
optimal as they would assign similar individuals in terms of  into different categories in the left tail of the distribu-
tion, failing the separation principle. In addition, it would assign individuals with substantial  differences into identical
categories in the right tail of the distribution, failing the homogeneity principle.
   31 The law of total variance implies Var ( m ) = E (Var ( m |  ( n ))) + Var (E ( m |  ( n ))) and Var ( m |  = k ) =
                                                     t               t t                 t    t                  t   t
E (Var (mt |                                          
                t ( n )) | t = k ) + Var (E ( mt | t ( n )) | t = k ).




                                                               19
scores when computing E (mt | t ( n )).



Model selection.        The last step of the risk classification system is to perform model selection, i.e.,

select values for the parameters K and n that determine, respectively, the number of risk classes and

how many ACG© scores lags should be included in t ( n ).
                                                                                                32   k-means clustering is an unsupervised

learning method; therefore, choosing the correct number of clusters is difficult (Athey and Imbens,

2019). We proceed assuming that the objective SV (.) applies also when determining these parame-

ters. As noted above, this means we can use R2 as our criterion for model selection.

        If n = 1 so that t ( n ) = t , the clustering algorithm can be applied to t since E ( mt | t ) = µt
                                                                                                          


(where µ is the global mean expenditure). If, however, previous ACG© scores have explanatory

power, E (mt | t ( n )) needs to be estimated. In order to get predictions that are accurate along the

entire distribution, including the tails, we use cubic regression splines. Figure 3 provides a compari-

son of mean expenditure by t ( n ) before and after smoothing for n = 2.
        3 4 5 6




                                                                                      3 4 5 6




                                                   15,000                                                                        15,000
        2




                                                                                      2
                                                            Expenditure




                                                                                                                                          Expenditure
                                                   10,000                                                                        10,000
  t-1




                                                                                t-1
 




                                                                               
        1




                                                                                      1




                                                   5,000                                                                         5,000

                                                   2,000                                                                         2,000
                                                   1,000                                                                         1,000

                        1      2   3 4 5 6                                                                  1      2   3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                
                         t                                                                                   t

                     (a) Raw Averages                                                                 (b) Smoothed Expenditure

                                         Figure 3: Mean Expenditure by t.
Note: The left figure is based on average expenditure within each of 400 cells (ventiles in       
                                                                                            t and t-1 ). The right figure
uses predicted values from a cubic spline regression. Source: German Claims Panel Data.


        Once E (mt | t ( n )) has been estimated for all n > 1, we can conduct the k-means clustering

in order to maximize the objective function (6). Figure 4 shows how the performance depends on

parameters K and n. For all values of n, there is initially a rapid improvement in the predictive

power when we increase the number of categories K; however, this improvement levels out at quite

low levels. Moreover, starting from a classification scheme that uses only the previous year's claims

(n = 1), there is distinct improvement when we add the previous year (n = 2). However, adding a
  32 Including lagged ACG© scores is consistent with an underwriting process often covering a relatively long medical

history of the applicant (e.g., all diseases of the past 5 years and all surgeries of the past 10 years in case of our insurer).


                                                                          20
second lag of the ACG© scores brings only marginal improvement in the predictive accuracy. Figure

4 shows that including at least one lag and 7 distinct classes attains the best performance; increasing

K or n further yields negligible improvement in performance.33



                              .2
                              .15
                          2
                          R
                              .1




                                                                                        No lags (n=1)
                                                                                        One lag (n=2)
                                                                                        Two lags (n=3)
                              .05




                                    0                             5                             10
                                                             Categories (K)

                              Figure 4: Performance of Alternative Risk Classifications.
Note: Each specification includes 21 age times gender fixed effects, year fixed effects and 79 plan fixed effects. Source:
German Claims Panel Data.


    Appendix C1 presents a number of robustness checks regarding the efficient classification system.

First, we analyze the extent to which results are driven by outliers in mt . It is of course desirable

that the classification considers outliers, given their disproportionate contributions to means and

variances; however, if the performance of the classification were widely different when they are

not considered, it would cast doubt on how well the scheme performs with regard to less extreme

risks. Figure C1 (Appendix) plots the performance of different classification systems when using

winsorized expenditures. As expected, the topcoding of outliers improves the predictive power of

all schemes; however, their relative performance is unaffected by this change.

    Second, we compare two different ways of including a longer history of claims. Instead of ex-

panding the information set t ( n ) before discretizing, we consider an alternative based on t ( n ) =
                                                                                             


t but where we consider the predictive power of the classification scheme interacted with its lags

(i.e. a classification based on K2 classes). Figure C2 (Appendix) provides the results. It shows that our

preferred classification with K classes performs only slightly worse than the corresponding interacted

classification with K2 classes.
  33 We   consistently report unadjusted R2 . All results are robust to using adjusted R2 instead.




                                                                21
      Third, we acknowledge that increasing n also changes the sample used for estimation. In Figure

C3 (Appendix) we compare the performance over different n within the same sample. It shows that

our main result is robust to the sample used.


5.2     Estimation of Expenditure Risk

      Next, we estimate the transition rates between different discrete risk categories t , as well as the

mean expenditure by risk categories. We posit that the risk type of individual i at age t,  it , depends

on the combination of the contemporaneous risk category it and age at t (in 5-year bins). That is,

 it  ( Ait , it ), where Ait is an indicator for one of the eleven age groups (five-year bands from age 25

to age 75 and 75+). It is important to note that the ACG© scores are based on an individual's age, so

that, in principle, a risk category it that uses ACG© scores as input should contain all the information

needed to predict mean expenditures. However, ACG© scores are not designed to predict transitions

so, in principle transition matrices, may depend on age even after conditioning on it . As discussed

below, our results confirm these predictions.

      Considering that the clustering method generates a set of risk classes of very different sizes, a

completely non-parametric estimation for the transition matrices g( it | i,t-1 ) and mean expenditures

E(mit | it ) is not possible. Instead, we resort to a parametric, yet flexible model. To estimate the

transition matrices, we estimate a multinomial logit model for health dynamics specified as:


                                         j                                              j
                                       it = Ait  j + Lit  j + h Ait , Lit ;  j +        it                                    (7)

           j
where it represents the log odds for i,t+1 = j, for j  {2, . . . , 8}. The category i,t+1 = 1 is the

reference category and i,t+1 = 8 represents death. Ait represents i's age groups, and Li,t is a set of

indicators for the categories of i,t . In addition, Equation (7) includes h Ait , Lit ;  j which consists of

pairwise interactions of Ait and Lit with the associated parameter vector  j .34

      To model the expected claims based on risk type, we follow a similar approach, but use the pre-

dicted values of claims from an OLS regression. In addition to the controls in Equation (7), we also

control for a vector of dummies Qit representing health plan generosity q  { ECO, PLUS, TOP}. The

base specification is:



                                 mit = Ait  + Lit  + Qit  + h ( Ait , Lit , Qit ;  ) +        it                              (8)
  34 We selected the interacted terms sequentially: in each iteration, we include the interaction term with the strongest

association with transition rates (based on a 2 test), until none of the remaining interaction terms is statistically significant.



                                                               22
    In an iterative process, we add pairwise interaction terms between Ait , Lit , and Qit (represented

by h ( Ait , Lit , Qit ;  )) to Equation (8) until no remaining term is statistically significant.35 Hence, we

include age groups indicators Ait also in the estimation of expected expenditure. As noted above, we

should expect that age per-se does not have predictive power in the model for expected expenditures

if our risk classification based on ACG© scores is rich and flexible enough.


Descriptive Statistics.         Table 1 shows the summary statistics of total claims m by age group. Fol-

lowing Ghili et al. (2019), we decompose the variation of m into two components: the part that is

explained by , i.e., S.D. of E (m | );36 and the residual variation around the predicted value, i.e.,

S.D. around E (m | ).

    As expected, mean claims strongly increase in age: they almost double from $1,996 in age group

25 to 30, to $3,719 in age group 45 to 50, almost double again to $7,151 in age group 65 to 70. For

enrollees above 75 years, the average amount of claims is $10,020 (all values are in 2016 U.S. dollars).

This age gradient is, however, accounted for by our risk classification. Even though a few age-related

parameters in Equation (8) turn out statistically significant, the deviations from mean expenditure

within each risk class are economically insignificant. Figure A1 (Appendix) illustrates this point. We

interpret it as evidence that our preferred risk classification is rich enough.

                             Table 1: Health Expenditure Claims m by Age Group

                        Ages      Mean        S.D.      S.D.(E (m | ))       S.D.(m - E (m | ))
                          All     4,109      9,451           3,494                   8,806
                          25-      1,996      5,529          1,782                  5,234
                          30-      2,619      6,050          1,938                  5,731
                          35-      2,840      6,312          2,086                  5,957
                          40-      3,119      7,153          2,411                  6,734
                          45-      3,719      8,444          2,946                  7,913
                          50-      4,880      9,866          3,544                  9,208
                          55-      6,517     12,679          4,573                  11,825
                          60-      7,635     18,608          4,299                  18,104
                          65-      7,151     12,753          4,421                  11,963
                          70-      8,355     13,837          5,026                  12,892
                          75-     10,020     13,485          4,490                  12,715
                        Source: German Claims Panel Data. Sample includes all age
                        groups and uses the ACG© scores to construct risk categories 
                        as explained in Section 5.1.
  35 The  estimation of conditional expenditure given t is based on a subsample of clients with moderately-sized de-
ductibles. The reason is that clients with large deductibles may decide not to submit their claims, which leads to a down-
ward bias in the estimates. This is less of a concern for the risk classification    t , which is based on a much broader set
of information on the clients and on treatment episodes. In Appendix section C2 we provide some descriptives for this
subsample, which generally confirm that this assumption is reasonable.
  36 This statistic also corresponds closely to the maximand of the risk classification algorithm, cf. Section 5.1 above.




                                                             23
   Table 2 shows how different age groups are distributed across risk categories , and it shows a

clear age gradient in health expenditure risk. The probability of being in the lowest risk category, i.e.,

 = 1, declines progressively with age, whereas the share of enrollees in the five highest categories

increases in age; the pattern is particularly pronounced for categories  = 4 and  = 5. Only 1.7

percent of enrollees between 25 and 30 years are in categories  = 4 and  = 5. This share almost

quadruples to 6.2 percent in age group 45 to 50, and then more than quadruples again to 28.6 percent

in age group 65 to 70. It is 61 percent for enrollees above 75 years. On the other hand, risk category

 = 7 clearly represents catastrophic costs and covers at most 0.3 percent of the population in any

age group.

                           Table 2: Health Risk Categories  by Age Group

               Age    1 (Healthiest)        2      3         4       5       6      7 (Sickest)
              25-30        0.789          0.154   0.039     0.013   0.004   0.001     0.000
              30-35        0.740          0.178   0.054     0.020   0.006   0.001     0.000
              35-40        0.652          0.225   0.085     0.027   0.009   0.002     0.000
              40-45        0.622          0.227   0.103     0.034   0.012   0.003     0.000
              45-50        0.539          0.258   0.136     0.046   0.016   0.004     0.001
              50-55        0.463          0.263   0.174     0.068   0.024   0.007     0.001
              55-60        0.291          0.319   0.232     0.108   0.036   0.011     0.002
              60-65        0.184          0.313   0.269     0.155   0.058   0.019     0.003
              65-70        0.069          0.291   0.337     0.217   0.069   0.014     0.002
              70-75        0.019          0.203   0.347     0.309   0.105   0.015     0.002
               75+         0.000          0.092   0.267     0.422   0.188   0.029     0.003
              Source: German Claims Panel Data. Sample includes all age
              groups and uses the ACG© scores to construct risk categories 
              as explained in Section 5.1.



Transitions between States.         Table 3 displays one-year transition rates between health risk cate-

gories for all age groups; the numbers are predicted probabilities based on Equation (7). Two facts

emerge from Table 3. First, we find strong persistence in health risk. For instance, an individual with

t = 1 has an 83 percent probability of t+1 = 1. The likelihood of staying in the same category

between two consecutive years decreases over risk categories but, still, 45 percent of individuals in

category 7 remain in category 7 in the next year. Second, despite the high persistence, the likelihood

of a severe health shock (and thus the reclassification risk) is non-trivial even when just considering

two calendar years. For example, the probability of ending up in risk category 4 in t + 1 is 3.6 percent

after being category 2 in year t.

   The transition rates are highly dependent on age. Tables C1 and C2 (Appendix) show transition

matrices for each of the 11 age groups. For example, the probability of remaining in state 1 decreases


                                                       24
                                      Table 3: Health Risk Category Transitions

                                                              t +1
                   t            1        2       3      4            5    6            7    8 ()
                   1          0.831    0.158   0.006   0.003     0.001   0.001    0.000    0.001
                   2          0.214    0.523   0.215   0.036     0.009   0.001    0.000    0.002
                   3          0.050    0.179   0.572   0.164     0.029   0.003    0.000    0.003
                   4          0.024    0.053   0.227   0.541     0.128   0.013    0.001    0.013
                   5          0.018    0.027   0.035   0.330     0.445   0.104    0.005    0.036
                   6          0.010    0.018   0.017   0.096     0.294   0.409    0.052    0.104
                   7          0.002    0.005   0.002   0.027     0.085   0.200    0.452    0.226
                   Source: German Claims Panel Data. Sample includes all years, all
                   age groups, and uses the ACG© scores to construct risk categories
                    as explained in Section 5.1.


from 89 percent among 25-year-olds to 18 percent among individuals above 75. Also the probability

of recovering, i.e. transitioning from a higher to a lower risk class, is declining in age. Moreover,

the mortality rates increase rapidly with age--in particular for states below 7. All these differences

are statistically significant. Therefore, allowing for age-dependent transition rates is necessary even

though, as noted above, expected expenditure conditional on risk class is constant in age.
                          1.0
                          0.8
                          0.6
                   F(t+1|t)




                                                                                           t=1
                                                                                           t=2
                          0.4




                                                                                           t=3
                                                                                           t=4
                          0.2




                                                                                           t=5
                                                                                           t=6
                                                                                           t=7
                          0.0




                                1         2      3       4           5     6           7     8 ()
                                                 Destination Category (t+1)

                                          Figure 5: Stochastic Dominance.



Stochastic Dominance. In their characterization of the optimal contract, Ghili et al. (2019) invoke an

assumption of stochastic dominance. It requires that transition rates between risk categories--which

are represented by the cumulative distribution function F (t+1 | t )--satisfy first-order stochastic

dominance in the following sense: if t > t , then F (t+1 | t )                   FSD   F (t+1 | t ). In Figure 5 we

                                                         25
show that this property holds for all pairwise combinations of (t , t ) such that t > t .


5.3     Lifecycle Income Paths

      Next, we estimate the lifecycle income paths using 33 years of SOEP panel data. Because indi-

viduals may enroll in GLTHI contracts during their entire lifetime, we consider all sources of income

beyond wages. Our main income measure is the equivalized post-tax post-transfer annual income,

which sums over all post-tax income flows at the household level, and then normalizes by the num-

ber of household members (see Section 4.2). Using this income measure, we estimate the following

individual fixed effects model:



                                           log(yit ) = i + f ( ageit ) +   it                                       (9)

where yit stands for our income measure in 2016 U.S. dollars in year t for individual i; and i are

individual fixed effects which net out all persistent individual time-invariant income determinants,

such as gender, preferences, or work productivity. The flexible function f ( ageit ) represents a series

of age fixed effects and identifies the main coefficients of interest. They capture the main features of

the German lifecycle income profiles from 1984 to 2016.

      We estimate this income process separately by educational status for the two following groups: (a)

individuals with the highest schooling degree after 13 years of schooling (Ed 13 ), and (b) individuals

with an intermediate degree after 10 years of schooling (Ed 10 ).37 We estimate separate income

processes by education groups because lifecycle profiles differ substantially by educational degree

(Becker and Chiswick, 1966). As mentioned, the steepness of these lifecycle income profiles will

determine the welfare consequences of long-term health insurance to a large extent.

      The solid black lines in Figure 6 show the estimated coefficients of f ( ageit ) for the two groups.

Income rises sharply between age 25 and age 57. Then it decreases substantially until around age 70,

from which point it remains relatively flat until death. It is also easy to observe a level difference in

income paths between the two educational groups over the entire lifecycle.

      Several factors can explain the lifecycle income pattern in Figure 6. First, the labor market entry

and subsequent careers significantly increase post-tax income between the main working ages 25 and

55. Second, our income measure includes social insurance benefits, and the German welfare state is

known for its generosity. Third, it may be surprising that equivalized household income starts to
  37 Germany has three different schooling tracks where the majority of students complete school after 10 years and then

start a three-year apprenticeship (cf. Dustmann et al., 2017).



                                                          26
                        10.6
                        10.4
              log(income)
                        10.2
                        10




                                                        Ed 13, fitted           Ed 10, fitted
                                                        Ed 13, age FE           Ed 10, age FE
                        9.8




                               20          40                   60         80               100
                                                                Age

                        Figure 6: Lifecycle Income Paths Germany, Nonparametric and Fitted.
Source: SOEP (2018), years 1984 to 2016. All values in 2016 USD.




decrease after age 57 until around age 70. However, especially in the 1980s and 1990s and also today,

                            ¨
many Germans retire early (Borsch-Supan      ¨
                                        and Jurges, 2012); others reduce their working hours, for

example, to take care of their grandchildren or provide long-term care for their parents (Schmitz

and Westphal, 2017). Finally, the stable permanent income stream from age 70 until death may be

explained by the fact that our income measure includes primarily statutory pensions, employer-

based pensions and private pensions (Geyer and Steiner, 2014; Kluth and Gasche, 2016; Engels et al.,

2017).

    We accommodate these lifecycle income pattern by fitting f ( ageit ) as a piece-wise squared poly-

nomial of age, where we allow the parameters of age and age2 to differ across three different age bins:

[25, 56], [56, 70] and 70+. This is illustrated by the two gray solid lines in Figure 6. It is noteworthy
that the piece-wise squared polynomials fit the empirical lifecycle profiles very well.




                                                           27
6      Main Results

6.1     Equilibrium Lifecycle GLTHI Premiums

      After estimating the health risk process, we can calculate the equilibrium GLTHI lifecycle pre-

miums by solving Equation (1) using backwards induction. Note that Pt ( t ) in Equation (1) is the

guaranteed-renewable premium that an individual with health  t would be offered if she entered a

contract in period t in the GLTHI market. Therefore, the equilibrium GLTHI premiums correspond

to 490 values: premiums depend on enrollee's current health category t  {1, 2, ..., 7}, as well as age

t  {25, ..., 94}. We use a discount factor  = 0.966 (corresponding to a discount rate of 3.5 percent).

      Figure 7 plots the resulting premiums for a handful of the most relevant combinations: t = 1 and

t  [25..59]; t = 2 and t  {25, ..., 74}; t = 3 and t  {65, ..., 94}; t = 4 and t  {60, ..., 74}; t = 5

and t  [75...94]. These combinations represent the three most common states for each corresponding

age interval.
                                        20,000




                                                          t=5
                                                          t=4
               Annual Premium (Pt(t); USD)




                                                          t=3
                                        15,000




                                                          t=2
                                                          t=1
                                        10,000
                                        5,000
                                        0




                                                 20             40                60              80            100
                                                                         Age at inception

                                                 Figure 7: Calibrated Starting Premiums Pt ( t ) in the GLTHI



      Three forces are at play that determine the lifecycle profile of Pt ( t ) in Figure 7. First, Pt ( t ) is an

increasing function of  t . This is because, for any age, a higher health risk classification is associated

with higher current and future health claims (both through their effect on current claims and their



                                                                             28
effect on health transitions).

      Second, starting premiums increase with age for most age ranges. This is because expected health

care claims and health transitions depend on age (through the At component of  t ). As a consequence,

the annualized net present value of health care claims of an individual with a given  t increases with

age for most of the age ranges.

      Third, however, when individuals enter the contract later in their lives, the need to front-load

premiums to fund future negative health shocks decreases over the lifecycle. This force explains

why Pt ( t ) decreases with t when t is sufficiently large.

      In Figure D1a and D1b (Appendix), we compare the calibrated and the observed premiums by

age at inception. First, we observe positively sloped starting premiums by age over the entire age

range, both for the calibrated and the observed premiums. Second, there are clear level differences

by health risk such that the starting premiums are a clear function of t --sicker applicants have

to pay higher premiums. This rank ordering persists over the entire lifecycle. Third, although the

premium levels for sicker individuals are slightly larger in the calibrated than the observed case, the

two Figures D1a and D1b show very similar starting premiums by age and health risk.


6.2     Comparison with the Optimal Dynamic Contract

      The optimal dynamic contract as derived by Ghili et al. (2019) implies evolving consumption

guarantees over the lifecycle. These consumption guarantees depend on lifecycle income profiles

(see Equation (2) and Remark 4).

                                    Table 4: Contract Terms at Inception

            25                     1       2        3       4     5          6           7
            Expected claims      1,473   3,559    6,019 9.302 14,600       24,554      54,930
                                                     (a) GLTHI
            Premium              3,973   5,517    7,563 10,363 15,291      24,561      54,930
            front-loading        2,499   1,957    1,545 1,062   691          7            0
                                                 (b) GHHW Ed 13
            Premium              1,895   4,578    6,988 10,103 15,187      24,554      54,930
            front-loading         421    1,019     970     801  586          0           0
                                                 (c) GHHW Ed 10
            Premium              2,571   5,366    7,489 10,307 15,273      24,554      54,930
            front-loading        1,097   1,807    1,471 1,006   673          0            0
            Source: German Claims Panel Data, SOEP data. Table shows expected health care claims,
            starting premiums, and the amount of front-loading by health risk category at age 25,
            25  {1, ..., 7}. All values in 2016 USD.


      We illustrate the differences between the optimal and the GLTHI contract by comparing the con-


                                                     29
tract terms at age 25. Panel (a) of Table 4 shows the GLTHI premium and front-loading amounts for a

25 year old by the health status 25  {1, ..., 7}. Specifically, if an individual's health status is 25 = 1,

she pays a premium of $3,973, which is $2,499 in excess of expected claims. Individuals with higher

's pay higher premiums, but the amount of front-loading decreases. For example, for 25 = 3 the

premium is $7,563 which includes $1,545 in front-loading. The amount of front-loading decreases

the worse the current health status is, because the likelihood of a further health deterioration also de-

creases the worse the current health status is. Also, note that the GLTHI premiums are not contingent

on the lifecycle income paths (see Remark 2).

   Panel (b) of Table 4 shows the premium and front-loading amounts under the optimal dynamic

contract for an individual with the highest schooling degree (Ed 13 ). For almost all health states,

the initial premium and front-loading is lower and thus consumption higher when compared to

the GLTHI contract. However, the differences in premiums between GLTHI and GHHW converge,

the worse the health risk classification. For example, for 25 = 1 the GHHW premium is $1,895

(vs. $3,973 for GLTHI) but for 25 = 4, the GHHW premium is $10,103 (vs. $10,363 for GLTHI).

The optimal contract entails less front-loading because a higher front-loading increases the marginal

utility of consumption; in addition, if the current health status is very poor, there is a lesser need

for front-loading because the likelihood of future health status getting worse is smaller. As such,

in the optimal contract, the amount of front-loading depends not only on the implications of the

current health state for future health states, but also on its implications for the marginal utility of

consumption.

   Panel (c) of Table 4 shows the optimal contract for an individual with a schooling degree after 10

years of schooling (Ed 10 ). This individual has a flatter income profile over her lifecycle (see Figure

6), which is why the optimal contract entails a higher degree of front-loading, especially for healthy

individuals. In general, the premium and front-loading amounts for the education group ED 10 with

25  {1, ..., 5} are in between the premiums and front-loading levels of GHHW for Ed 13 and the

GLTHI. For example, for enrollees with 25 = 1, the optimal premium is $2,571 for an individual with

Ed 10, which is in between the optimal premium of 1, 895 for individuals with Ed 13 and the GLTHI

premium of 3, 973. Similar to Panels (a) and (b), for Ed 10 group enrollees, the front-loading amount

is lower, the sicker the individual is at inception. This is because, the likelihood of a further health

shock decreases and it is very rare that health substantially improves over the lifecycle for very sick

individuals.

   Finally, comparing Panels (a)-(c), we see that the premium amounts under GLTHI, GHHW (Ed


                                                    30
13 ) and GHHW (Ed 10 ) converge for individuals whose health status at inception is 25  {5, 6, 7},

the three sickest states. Specifically, for 25 = 5, all three premiums are around $15K; for 25 = 6, all

three premiums are around $24.5K; and for 25 = 7, all three premiums are exactly at $54,930.


6.3     Welfare Results

      We now calculate welfare under the different contracts as defined in Section 3.3. We calculate

welfare by simulating the economy for a lifecycle of 70 years, from age 25 to age 94 for N = 500, 000

individuals. Note that, up to now, we did not need to specify the utility function because, as we

pointed out in Remarks 1 and 3, neither the GLTHI premiums nor the premiums under the GHHW

optimal contracts hinge on the specific utility function. However, for welfare comparisons, we need

to assume some utility function. For the baseline results, we follow Ghili et al. (2019) and use a

constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility function of the form:38



                                                           1
                                                u ( c ) = - e-c .                                                (10)
                                                           

      In our main results, following Ghili et al. (2019), we use a risk aversion parameter  = 0.0004.

In Section 7, we will explore the robustness of the welfare results with respect to , and also under

non-time-separable Epstein-Zin preferences.

      We provide nine sets of results, corresponding to different assumptions regarding the probability

simplex that determines the initial state, 0  7 . Panels (a) to (g) of Table 5 show the results assum-

ing that individuals start in each of the seven possible health states. For instance, Panel (a) assumes

that everyone starts in the healthiest state, such that 0 =           1
                                                                     100 [100, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0].   Panel (h) assumes

that 25 is drawn from the distribution implied by the transition matrix at age 25, given 24 = 1

(see Table C1, Appendix). By doing so, we accurately replicate the distribution of  among the 25-

to 30-year old. Finally, Panel (i) replicates Panel (h) but does not allow individuals to start in the

worst possible health state. We simulate Panel (i) because Panel (h) shows that even though only 0.01

percent of the population are in the worst health state, this group dominates welfare calculations for

all contract types considered. As discussed in Section 5.3, we stratify the findings by two different

education-dependent lifecycle income paths.
  38 The CARA utility function has the convenience of allowing for negative consumption, which occurs when income
is lower than the required premium payments, for example, but it also implies that the consumption equivalent may be
negative under some contracts, as we will see in Table 5.




                                                        31
                                Table 5: Welfare Under Various Contracts


                                                                       I -CST        CGHHW -CGLTH I
                         C          CST    CGLTH I CGHHW CGLTH     C  -CST              CGHHW
                         (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)            (5)                 (6)
                                       Panel (a): 0 = 100
                                                       1
                                                          [100, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
              Ed 10    23,082     -10,153 21,484     22,587         0.952                0.049
              Ed 13    34,857      -1,954   26,125   28,115         0.763                0.071
                                       Panel (b): 0 = 100 [0, 100, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
                                                       1

              Ed 10    22,712     -10,777 20,915      21,563         0.946               0.030
              Ed 13    34,485      -3,704   25,193    25,970         0.757               0.030
                                        Panel (c): 0 = 100 [0, 0, 100, 0, 0, 0, 0]
                                                        1

              Ed 10    22,417     -10,683 20,039     20,435          0.928               0.019
              Ed 13    34,187      -1,957   23,644   24,032          0.708               0.016
                                       Panel (d): 0 = 100
                                                       1
                                                          [0, 0, 0, 100, 0, 0, 0]
              Ed 10    22,128     -10,795 18,548     18,752          0.891               0.011
              Ed 13    33,898      -2,007  21,356    21,530          0.651               0.008
                                       Panel (e): 0 = 100 [0, 0, 0, 0, 100, 0, 0]
                                                       1

              Ed 10    21,765     -10,871 15,083      15,132          0.795              0.003
              Ed 13    33,534      -1.993   17,039    17,092          0.536              0.003
                                        Panel (f): 0 = 100 [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 100, 0]
                                                        1

              Ed 10    21,055     -11,209    6,414   6,416           0.546               0.000
              Ed 13    32,820      -2,401    8,021   8,027           0.296               0.001
                                       Panel (g): 0 = 100
                                                       1
                                                          [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 100]
              Ed 10    13,261 -26,690 -26,673 -26,673             0.000           0.000
              Ed 13    24,631 -24,214 -24,212 -24,212             0.000           0.000
                          Panel (h): 0 = 100
                                          1
                                             [89.10, 10.25, 0.47, 0.11, 0.04, 0.03, 0.01]
              Ed 10    22,980 -10,179     -912       -912        22.117            0.000
              Ed 13    34,150 -2,759      1,344      1,344       27.865            0.000
                            Panel (i): 0 = 100 [89.11, 10.25, 0.47, 0.11, 0.04, 0.03, 0]
                                             1

              Ed 10    22,980     -10,119    21,168      21,945        0.945             0.035
              Ed 13    34,159      -2,223    25,088      26,093        0.751             0.039
              Source: German Claims Panel Data, SOEP data. Table shows welfare mea-
              sured by the consumption certainty equivalents in 2016 USD dollars, per
              capita, per year, separately for two income profiles (see Figure 6). Panels
              (a) to (g) differentiate by initial health status 25  {1, ..., 7} . In Panel (h), we
              use the actual population distribution across health states in our data and in
              Panel (i), we do not allow 25 year olds to be in the worst health risk category.
              Columns (1) to (4) show welfare according to the (1) first-best, (2) a series
              of short-term contracts, (3) the GLTHI, and (4) the GHHW. Column (5) shows
              how much of the welfare gap between (2) and (1) is closed by GLTHI. Column
              (6) shows the percentage of welfare loss under GLTHI relative to GHHW.


   Column (1) calculates the welfare for the first-best as decribed by Equation (3); Column (2) calcu-

lates welfare under a series of short-term contracts, CST (Equation (4)); Column (3) shows the results

under the GLTHI contracts, CGLTH I ; Column (4) calculates the welfare under the optimal dynamic


                                                       32
contract as described by GHHW, CGHHW . Columns (5) and (6) show the welfare difference between

the GLTHI and CST , and that between CGHHW and CGLTH I , respectively.

   Overall, Table 5 shows the following: First, not surprisingly, Column (1) shows that welfare in

the first-best scenario is always lower for the lower education (Ed 10 ) and decreases with health at

inception. For example, for individuals with the highest schooling degree who are in the healthiest

risk category at age 25, the consumption certainty equivalent is $34,857 per year. This decreases to

$24,631 for those 25 year olds who are in the sickest risk category.

   Second, Column (2) shows that a series of short-term contracts CST produces large welfare losses

compared to the first-best. For all initial health states at age 25 and for both lifecycle income profiles,

the consumption certainty equivalents are always negative.39

   Third, the GLTHI produces substantial welfare gains compared to short-term contracts. Consider

the case when 25 = 1 with probability 1, which is described in Panel (a) for 0 =                    1
                                                                                                   100 [100, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0].

Column (3) shows that, under the GLTHI, the consumption certainty equivalent is $21,484 for Ed 10

and $26,125 for Ed 13, respectively. Column (5) shows that the GLTHI closes 95 and 76 percent of the

welfare gap between a series of short-term contracts and the first best for Ed 10 and Ed 13 individ-

uals, respectively. Column (4) presents the welfare under the theoretically optimal GHHW contract,

which shows that indeed the GHHW contracts achieve higher welfare than that from GLTHI for both

Ed 10 and Ed 13 education groups, with their consumption equivalents equal to $22,587 and $28,115,

respectively. However, Columns (6) shows that the welfare gains from the GHHW contracts relative

to those achieved under the GLTHI contracts are quite small, at only 4.9 and 7.1 percent, respectively,

for Ed 10 and Ed 13 education groups.

   Fourth, when evaluating welfare under different distributions over the initial health states, the

findings discussed above turn out to be systematic. The welfare differences between the GLTHI and

the GHHW contracts for initial health states 25  {2, 3, 4} are reported in Panels (b)-(d), respectively.

Column (6) in these panels show that the welfare differences are only between 0.8 to 3 percent, for

lifecycle income profiles of both Ed 10 and Ed 13 education groups. For very bad initial health states,

25  {5, 6, 7}, the results are reported in Panels (e)-(g). Column (6) for these panels reveal that the

welfare between the GHHW and the GLTHI contracts is almost identical for both Ed 10 and Ed 13

education groups. However, it should be noted that starting in the sickest state 25 = 7 produces

negative welfare even under GHHW (see also Ghili et al., 2019) and also under GLTHI. In Panels (h)

and (i) where the initial health distributions corresponds to the observed empirical distribution for
 39 Recall   that the CARA utility function as specified by Equation (10) allows for negative consumption.



                                                             33
age-25 enrollees in our sample, we find that the welfare loss under the GLTHI contracts relative to

the optimal GHHW contracts is at most 3.9 percent.


6.4                                                       Understanding the Welfare Comparisons

               In order to understand the welfare results discussed in the previous section, we now delve deeper

into how the short-term contracts, the GLTHI contracts, and the GHWW contracts affect both indi-

viduals' intertemporal consumption smoothing and the consumption volatility over their lifecycle. Figure

8 plots the average consumption over the lifecycle for (i) a series of short-term contracts, (ii) GHHW,

and (iii) GLTHI, separately for Ed 10 (Figure 8a), and Ed 13 (Figure 8b). The figures illustrate the

driving forces behind the welfare differences in Table 5.
                          20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000 45,000 50,000




                                                                                                                                                 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000 45,000 50,000
                                                                                  ST                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                  GLTHI                                                                                                                  GLTHI
  Average Consumption (USD)




                                                                                                                         Average Consumption (USD)
                                                                                  GHHW                                                                                                                   GHHW




                                                                             20       40         60      80        100                                                                              20       40         60    80   100
                                                                                                Age                                                                                                                    Age

                                                                                           (a) Ed 13                                                                                                              (b) Ed 10

                                                                                      Figure 8: Expected Consumption over the Lifecycle by Education



               As shown by the thin solid lines, the average consumption under a series of short-term contracts

is simply equal to the income (Figure 6) minus the expected medical spending (see Equation 4). The

average consumption profile under short-term contracts is therefore hump-shaped over the lifecycle

for both education groups. As shown by the dashed lines, average consumption under the GLTHI

has a similar shape, but starts at a lower level and is higher at older ages. This reflects the heavy

front-loading of GLTHI up to the early 50s. As shown by the thicker solid lines, average consump-

tion under the optimal GHHW contract is designed to account for the utility effects from not only

reducing the reclassification risk, but also from the smoothing of consumption over the lifecycle. Hence, the

optimal contract implies a much smaller degree of front-loading than the GLTHI contract (Table 4).

Thus, the average consumption under GHHW contracts starts at a higher level, particularly for the


                                                                                                                    34
highly educated who have steeper income profiles and for whom front-loading is costlier. As indi-

viduals approach their middle ages, the optimal contract allows to fully smooth consumption, which

is illustrated by the straight flat consumption line after around age 40.                                                                   40


                    However, relative to GLTHI, the optimal contract achieves better consumption smoothing at the

expense of more reclassification risk. To illustrate the degree of reclassification risk over the lifecycle,

Figure 9 displays the standard deviations of consumption changes over the lifecycle. (That is, Figure 9

plots for each t the standard deviation of Ci,t  Ci,t+1 - Ci,t .)
  S.D. of Changes in Consumption (USD)




                                                                                        S.D. of Changes in Consumption (USD)
                                                  ST                                                                                    ST
                                                  GLTHI                                                                                 GLTHI
                                                  GHHW                                                                                  GHHW
                                     3,000




                                                                                                                           3,000
                                     2,000




                                                                                                                           2,000
                                     1,000




                                                                                                                           1,000
                                     0




                                                                                                                           0




                                             20       40         60     80       100                                               20       40         60    80   100
                                                                Age                                                                                   Age

                                                           (a) Ed 13                                                                             (b) Ed 10

                                                     Figure 9: Simulated Standard Deviation of Consumption Changes



                    As seen, the GLTHI contract imposes very little reclassification risk as most individuals lock P25 (·)

in the first period. The few individuals who switch are those who start with 25 > 1 and become

sufficiently healthier over the lifecycle (such that Pt ( t ) > P25 ( 25 ) for some t) to be offered a cheaper

contract. However, this is a rare event, especially after age 40. On the other hand, the optimal

GHHW contract specifies consumption bumps early in the lifecycle. For instance, the consumption

guarantee under GHHW increases for individuals who start at 25 = 1 and remain at 26 = 1 in

the following year. The reason is that a competing insurer can take into account the "good news"

regarding future health, contained in the event "25 = 1 and 26 = 1," and offer the individual a

higher consumption guarantee, and still break even in expectation. Finally, the standard deviation of

consumption changes increases strongly between age 25 and 60 for a series of short-term contracts,

then decreases slightly up to age 70 and then increases again until death.
  40 Furthermore,as we will show in Figure 11 below, with a risk aversion parameter of  = 4  10-4 , the welfare dif-
ferences between GLTHI and GHHW contracts due to differences in the expected consumption profiles over the lifecycle
are meaningful. Barring differences in reclassification risk across contracts, the lifecycle consumption under the GHHW
contracts produces welfare gains of approximately US 2, 600 per year.


                                                                                  35
    Figure 10 compares the average lapsation rates under each contract, where lapsing under GHHW

is defined as an increase in the consumption guarantees.41 As expected, lapsation from GLTHI is very

low over the entire lifecycle. In contrast, when expected future health improves, GHHW leads to a

higher consumption for the healthiest types (and therefore for almost everyone) in the early periods.

Still, lapsation under GHHW decreases substantially in the late 40s. At this point, most individuals

have achieved their consumption plateau. Subsequently, consumption remains constant in order to

transfer resources intertemporally and to save for old age.

    Figures 8-9 illustrate the fundamental trade-offs between the GLTHI and the GHHW. The GHHW

requires less front-loading by tolerating more consumption volatility (and reclassification risks); be-

cause consumers' income profiles for both ED 10 and ED 13 education groups tend to rise in early

ages, less front-loading required by the GHHW contracts implies that GHHW contracts engender a

better intertemporal consumption smoothing than the GLTHI, as illustrated by Figure 8. However,

the extra front-loading of the GLTHI contracts does result in lower standard deviations of consump-

tion changes (and much lower lapsation rates) than the GHHW contracts. Of course, by design,

the GHHW contracts optimally balance the above-mentioned trade-offs; thus the GHHW contracts

always, in environments that satisfy the conditions required for Ghili et al. (2019)'s theoretical char-

acterization, achieve a higher welfare than the GLTHI contracts. The results we reported in Table

5, however, suggest that the GLTHI contracts, despite their simplicity, are able to achieve welfare

similar to the optimal GHHW contracts.

    The trade-offs between the GLTHI and the GHHW contracts, therefore, are intertemporal con-

sumption smoothing vs. consumption volatility. The welfare effect of intertemporal consumption

smoothing depends on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES), and the welfare effect of con-

sumption volatility depends on risk aversion. The time-separable preference hypothesized so far in

our analysis, similar to that in Ghili et al. (2019), imposes that the IES and risk aversion are para-

metrically linked. In Section 7, we will break the parametric link between IES and risk aversion, and

conduct welfare comparisons between different contracts under the Epstein and Zin (1989)'s recur-

sive preferences.
  41 As noted by Ghili et al. (2019), optimal contracts impose a "no-lapsation constraint", so that the consumer will always

stay in the same contract. However, an increase in the consumption guarantee specified within a contract can be also
interpreted as a lapsation from an equivalent set of guaranteed premium paths. Figure 10 uses this interpretation of
lapsing.




                                                            36
                                                                                                      GLTHI


                                .8
                                                                                                      GHHW; Ed 13
               Lapsation Rate [%]                                                                     GHHW; Ed 10
                                .6
                                .4
                                .2
                                0




                                     20               40                   60                    80             100
                                                                           Age

                                     Figure 10: Laspation Rates by Type of Contract and Education



6.5    Savings and the Welfare Comparisons

      Our main welfare calculations assume that individuals cannot save. This assumption may sub-

stantially underestimate the welfare under short-term contracts, and under the GLTHI. As noted

above, the GLTHI contracts result in a consumption profile that closely tracks the hump-shaped life-

cycle income profile. Moreover, under short-term contracts, individuals experience large premium

shocks that could be smoothed with precautionary savings. Hence, this section allows for precau-

tionary savings. We do so by solving a dynamic programming problem of optimal savings with

mortality risk as in Yaari (1965). Individuals solve the following maximization problem:

                                                             T
                                               max E
                                                 ct
                                                            St  t u ( c t )
                                                           t = t0

                                               s.t.   a t0 = 0

                                                      at  0 t

                                                      a t +1 = ( 1 + r ) a t + y t - c t - P (  t )

where P(t ) is the premium in period t as a function of an individual's medical history t 

( 1 ,  2 , ...,  t ), and at is the level of assets.


                                                                      37
    Different contracts result in different mappings between an individual's medical history up to pe-

riod t and an individual's premium in t. Under a series of short-term contracts, only an individual's

current health status matters since P(t ) = E(mt |t ) = E(mt | t ). In contrast, for a GLTHI contract,

the entire medical history matters. Due to guaranteed-renewability, P(t ) is defined recursively: In

the first period, 1 =  1 and P(1 ) = P1 ( 1 ), where Equation (1) defines Pt ( t ). In any period t > 1,

P(t ) = min{ P(t -1 ), Pt ( t )}.42 (Note that, in this optimal consumption problem with savings,

there is uncertainty regarding net income yt - P(t ) and mortality risk.43 )

    For a given lifecycle income profile, the dynamic program provides an optimal consumption
         (  , a ) where a is the level of assets carried into period t. The certainty equivalent (CE) of
policy Ct  t t           t

the dynamic problem is equal to:


                                                  E t
                                                    T
                                                      = t0 St 
                                                               t - t0 u ( C  (  , a )
                                                                           t   t t
                                    u(CSAV ) =                                                                        (11)
                                                         E t
                                                           T
                                                             = t0 St 
                                                                      t - t0




                              Table 6: Welfare by Type of Contract with Savings

                                             CGHHW       CEGLTH I ,SAV      CEST,SAV

                                   Ed 10      21,945             21,177            741
                                   Ed 13      26,093             25,088          4,879
                                   Source: German Claims Panel Data, SOEP
                                   data. The distribution of initial health states
                                   at age 25 used in this table corresponds to
                                   that in Panel (i) of Table 5. All consumption
                                   certainty equivalents (welfare) are in 2016
                                   USD per capita, per year.

    Table 6 shows the welfare results when allowing for savings, assuming r = 1/ - 1. Allowing

for precautionary savings substantially improves welfare under the series of short-term contracts.

Consider the distribution of initial health state 0 =            1
                                                                100 [89.11, 10.25, 0.47, 0.11, 0.04, 0.03, 0]   as consid-

ered in Panel (i) of Table 5. The consumption certainty equivalent increases from CEST = -10, 119

to CEST,SAV = $741 for Ed 10 individuals, and from CEST = $ - 2, 223 to CEST,SAV = $4, 879 for Ed

13 individuals. On the other hand, savings do not significantly improve welfare under the GLTHI.

Intuitively, the GLTHI contract already achieves substantial savings through highly front-loaded pre-

miums. Moreover, as shown in Ghili et al. (2019), under GHHW, individuals have no incentives to
  42 The state variable in the dynamic program under GLTHI is the guaranteed-renewable premium; its law of motion is
given by the probability of qualifying for a lower premium.
  43 Mortality risk implies that individuals may die with positive assets. Therefore, the expected net present value of

consumption with optimal savings will be lower than the net present value of resources. Our calculations implicitly assume
that individuals do not derive value from bequests.


                                                           38
engage in additional savings. Thus, introducing savings does not affect welfare under the optimal

contract.


6.6     Implications for Reforms to the U.S. Health Insurance System

      So far, we have contrasted welfare under the GLTHI, the optimal dynamic contracts of Ghili et al.

(2019), and under a series of short term contracts. In each case, we assume that policyholders keep

their contracts for their entire lives. This assumption is realistic for the GLTHI, because Germany has

no special insurance program for retirees.

      However, our findings also have implications for the U.S. health insurance system, which is a

mixture of public and private health insurance. Among the working age population below 65, about

60 percent have employer-sponsored health insurance (ESHI) and about 40 percent have either short-

term private health insurance or are uninsured (Claxton et al., 2017); Medicare covers people above

65 (and the disabled), financed by payroll taxes. Of course, this system differs from the German

health insurance system (see Section 2). The U.S. ESHI is community-rated at the employee level and

essentially long-term--provided that employers and employees do not separate--in which case it

resembles the GLTHI. Prior to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) reform of 2010, the U.S. individual pri-

vate health insurance market also closely resembled the individually risk-rated short-term contract

as described in Section 3.3.44 Thus, as a first order approximation, pre-ACA, the U.S. health insur-

ance system can be thought of as a mixture of 60 percent GLTHI and 40 percent short-term health

insurance contracts for workers up to age 65; followed by a Medicare pay-as-you-go system for those

65 and older.

      The questions that we ask in this section are: If we were to reform the current U.S. health insur-

ance system, as approximated by the contracts above, and all private insurance for the working age

population were individual long-term contracts (either as GLTHI or GHHW contracts), followed by

Medicare for those 65 and older, by how much could we improve welfare? And how would such

a hybrid system, with long-term private insurance for the working population and public Medicare

insurance for the elderly, compare with a system where individuals purchase long-term insurance

that also provides coverage after 65 until they die (i.e., our baseline scenario with lifetime coverage)?


Implementing the Pre-ACA U.S. Health Care System. To implement the pre-ACA U.S. health care

system in the German context, we consider a social insurance program where, at age 65, individuals
  44 However, post-ACA, individual private contracts are community rated--although the ACA still allows insurers to
charge older people and smokers more--and thus differ from the short-term contracts described in our paper.


                                                        39
qualify for free health insurance that is financed by a proportional tax on income. Although this is

a simplified version of the U.S. Medicare program, its structure captures the main effect of Medicare

in the context of long-term contracts. The Medicare tax acts as an additional, front-loaded premium

during working ages to fund free health insurance for all people above 65, regardless of their health

status.

    For each education group Ed  Ed 10, Ed 13 separately, we assume that the proportional Medi-

care payroll tax e is collected from individuals in this education group, and that it covers all health

care expenses of their education group during the Medicare period (age 65 and above), such that



                                          64                             94
                                Ed
                                
                                   E             St t-24 yt |Ed    =E          St t-24 mt                              (12)
                                         t=25                           t=65


where St is an indicator of survival until period t, yt is income, mt medical spending, and  is the

discount rate. In conducting this exercise separately for Ed 10 and Ed 13, we do not allow for cross-

subsidization and redistribution between high and low-income earners. By doing so, we can compare

the hybrid system to our baseline scenario for the same net present value of resources. Consequently,

all welfare consequences are due to intertemporal substitution and reclassification risk, and not due

to transfers across individuals of different income levels. To evaluate welfare under the hybrid sys-

tem, we separately compute a new set of GLTHI premiums, and the consumption guarantees under

GHHW, assuming that the terminal period is T = 64.45

    The consumption certainty equivalent is the constant consumption level that provides the same

lifetime utility as those achieved under the hybrid system. Panel (a) of Table 7 shows the welfare re-

sults under the hybrid system, separately for Ed 10 and Ed 13 lifecycle income profiles. Panel (b) of

Table 7 replicates the baseline results without Medicare (and thus the corresponding contracts apply

over the entire lifecycle). For illustration purposes, the distribution of initial health states used in the

calculations is the same as that of Panel (i) in Table 5, namely, 0 =              1
                                                                                  100 [89.11, 10.25, 0.47, 0.11, 0.04, 0.03, 0].

    Top row of Panel (a) shows the working age Medicare tax that is necessary to finance the Medicare

system for those aged 65 and above. As explained, we separately calculate two separate tax rates

according to Equation (12) for education groups Ed 10 and Ed 13. As seen the payroll tax rates

are 4.4% and 3.1% for Ed 10 and Ed 13, respectively. The next three rows show the consumption
  45 For GLTHI, the Medicare payroll tax rates do not impact the calculation of the equilibrium premiums when T = 64
                                             Ed
(see Equation (1)). The GHHW premiums, however, depend on the income paths (see Equation (2)); we assume that
                                                                                            calculated by Equation (12).
incomes of individuals in education group Ed 10 and Ed 13 are taxed at the respective rate Ed




                                                              40
  Table 7: Welfare of a Hybrid System of Private Contracts plus "Medicare-Like" Public Insurance

                                               Ed 10                      Ed 13
                       Panel (a): Medicare Tax up to 64 + Medicare from 65
                    Payroll Tax Rate (%)         4.36                       3.12
                    CEGLTH I                   20,371                     24,350
                    CEGHHW                     20,765                     24,973
                    CEST                      -11,080                     -3,417
                                Panel (b): Baseline: Panel (i) in Table 5
                    CEGLTH I                   21,168                     25,088
                    CEGHHW                     21,945                     26,093
                    CEST                      -10,119                     -2,223
                                  Panel (c): Social Insurance Program
                    CEw/o cross-subsidies      22,608                     28,536
                    CEw/ cross-subsidies       23,168                     27,838
                    Source: German Claims Panel Data, SOEP data. The dis-
                    tribution of initial health states used in the calculations is
                    the same as that of Panel (i) in Table 5, namely, 0 =
                     1
                    100 [89.11, 10.25, 0.47, 0.11, 0.04, 0.03, 0]. All consumption certainty
                    equivalents (welfare) are in 2016 USD per capita, per year.


certainty equivalents under three private health insurance contracts for individuals younger than 65:

CEGLTH I is the certainty equivalent when individuals purchase GLTHI contracts from age 25 until

age 64; CEGHHW is the certainty equivalent when individuals purchase GHHW contracts from age

25 until age 64; and finally, CEST is the certainty equivalent when individuals purchase short-term

contracts from age 25 until 64.

   As we argued, the U.S. system could be considered a 60/40 combination of CEGLTH I and CEST ,

with welfare as reported in Panel (a) of Table 7. Hence, converting the 40 percent with CEST to

CEGLTH I would substantially improve the welfare of the whole population. Converting all individu-

als' current private insurance to the GHHW contracts would be even better. However, consistent with

our previous findings, the difference in welfare gains between GLTHI and GHHW is relatively small.

It is also instructive to compare a hybrid system, as implemented above, with a system where indi-

viduals hold long-term insurance contracts until they die, that is, our baseline scenario with lifetime

coverage. Interestingly, theoretically it is ambiguous whether the hybrid system or the private system

achieves higher welfare. The reason is that Medicare is a mandatory public system, and as such it

does not suffer from the one-sided commitment problem that the GLTHI and GHHW contracts need

to address. The baseline results are reported in Panel (b) of Table 7.

   Comparing Panels (a) and (b) reveals that welfare under the hybrid system is always lower than

under the baseline scenario with lifetime contracts. The reason is as follows: Compared to the optimal

contract, the Medicare program reduces consumption at earlier ages (because of the payroll tax), with


                                                      41
no substantial changes in the reclassification risk. As seen in Figure 9, the optimal GHHW contract

involves virtually no reclassification risk after age 65. For similar reasons, the Medicare program

does not improve welfare when combined with the GLTHI contract. GLTHI has already too much

front-loading and too little reclassification risk relative to GHHW.

    What is more surprising is that the hybrid system also achieves a lower welfare when the private

insurance is in the form of short-term contracts. Because the Medicare provision in the hybrid system

substantially decreases consumption volatility at old ages, in principle, introducing a Medicare-like

program could increase welfare in an economy with short-term contracts. However, the Medicare

tax decreases consumption at early ages, when the marginal utility of consumption is high. As Table

7 shows, the latter effect dominates for both income groups. In both cases, introducing Medicare is

also welfare decreasing in an economy with short term contracts.

    Finally, Panel (c) explores welfare under a "Social Insurance Program." In this scenario, individu-

als are taxed during working ages with a linear tax. In exchange, they receive free health care during

their entire lifetime. The first row of Panel (c) shows the certainty equivalent of each education group

when each group is taxed separately, i.e., there is no cross-subsidization across income groups. The

second row of Panel (c) shows the certainty equivalent of each education group when there is a

unique tax rate that applies to both groups, i.e., there is cross-subsidization from the high earners

to the low earners.46 We find that this program achieves higher welfare than both, the long-term

contracts and the hybrid programs. Although a linear tax on income does not achieve the optimal

consumption smoothing over the lifecycle, this program fully eliminates reclassification risk. As we

assume that taxes are fully enforceable, this program achieves welfare that is unfeasible with the

participation restrictions embedded in the optimal contract.47


Robustness of the Findings.            The results in Table 7 assume that the Medicare payroll tax during

working ages fully covers all medical expenses for the population above 65. In reality, however,
  46 Without cross-subsidization, the tax for high-income earners and low-income earners would be 12.2 and 17.1 percent,

respectively. With cross-subsidization, assuming a share of high-income earners relative to low-income earners consistent
with Table A2, the uniform tax rate would be 14.8 percent. For comparison, consider that the tax rate in the German
statutory SHI (which we briefly describe in Section 2) is about 16 percent of employee gross wages (up to a contribution
cap) when adding both the employee and employer contributions.
  47 This direct comparison of welfare under the social insurance program and the private contracts does not take into

account any possible efficiency costs from taxation. However, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the social
insurance program is still preferable even after accounting for the excess burden of taxation: Let R be the net present
value of the total tax revenue collected for an individual (which, by definition, is equal to the net present value of health
expenditures). An "equivalent yearly tax burden" can be calculated as the constant dollar amount r such that the net
present value of paying r every year is equal to R. We find r = $4, 022. Applying a marginal excess burden per dollar of
tax revenue of 0.195 from Saez et al. (2012), we find that the tax of the social insurance program imposes a yearly cost of
$784. This deadweight loss of taxation is lower than the extra welfare of the social insurance program. Note also that the
GHHW contract could in principle result in efficiency losses since premiums are tied to income.


                                                             42
Medicare Part B beneficiaries do pay a (subsidized) premium.48 Premium-free Medicare coverage

at old-age increases the tax rate needed to fund the entire program. Therefore, the degree of front-

loading increases further. Because our simplified version of Medicare imposes too much front-loading,

it is instructive to investigate the effect of introducing a Medicare premium with a corresponding

decrease in the tax rate.

      In Appendix D1, we illustrate the trade-off between charging a higher Medicare payroll tax for

future beneficiaries vs. a higher Medicare premium for current beneficiaries. In conclusion, we find

that a higher premium for current beneficiaries increases welfare because it increases consumption

at early ages. However, even a very high Medicare premium (such that the Medicare tax is close to

zero), combined with either the optimal contract or the GLTHI contract, would not achieve the same

level of welfare as the optimal GHHW contract.

      We also test the robustness of the results in Table 7 by allowing for savings in the Medicare envi-

ronment. In this economy, individuals are offered the GLTHI premium profile up to age 65, and free

Medicare coverage starting at age 65. Such an insurance structure creates incentives to save. As in

Section 6.5, we calculate welfare under an optimal level of savings and find a certainty equivalent of

$20,672 (Ed 10) and $24,656 (Ed 13) (detailed results available upon request). This level of welfare is

higher than welfare without savings (see Table 7), but still lower than welfare under either a lifetime

GLTHI contract or a lifetime GHHW contract.



7      Robustness

      In this section, we investigate the robustness of our main findings in two dimensions. First, we

investigate whether our results are robust to degree of risk aversion, i.e., the parameter  in the CARA

utility function specified by Equation (10); second, we investigate whether our results are robust to

Epstein and Zin (1989)'s recursive preferences where risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity of

substitution are separately parameterized.


7.1     The Degree of Risk Aversion

      Under our parametric assumptions on preferences, the GLTHI contracts entail a small welfare

loss relative to the optimal dynamic GHHW contracts as characterized by Ghili et al. (2019). Almost

entirely eliminating reclassification risk basically compensates the welfare loss from heavier front-
    48 In addition, Medicare Part A imposes substantial cost-sharing, from which we have abstracted throughout in the paper.




                                                             43
loading in the GLTHI. Following Ghili et al. (2019), our main results assume a level of risk-aversion

of  = 4 × 10- 4. With this level of risk aversion, an individual would be indifferent between (a) a

gamble where she wins $1,000 with a 50 percent chance and loses $713 with a 50 percent chance and

(b) no gamble, i.e., the status quo. This subsection investigates the robustness of our findings with

respect to different levels of .


                                   Mean(GHHW)-GLTHI
                 .4




                                   GHHW-GLTHI
                 .3
             CE
                 .2
                 .1
                 0




                       0                   2                   4                  6                   8
                                                         [10^(-4)]
                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                    x10
                    Figure 11: Difference in CE (GHLTI vs. GHHW) by Risk Aversion
Source: German Claims Panel Data, SOEP data. The x-axis shows the level of risk aversion . The y-axis shows differences
in consumption certainty equivalents (CE) between GHHW and GLTHI as a fraction of total GHHW welfare, in other
words, the welfare loss of GLTHI relative to GHHW. The dashed line shows total welfare differences, and the solid line
shows only welfare differences due to differences in consumption.




    Figure 11 shows the results graphically, where the x-axis spans values of   [5 × 10- 5, 8 × 10- 4].

For each , the y-axis shows the corresponding difference in certainty equivalents as a fraction of the

welfare under GHHW. The dashed line plots total welfare differences between GLTHI and GHHW.

As seen, the difference is small when  is either very low or very high. That is, our main qualitative

finding--the simple GLTHI contract can basically achieve similar welfare as the optimal dynamic

GHHW contract--is robust to the degree of risk aversion, .

    To investigate the underlying reason for the robustness of the findings with respect to , the solid

line plots the percentage point differences in welfare when we only focus on differences in consumption

across the lifecycle. In other words, we eliminate the welfare differences that are due to differences in



                                                          44
reclassification risk. As seen, we then find that GHHW is superior to GLTHI and that the difference

is increasing in .49

      In summary, varying the levels of risk aversion affect the differences between GLTHI and GHHW

via two underlying channels. The first is due to differences in lifecycle consumption, which clearly

favors GHHW, and even more so the larger ; the second is due to differences in reclassification risk,

which clearly favors GLTHI, and even more so the larger . As we vary , these two opposing forces

almost completely cancel out.

      When risk aversion is close to 0, GLTHI and GHHW contracts coincide. In the extreme case

of risk neutrality, the volatility of premiums and the lifecycle shape of expected consumption are

irrelevant. For low levels of , the lifecycle path of expected consumption is the most relevant factor

determining the welfare differences between the two contracts. However, when  becomes large

enough, the higher degree of reclassification risk in GHHW becomes increasingly relevant. Even

though individuals with large  strongly prefer the smoother consumption under GHHW, they also

dislike the higher associated reclassification risk.

      The dashed curve in Figure 11 shows total welfare differences between GLTHI and GHHW. The

maximal welfare difference between the two contracts across all values of  is five percent. This

difference arises when  = 3 × 10- 4 and amounts to equals about ten percent of the welfare under

GHHW.50


7.2     Epstein-Zin Recursive Preferences

      When a single parameter governs both risk aversion and the intertemporal elasticity of substitu-

tion, the welfare differences between the GLTHI and the GHHW contract are small. In this section,

we investigate the robustness of this result when breaking the parametric link between risk aversion,

, and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, . In particular, we evaluate both contracts under

Epstein-Zin (EZ) preferences (Epstein and Zin, 1989). Preferences are defined recursively as:


                                                Vt = F (ct , Rt (Vt+1 )),
  49 In practice, the line represents the CE of consumption after replacing the actual consumption under GHHW with

the expected consumption at each age under GHHW, thus eliminating the reclassification risk component of the optimal
contract. By contrast, the reclassification risk component of GLTHI is negligible.
  50 Under this level of risk aversion, an individual would be indifferent between (a) a gamble where she wins $1,000 with

a 50 percent chance or loses $768 with a 50 percent chance, and (b) no gamble.




                                                           45
with

                                              Rt (Vt+1 ) = G -1 (Et G (Vt+1 ))

    As in Epstein and Zin (1989), will consider the CES aggregator

                                                                                             1
                                                                                           1-1/
                                      F (c, z) = (1 - )c1-1/ + z1-1/


We embed the same CARA specification used in our main analysis into the EZ preferences by assum-
                        1 -c
ing G (c) = u(c) =      e    .     In Appendix C2, we show that the consumption certainty equivalent can

be expressed as:

                                                                                           1
                                                                              1-1/
                                                                                     
                                                                                         1-1/
                                                 (G-1 (E0 (G(Vt0 ( t0 )))))
                                                              1- 
                                       c=                                                       .                     (13)
                                                                                     
                                                         T      t-t j                
                                                         j = t0  0 St0

                                                                                                          j
where E0 () takes expectations with respect to the "birth" state,  t0 and St is the survival probability

from t to j.

    For each contract, we compute Vt0 ( t0 ) numerically via backwards induction.
                       .01




                                                                                                              =5E-5
                                                                                                              =4E-4
                                                                                                              =8E-4
                       .005
                   CE
                       0
                       -.005




                               1        1.5           2            2.5               3              3.5          4
                                        Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution ()

       Figure 12: Difference in CE (GHLTI vs. GHHW) by Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution
Source: German Claims Panel Data, SOEP data. The x-axis shows the level of intertemporal elasticity of substitution .
The y-axis shows differences in certainty equivalents (CE) between GHHW and GLTHI as a fraction of total GHHW
welfare.



    Varying  and , Figure 12 shows differences in certainty equivalents between GLTHI and GHHW


                                                                46
as a fraction of the welfare under GHHW. As seen, the welfare differences between the two contracts

are small over all the entire range of parameter values considered. Notice that in Figure 12, when

the risk aversion parameter  = 8E - 4, the certainty equivalent of GHHW can be lower than that

of GLTHI, when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is relatively high. This can occur because

the GHHW contract is not necessary optimal contracts under recursive preferences--recall that Ghili

et al. (2019)'s theoretical characterization requires that preferences are time separable, which Epstein

and Zin (1989)'s recursive preferences do not satisfy.


7.3     Income Profiles

      Finally, to test the robustness of our results with respect to the income profile, we also estimate

the lifecycle income pattern for the United States. To this end, we use the Cross National Equivalence

Files (CNEF) of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID is the oldest and longest-

running panel survey in the world. It has been surveying U.S. families annually since 1968 and, since

1997, biannually (Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 2018). The CNEF harmonizes survey measures

across countries and over time (Frick et al., 2007). We use the cleaned and generated variables of

the CNEF-PSID project, which allows us to generate the exact same income concept (in 2016 USD)

and implement the same estimation process as that for Germany. That is, we exclude respondents

under 25, focus on the years 1984 to 2015, and estimate Equation (9). Figure A2 (Appendix) shows

an increase in the post-tax equivalized income that is very close to the one observed in Germany

between ages 25 and 60. However, the decrease in lifecycle income after age 60 is much steeper in the

U.S. than in Germany, for both educational groups. Our calculations show that the main findings are

robust to the US income profiles: compared to the GHHW contract, we find that the GLTHI contracts

are able to achieve welfare that is only 5.8 and 3.5 percent lower for Americans with high school and

college degrees, respectively.51



8      Conclusion

      Pricing regulation in health insurance markets has to trade off reclassification risk, adverse selec-

tion, moral hazard as well as consumption smoothing over the lifecycle. Very few countries in the

world have organized their health insurance based on private markets--e.g., the U.S., Chile, Switzer-

land and Germany. The U.S. and Switzerland have traditionally organized them in the form of short-
    51 The   detailed results are available from the authors upon request.



                                                                47
term annual contracts and tight pricing regulation with a focus on community rating to insure against

reclassification risk of all citizens. A fundamental alternative is private individual long-term health

insurance which has the power to leverage individual, intertemporal lifecycle incentives to eliminate

reclassification risk for most citizens. In this paper, we present, discuss and evaluate the basic prin-

ciples of such a real-world market that has been largely overlooked as a fundamental alternative to

community-rated short-term health insurance or government-run single payer markets: the German

individual private long-term health insurance market (GLTHI).

   First, we present the basic principles of the market and derive the theoretical lifecycle premiums

and welfare effects of the market. We show that GLTHI almost fully eliminates health reclassification

risk over the lifecycle. However, the low reclassification risk comes at the expense of high premium

front-loading and limited intertemporal consumption smoothing. Second, we benchmark the welfare

effects of GLTHI contracts against the optimal dynamic contract as derived by Ghili et al. (2019), using

a unique database of one of the largest German private insurers.

   Overall, we find that GLTHI contracts generate substantial welfare gains relative to short-term

contracts. More importantly, the German-style long-term contracts achieve basically the same welfare

as the optimal dynamic contract as derived by Ghili et al. (2019). We show that the elimination of

reclassification risk almost fully compensates the welfare loss due to more front-loading relative to

the optimal contract. We also show that this finding is robust to alternative degrees of risk aversion

and that, for very low and and high degrees of risk aversion, welfare under the GLTHI contract

converges to welfare under the optimal contract. Moreover, the findings are also robust to different

degrees of intertemporal elasticities of substitution and Epstein-Zin preferences, as well as using

lifecycle income profiles derived from representative U.S. surveys. Our calculations show that the

GLTHI contract provides large welfare gains relative to a series of risk-rated short-term contracts as

in the pre-ACA era of the United States. Moreover, we address the interaction of long-term contracts

with a Medicare-like pay-as-you-go system. We show that combining long-term contracts during

working ages with Medicare in old age is a superior alternative to the status quo, but inferior to long-

term contracts for the entire lifetime.

   Compared to the optimal contract, an unquantified advantage of the German long-term contract

is its simple design, combined with low information requirements. Moreover, the market has been

stable and providing insurance for millions of people for decades. We believe that our findings,

coupled with these facts, strengthen the case of the German design as an appealing policy option.

   We finish by acknowledging two important and general caveats of long term contracts. First, our


                                                  48
results show that neither the German design nor the optimal dynamic contract may be a desirable

alternative for some population subgroups. In fact, as already pointed out by Ghili et al. (2019), long

term contracts may be highly undesirable for people who are very sick in young ages. From a policy

perspective, this result implies that, for those individuals, societies implementing long-term contracts

must provide a public alternative--like the co-existing public insurance in the case of Germany.

    Second, our theory abstracts from a couple of key features that may have relevant implications for

welfare under long-term contracts. First, our model assumes time-consistent individuals. From the

perspective of a present-biased consumer, front-loading may render the long-term contracts undesir-

able, particularly when front-loading is high.52 In addition, our model abstracts from moral hazard.

In the presence of moral hazard, using long-term contracts to decrease reclassification risk could in-

duce inefficiencies in spending, which reduces the desirability of long-term contracts. Quantifying

the role of moral hazard in long-term contracts is an important avenue for future research.


References
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for "lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3), 488­500.

Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers (2019a). Rechenschaftsbericht der Privaten Kranken-
  versicherung 2018-2019. Verband der Privaten Krankenversicherung. https://www.pkv.de/
  service/broschueren/verband/rechenschaftsbericht-2018-2019/, retrieved on February 20,
  2020.

Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers (2019b). Zahlen und Fakten. https://www.pkv.
  de/service/zahlen-und-fakten/, retrieved on February 6, 2020.

Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers (2019c). Zahlenbericht der Privaten Krankenver-
  sicherung 2018. Verband der Privaten Krankenversicherung. https://www.pkv.de/service/
  broschueren/daten-und-zahlen/zahlenbericht-2018.pdb.pdf, retrieved on February 20, 2020.

Atal, J., H. Fang, M. Karlsson, and N. R. Ziebarth (2019). Exit, voice or loyalty? An investigation
  into mandated portability of front-loaded private health plans. Journal of Risk and Insurance 86(3),
  697­727.

Atal, J. P. (2019). Lock-in in dynamic health insurance contracts: Evidence from Chile. PIER Working
  Paper Archive 19-020, Penn Institute for Economic Research, Department of Economics, University
  of Pennsylvania.

Athey, S. and G. Imbens (2019). Machine learning methods economists should know about, arxiv.

Baumann, F., V. Meier, and M. Werding (2008). Transferable ageing provisions in individual health
  insurance contracts. German Economic Review 9(3), 287­311.
  52 Still, Gottlieb and Zhang (2019) show that with a sufficiently large number of periods, the inefficiencies arising from

time inconsistency vanish. With the long-term contract that emerges in the equilibrium with time-inconsistent agents,
time-inconsistent agents may achieve the same level of welfare than time-consistent agents.




                                                            49
Becker, G. S. and B. R. Chiswick (1966). Education and the distribution of earnings. The American
  Economic Review 56(1/2), 358­369.

 ¨
Borsch-Supan,               ¨
                A. and H. Jurges (2012). Disability, pension reform, and early retirement in Germany.
  In Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Historical Trends in Mortality and Health,
  Employment, and Disability Insurance Participation, NBER Chapters, pp. 277­300. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Bundesministerium fur¨ Gesundheit (2020). Anzahl der Krankenkassen. http://www.gbe-bund.de/,
  retrieved on February 6, 2020.

 ¨
Bunnings,  C., H. Schmitz, H. Tauchmann, and N. R. Ziebarth (2019). How health plan enrollees value
  prices relative to supplemental benefits and service quality. Journal of Risk and Insurance 86(2), 415­
  449.

 ¨
Buser,                                                    ¨
       W. (2012). Private Krankenversicherung: Der Weg zuruck in die Kasse.                    Deutsches
   ¨
  Arzteblatt 109(4), A­162­A­162.

Cecu (2018).  Ruckkehr
                ¨                                                              ¨
                       aus der privaten in die gesetzliche Krankenversicherung Uberblick zum
  PKV-GKV-Wechsel.            ¨ Finanzen und Versicherungen.
                      Portal fur                                      https://www.cecu.de/
  private-krankenversicherung-rueckkehr-gesetzliche.html, last retrieved on October 28,
  2018.

Christiansen, M., M. Eling, J.-P. Schmidt, and L. Zirkelbach (2016). Who is changing health insurance
  coverage? Empirical evidence on policyholder dynamics. Journal of Risk and Insurance 83(2), 269­
  300.

Claxton, G., L. Levitt, and K. Pollitz (2017). Pre-ACA Market Practices Provide Lessons for ACA Replace-
  ment Approaches. Kaiser Family Foundation. https://www.kff.org/health-costs/issue-brief/
  pre-aca-market-practices-provide-lessons-for-aca-replacement-approaches/, retrieved
  on September 14, 2018.

Cochrane, J. H. (1995). Time-consistent health insurance. Journal of Political Economy 103(3), 445­473.

Deutsche Aktuarvereinigung (DAV) (2019).    Der aktuarielle Unternehmenszins in der pri-
 vaten Krankenversicherung (AUZ): Richtlinie.       https://aktuar.de/unsere-themen/
 fachgrundsaetze-oeffentlich/2019-10-09_DAV-Richtlinie_AUZ.pdf, retrieved on Febru-
 ary 6, 2010.

                                      ¨
Dustmann, C., P. A. Puhani, and U. Schonberg (2017). The long-term effects of early track choice. The
 Economic Journal 127(603), 1348­1380.

Eekhoff, J., M. Jankowski, and A. Zimmermann (2006). Risk-adjustment in long-term health insur-
  ance contracts in Germany. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice 31(4), 692­704.

Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, S. P. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. R. Cullen (2013). Selection on moral hazard
  in health insurance. American Economic Review 103(1), 178­219.

Engels, B., J. Geyer, and P. Haan (2017). Pension incentives and early retirement. Labour Eco-
  nomics 47(C), 216­231.

Epstein, L. G. and S. E. Zin (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of con-
  sumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57(4), 937­969.

Finger, R. J. (2001). Risk classification. In Casualty Actuarial Society (Ed.), Foundations of Casualty
  Actuarial Science (fourth ed.)., Chapter 6, pp. 287­341.


                                                   50
Finger, R. J. (2006). Risk classification. Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 231­276.

Finkelstein, A., K. McGarry, and A. Sufi (2005). Dynamic inefficiencies in insurance markets: Evi-
  dence from long-term care insurance. The American Economic Review 95(2), 224­228.

French, E. and E. Kelly (2016). Medical spending around the developed world. Fiscal Studies 37(3-4),
  327­344.

Frick, J. R., S. P. Jenkins, D. R. Lillard, O. Lipps, and M. Wooden (2007). The Cross-National Equiva-
  lent File (CNEF) and its Member Country Household Panel Studies. Journal of Applied Social Science
  Studies (Schmollers Jahrbuch: Zeitschrift fur¨ Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften) 127(4), 626­654.

German Statistical Office (2016). Sozialleistungen - Angaben zur Krankenversicherung (Ergebnisse
 des Mikrozensus). Fachserie 13 reihe 1.1.

Geyer, J. and V. Steiner (2014). Future public pensions and changing employment patterns across
 birth cohorts. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 13(02), 172­209.

Ghili, S., B. Handel, I. Hendel, and M. D. Whinston (2019). The welfare effects of long-term health
 insurance contracts. Working Paper 2218, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper.

GKV-Gesundheitsreformgesetz (2000). Gesetz zur Reform der gesetzlichen Krankenversicherung ab
 dem Jahr 2000. https://www.bgbl.de/xaver/bgbl/start.xav?start=%2F%2F*[%40attr_id%3D%
 27bgbl199s2626.pdf], last retrieved on February 10, 2020.

Gotthold, K. and B. Gr¨  aber (2015).      So kommen Sie zuruck   ¨   in die geset-
 zliche   Kasse.         https://www.welt.de/finanzen/verbraucher/article138148142/
 So-kommen-Sie-zurueck-in-die-gesetzliche-Kasse.html, last retrieved on October 18,
 2018.

Gottlieb, D. and X. Zhang (2019). Long-term contracting with time-inconsistent agents.
 mimeo. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3176354, retrieved Febru-
 ary 15, 2020.

Handel, B., I. Hendel, and M. D. Whinston (2015). Equilibria in health exchanges: Adverse selection
 vs. reclassification risk. Econometrica 83(4), 1261­1313.

Hendel, I. and A. Lizzeri (2003). The role of commitment in dynamic contracts: Evidence from life
 insurance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 299­328.

Herring, B. and M. V. Pauly (2006). Incentive-compatible guaranteed renewable health insurance
 premiums. Journal of Health Economics 25(3), 395­417.

Hofmann, A. and M. Browne (2013). One-sided commitment in dynamic insurance contracts: Evi-
 dence from private health insurance in Germany. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 46(1), 81­112.

Hullegie, P. and T. J. Klein (2010). The effect of private health insurance on medical care utilization
 and self-assessed health in Germany. Health Economics 19(9), 1048­1062.

Innungskrankenkasse Berlin Brandenburg (2018).     IKK- oder privat versichert: Wichtige In-
  fos zur Entscheidung. https://www.ikkbb.de/fileadmin/user_upload/doc/Broschueren_fuer_
  Versicherte/IKKBBoderprivatversichertVers..pdf, last retrieved on October 30, 2018.

Kaiser Family Foundation (2019). 2019 Employer Health Benefits Survey. https://www.kff.org/
  health-costs/report/2019-employer-health-benefits-survey/, retrieved on December 14,
  2019.



                                                    51
Karlsson, M., T. J. Klein, and N. R. Ziebarth (2016). Skewed, persistent and high before death: Medical
  spending in Germany. Fiscal Studies 37(3-4), 527­559.

Kluth, S. and M. Gasche (2016). Ersatzraten in der Gesetzlichen Rentenversicherung / Replacement
  Rates in the German Statutory Pension System. Jahrbucher
                                                      ¨     fur
                                                             ¨ National¨
                                                                       okonomie und Statistik (Journal
  of Economics and Statistics) 235(6), 553­583.

Krankenkassen-Zentrale (KKZ) (2020).           BAP 2020:     Neue Private Krankenversicherung ­
  Beitragserh¨
             ohung und andere Beitragsanpassungen. https://www.krankenkassenzentrale.de/wiki/
  beitragsanpassung#, retrieved on February 6, 2010.

Kriegel, H.-P., E. Schubert, and A. Zimek (2017). The (black) art of runtime evaluation: Are we
  comparing algorithms or implementations? Knowledge and Information Systems 52(2), 341­378.

Lloyd, S. (1982). Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 28(2),
  129­137.

                                                  ¨
Nell, M. and S. Rosenbrock (2007). Die Diskussion uber die Portabilit¨
                                                                     at von risikogerechten Trans-
 ferbetr¨agen in der Privaten Krankenversicherung. Zeitschrift fur
                                                                 ¨ die gesamte Versicherungswis-
 senschaft 96(1), 39­51.

Nell, M. and S. Rosenbrock (2008). Wettbewerb in kapitalgedeckten Krankenversicherungssyste-
                                       ¨
 men: Ein risikogerechter Ansatz zur Ubertragung                      ¨
                                                     von Alterungsruckstellungen in der Privaten
 Krankenversicherung. Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 9(2), 173­195.

Nell, M. and S. Rosenbrock (2009). Ein Risikoausgleichsmodell fur ¨ den Wettbewerb um Bestand-
 skunden in der PKV. Zeitschrift fur
                                  ¨ die gesamte Versicherungswissenschaft 98(4), 391.

Nuscheler, R. and T. Knaus (2005). Risk selection in the German public health insurance system.
 Health Economics 14(12), 1253­1271.

Panel Study of Income Dynamics (2018). Public use dataset. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
  Produced and distributed by the.

     ¨
Panthofer, S. (2016). Risk selection under public health insurance with opt-out. Health Economics 25(9),
  1163­1181.

Patel, V. and M. V. Pauly (2002). Guaranteed renewability and the problem of risk variation in indi-
  vidual health insurance markets. Health Affairs Suppl. Web Exclusives, W280­W289.

Pauly, M., A. Percy, and B. Herring (1999). Individual versus job-based health insurance: Weighing
  the pros and cons. Health Affairs 18(6), 28­44.

Pauly, M. V., H. Kunreuther, and R. Hirth (1995). Guaranteed renewability in insurance. Journal of
  Risk and Uncertainty 10(2), 143­156.

Pauly, M. V. and R. D. Lieberthal (2008). How risky is individual health insurance?          Health Af-
  fairs 27(3), w242­w249.

Polyakova, M. (2016). Risk selection and heterogeneous preferences in health insurance markets with
  a public option. Journal of Health Economics 49, 153 ­ 168.

Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. H. Giertz (2012). The elasticity of taxable income with respect to marginal
  tax rates: A critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 50(1), 3­50.

Schencking, F. (1999). Private Krankenversicherung im Unterschied zur Gesetzlichen Krankenversicherung,
  pp. 18­32. Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universit¨   atsverlag.


                                                  52
                    ¨
Schmeiser, H., T. Stormer, and J. Wagner (2014). Unisex insurance pricing: Consumers' perception
  and market implications. In The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance--Issues and Practice, Volume 39,
  pp. 102­138.

Schmitz, H. and M. Westphal (2017). Informal care and long-term labor market outcomes. Journal of
  Health Economics 56(C), 1­18.

Schmitz, H. and N. R. Ziebarth (2017). Does framing prices affect the consumer price sensitivity of
  health plan choice? The Journal of Human Resources 52(1), 89­128.

SOEP (2018). Data for years 1984-2016. version 33, SOEPlong, 2018 doi:10.5684/soep.v33.

Wagner, G. G., J. R. Frick, and J. Schupp (2007). The German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP):
 Scope, evolution, and enhancements. Journal of Applied Social Science Studies (Schmollers Jahrbuch:
 Zeitschrift fur
              ¨ Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften) 127(1), 139­169.

                 ¨
Werbeck, A., A. Wuebker, and N. R. Ziebarth (2019). Cream skimming by health care providers and
 inequality in health care access: Evidence from a randomized field experiment. https://www.
 researchgate.net/publication/335890073_Cream_Skimming_by_Health_Care_Providers_
 and_Inequality_in_Health_Care_Access_Evidence_from_a_Randomized_Field_Experiment,
 retrieved February 20, 2020.

Yaari, M. E. (1965). Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and the theory of the consumer. Review of
  Economic Studies 32(2), 137­150.




                                                 53
                 Online Appendix: Not Intended for Publication

Appendix A
A1   Descriptive Statistics

                     Table A1: Summary Statistics: German Claims Panel Data

                                                Mean       SD     Min       Max              N

         Socio-Demographics
         Age (in years)                          45.5      11.4   25.0       99.0        1,867,465
         Female                                 0.276     0.447   0.0         1.0        1,867,465
         Policyholder since (years)              6.5       5.0    1.0        40.0        1,867,465
         Client since (years)                    12.8      11.0   1.0        86.0        1,867,465
         Employee                               0.336     0.473   0.0         1.0        1,867,465
         Self-Employed                          0.486     0.500   0.0         1.0        1,867,465
         Civil Servant                          0.132     0.338   0.0         1.0        1,867,465
         Health Risk Penalty                    0.358     0.480   0.0         1.0        1,867,465
         Pre-Existing Condition Exempt          0.016     0.126   0.0        1.0         1,867,465

         Health Plan Parameters
         TOP Plan                               0.377     0.485    0.0       1.0         1,867,465
         PLUS Plan                              0.338     0.473    0.0       1.0         1,867,465
         ECO Plan                               0.285     0.451    0.0       1.0         1,867,465
         Annual premium (USD)                   4,749     2,157     0      33,037        1,867,318
         Annual risk penalty (USD)               157       453      0      21,752        1,867,465
         Deductible(USD)                         675       659      0       3,224        1,867,465
         Total Claims (USD)                     3,289     8,577     0     2,345,126      1,867,465

         Source: German Claims Panel Data. Policyholder since is the number of years since the
         client has enrolled in the current plan; Client since is the number of years since the client
         joined the company. Employee and Self-Employed are dummies for the policyholders' cur-
         rent occupation. Health Risk Penalty is a dummy that is one if the initial underwriting
         led to a health-related risk penalty on top of the factors age, gender, and type of plan;
         Pre-Existing Conditions Exempt is a dummy that is one if the initial underwriting led to
         exclusions of pre-existing conditions. The mutually exclusive dummies TOP Plan, PLUS
         Plan and ECO Plan capture the generosity of the plan. Annual premium is the annual
         premium, and Annual Risk Penalty is the amount of the health risk penalty charged. De-
         ductible is the deductible and Total Claims the sum all claims in a calendar year. See
         Section 4.1 for further details.




                                                     A1
                Table A2: Summary Statistics: German Socio-Economic Panel Study

                                                           Mean         SD      Min       Max             N

Socio-Demographics
Female                                                     0.5217     0.4995      0         1          530,228
Age                                                       46.9119    17.4922     17        105         530,228

No degree yet                                               0.058     0.2338      0         1          530,228
Dropout of high school                                     0.0378     0.1908      0         1          530,228
Degree after 8/9 years of schooling (Ed 8)                 0.3619     0.4805      0         1          530,228
Degree after 10 years of schooling (Ed 10)                 0.2737     0.4459      0         1          530,228
Degree after 13 years of schooling (Ed 13)                 0.1746     0.3796      0         1          530,228

Employment
Civil servant                                              0.0393     0.1943      0         1          530,228
Self-employed                                              0.0624     0.2419      0         1          530,228
White collar                                               0.2736     0.4458      0         1          530,228
Full-time employed                                         0.4152     0.4928      0         1          530,228
Part-time employed                                         0.1402     0.3471      0         1          530,228

Income Measures in 2016 USD
Monthly gross wage                                          2,940      2,506      0      215,093       310,460
Monthly net wage                                            1,921      1,527      0     134511.5       310,460
Individual annual total income                             20,361     24,434      0     2,580,000      530,228
Equivalized post-tax post-transfer annual income           26,433     18,731      0     2,155,394      530,228

Insurance and Utilization
Hospital nights in past calendar year                      1.6652     8.3794      0        365         530,228
Doctor visits in past 3 months                             2.4941     4.1436      0         99         461,971
Privately insured                                             1          0        1          1          57,558

Source: SOEP (2018), the long version from 1984 to 2016. Whenever the number of person-year observations is
less than 530,228 the question was not asked in all years from 1984 to 2016. For example, Doctor visits in past 3
months has only been routinely asked since 1995. Privately insured indicates that 57,558/530,228=10.8% of all
observations are by people who are insured on the GLTHI market. All income measures have been consistently
generated and cleaned by the SOEP team; e.g., Monthly gross wage is labeled labgro and Monthly net wage
is labeled labnet in SOEP (2018). See Section 4.2 for a detailed discussion of the variables.




                                                     A2
                                    Figure A1: Predicted Health Expenditure
Note: Solid curves represent mean expenditure by age for each risk category t , estimated according to Equation (8) in
Section 5.2. The dashed lines represent the corresponding predictions assuming expenditure does not depend on age.
                        11




                                    College, fitted                  High School, fitted
                                    College, age FE                  High School, age FE
                        10.5
              log(income)
                        10
                        9.5




                               20           40                  60                   80                 100
                                                               Age

          Figure A2: Lifecycle Income Paths for the United States, Nonparametric and Fitted.
Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics (2018); Frick et al. (2007), years 1984 to 2015. All values in 2016 USD.




                                                           A3
Appendix B
Switching from GLTHI to SHI

    As mentioned in Section 2, the decision to enter the private market is essentially a "lifetime de-

cision." The basic social insurance principle is: "Once private, always private[ly insured]." Below,

we discuss the specific and very limited institutional exemptions for GLTHI enrollees to return to the

public SHI system. We also provide empirical evidence on the switching rates.

    First, for people above the age of 55, switching back to the public system is essentially impossible,

even when their income decreases substantially or when they become unemployed. One of the few

options for people above 55 would be to exit the labor force and enroll under the public family

insurance of the spouse, if available. Rules for switching back to SHI have been very strict for older

employees to avoid strategic switching to the private system when individuals are young and healthy

and switching back to the public system when they are old, sick and have little income (and thus low

income-dependent contribution rates).

    Second, people below the age of 55 can only return to the public system if they become unem-

ployed (and receive UI benefits), or if their gross wage from dependent employment permanently

drops below the income threshold. However, assuming an average annual premium of e 3,900 (as

observed in our data), for an equally high SHI premium (15.5% of the gross wage), annual labor

income would need to be as low as e 25,000 which does not make sense from a stratical point of

view for the overwhelming majority of cases. Moreover, switching to SHI entails loosing the entire

old-age provisions which averaged about $33K per policyholder in 2018 (Association of German Pri-

vate Healthcare Insurers, 2019c). Moreover, switching back to GLTHI in the future would imply risk

reclassification.

    Third, the self-employed below 55 can only switch to SHI if they give up their business and

become an employee with a gross salary below the income threshold (see Social Code Book V, Para.

                           ¨
6 for details of the law, Buser, 2012; Cecu, 2018).

    Official statistics show that the absolute number of people who switched from the private to the

public system has been relatively stable at around 130,000 since the beginning of the 1990s, which

corresponds to around 1.5 percent of the GLTHI market per year.53 Figure B1 below uses SOEP
  53 As the total number of GLTHI enrollees has steadily increased over the last decades, this implies declining switching

rates over time. Several reforms in the last decades are likely to be the cause of these declining switching rates over time:
The Gesundheitsreformgesetz of December 20, 1988 substantially tightened the possibility of switching for pensioners; the
Gesundheitsstrukturgesetz, passed on December 21, 1992, also likely affected switching between the systems as it intro-
duced the free choice of SHI sickness funds, along with other provisions about the regulation of private insurers. Likely
due to these and other reforms (e.g. the GKV-Wettbewerbsst¨      arkungsgesetz of 2007), the rate as a share of all privately
insured has declined in the last decades.



                                                            A4
                                               .2
                                                             lpoly smooth



                Switching Rate from GLTHI to SHI
                                                             95% CI



                                               .15
                                               .1
                                               .05
                                               0




                                                     25     35       45       55         65    75         85   95
                                                                                   Age

                                                          Figure B1: Likelihood to Return to SHI by Age
Source: SOEP (2018), the long version from 1984 to 2016. Epanechnikov kernel, degree 0, bandwidth 2.6.


data to plot switching rates by age. As seen, the likelihood to return to SHI decreases substantially

between the age of 25 and 35. We conjecture that this is mostly because people who were privately

insured as students enter the labor market and have to enroll in SHI if their gross salaries are below

the income threshold. Switching rates remain stable at a low level between age 40 and age 75, and

then slightly increase again. Using a fixed effects regression for the probability of switching to SHI

among the universe of Germans who were at least once policyholder of a comprehensive private

plan, we find very few significant determinants of switching back from the private to the public

system. In particular, health care utilization measures (number of hospital nights and doctor visits)

are not significant determinants and neither is the equivalized household income. The results of this

analysis are available upon request.

    Finally, we would like to point out that the historically grown institutional features of the German

system induce advantageous selection into the GLTHI. The is almost the case by construction as

private insurers have the right to deny coverage (or impose pre-existing condition clauses) to the sick.

Hence, the sick basically remain publicly insured with SHI (Nuscheler and Knaus, 2005; Hullegie

                                       ¨
and Klein, 2010; Polyakova, 2016; Panthofer, 2016).54 While the main purpose of our paper is to
  54 When   children of privately parents are also privately insured by their parents, under a family plan or a separately
private plan, parents have to pay premiums for each child. These are typically relatively modest as no old-age provisions
are built for children. Moreover, if parents sign a private GLTHI contract for their child within two months after birth,
risk rating is prohibited. In addition, some insurers offer a relatively unknown "option insurance" (Optionstarif ) which



                                                                               A5
                             Figure B2: Age Distribution of Initial Plan Inception
Source: German Claims Panel Data.


present, discuss and evaluate the basic principles of the GLTHI market, it is a real-word possibility

for sick people to have a public option in Germany. Confirmed by the welfare analysis, it is clear that

GLHI only maximizes welfare when people are relatively healthy at the time of their application.

This insight has policy implications, which we discuss in Section 8. If other countries would design

a market after the GLTHI and allow insurers to deny coverage (or impose guaranteed issue at all

stages but allow risk-rated premiums), then a public option (either direct provision of insurance of

premium subsidies) for those who are sick in young ages is necessary to avoid uninsurance and

underinsurance. Note that the uninsurance rate in Germany is around 0.1 percent--in 2015, only 69

thousand individuals were without health insurance coverage (German Statistical Office, 2016).




is mostly sold in combination with supplemental (to SHI basic coverage) private hospital, dental, or travel insurance for
which insurers carry out risk ratings. This initial risk rating then purchases the policyholder the option to purchase a
GLTHI contract with that specific insurer without another risk rating within 6 to 10 years (and once one becomes eligible
to opt out). No official numbers on the practical relevance of this option insurance are available. However, Google Trends
yields zero hits, Google Scholar only 17 total hits, and a keyword search in the German Handelsblatt (similar to the Wall
Street Journal ) yields only one single hit for the Optionstarif, whereas it yielded 152 for the Basistarif which covers 0.4%
of privately insured (see footnote 6). As a very last point, a more widespread and commonly known option is to put the
existing GLTHI contract on hold for a monthly fee (Anwartschaftsversicherung ), for example, when temporarily moving
abroad. When returning to Germany, people with that option can simply re-activate their contract under the old conditions
(§ 204 VVG).


                                                            A6
Appendix C

C1     Risk Classification: Robustness Checks

     We expose the risk classification scheme derived in Section 5.1 to a number of robustness checks.


Winsorizing. First, we analyse the extent to which results are driven by outliers in mit . It is of course

desirable that outliers are considered in the classification, given their disproportionate contributions

to means and variances; however, if the performance of the classification were widely different when

they are not considered, it would cast doubt on how well the scheme performs with regard to less

extreme risks. Therefore, we compared the performance of different classification schemes after the

top percentile of expenditure had been been winsorized. Results are provided in Figure C1. As

expected, the topcoding of outliers improves the predictive power of all schemes; however, their

relative performance is unaffected by this change.


Lags of classes.   Second, we compare two different ways of including a longer history of claims.

Instead of expanding on the information set t before discretising, we consider an alternative based

on     
   t = t but where we consider the predictive power of the classification scheme interacted with

its lags (i.e. a classification based on K2 classes). Results are provided in Figure C2. It compares

the two alternatives q = 0 and q = 1 from above, and in addition an interacted version, where

the classification is based on q = 0 but this classification scheme is interacted with its lags in the

regressions (leading effectively to K2 classes). Clearly, this alternative has similar, actually even better,

predictive power than q = 1. However, the variant with q = 1 thus achieves similar performance

with a much smaller number of classes.


Sample selection. The results in Figure 4 are based on a sample of individuals who are observed

over 4 years, since three lags are needed in it
                                              . In figure C3 we check how robust the finding is to


varying the observation window required for sample selection. Sample 1 requires only that mi and t

are observed, sample 2, also that                                                
                                  t-1 is observed, and sample 3 in addition that t-2 is observed. The

results provided in Figure C3 show that the predictive performance is sensitive to the sample used;

however, the relative performance between schemes is the same regardless of the sample considered.




                                                    A7
                            .3
                            .25
                        2

                            .2
                        R
                            .15




                                                                                      No lags (n=1)
                                                                                      One lag (n=2)
                                                                                      Two lags (n=3)
                            .1




                                  0                            5                              10
                                                           Categories (K)

         Figure C1: Performance of Alternative Risk Classifications: Winsorized Expenditure.
Note: Each specification includes 21 age times gender fixed effects, 5 year fixed effects and 79 plan fixed effects. Source:
German Claims Panel Data.
                            .2
                            .15
                        2
                        R
                            .1




                                                                            One lag (n=2)
                                                                            No lags (n=1), interacted
                                                                            No lags (n=1), simple
                            .05




                                  0                            5                              10
                                                           Categories (K)

            Figure C2: Performance of Alternative Risk Classifications: lags of classification.
Note: Each specification includes 21 age times gender fixed effects, year fixed effects and 79 plan fixed effects. Source:
German Claims Panel Data.




                                                             A8
                           .2
                           .15
                       2
                        R




                                                                           No lags (q=1, sample 1)
                                                                           No lags (q=1, sample 2)
                           .1




                                                                           No lags (q=1, sample 3)
                                                                           One lag (q=2, sample 2)
                                                                           One lag (q=2, sample 3)
                                                                           Two lags (q=3, sample 3)
                           .05




                                 0                             5                             10
                                                          Categories (K)

             Figure C3: Performance of Alternative Risk Classifications: Different Samples.
Note: Each specification includes 21 age times gender fixed effects, year fixed effects and 79 plan fixed effects. Source:
German Claims Panel Data.




                                                             A9
        Table C1:  Risk Category Transitions by Age Group--Ages 25­54

                                                t +1
Age      t     1         2        3        4           5      6        7      8 ()
         1   0.8907   0.1024   0.0047    0.0011    0.0004   0.0003   0.0001   0.0004
         2   0.3197   0.4257   0.2020    0.0432    0.0077   0.0011   0.0003   0.0003
25-29    3   0.1242   0.2829   0.4104    0.1404    0.0378   0.0043   0.0000   0.0000
         4   0.0892   0.1688   0.2484    0.3917    0.0860   0.0159   0.0000   0.0000
         5   0.0938   0.1250   0.0625    0.3750    0.2917   0.0521   0.0000   0.0000
         6   0.0909   0.0000   0.0455    0.2273    0.3182   0.3182   0.0000   0.0000
         7   0.0000   0.0000   0.0002    0.0045    0.0240   0.1447   0.7619   0.0647
         1   0.8767   0.1145   0.0055    0.0018    0.0009   0.0002   0.0001   0.0003
         2   0.3212   0.4347   0.1909    0.0438    0.0080   0.0006   0.0001   0.0007
30-34    3   0.1241   0.3015   0.4080    0.1409    0.0229   0.0016   0.0000   0.0011
         4   0.1039   0.1640   0.2407    0.3739    0.1032   0.0115   0.0007   0.0021
         5   0.0734   0.0911   0.0506    0.2911    0.3747   0.1089   0.0025   0.0076
         6   0.0422   0.0438   0.0529    0.1678    0.3628   0.2450   0.0525   0.0329
         7   0.0128   0.0115   0.0083    0.0574    0.1545   0.1663   0.4524   0.1368
         1   0.8427   0.1480   0.0055    0.0022    0.0009   0.0002   0.0001   0.0004
         2   0.2798   0.4635   0.2113    0.0360    0.0076   0.0013   0.0000   0.0005
35-39    3   0.1177   0.2379   0.4850    0.1288    0.0275   0.0028   0.0001   0.0002
         4   0.0719   0.0967   0.3055    0.4085    0.0999   0.0158   0.0003   0.0014
         5   0.0743   0.0493   0.0691    0.3402    0.3629   0.0958   0.0039   0.0045
         6   0.0415   0.0331   0.0340    0.1180    0.2958   0.4009   0.0455   0.0312
         7   0.0127   0.0088   0.0054    0.0409    0.1276   0.2757   0.3975   0.1313
         1   0.8514   0.1392   0.0050    0.0024    0.0010   0.0003   0.0001   0.0006
         2   0.2862   0.4666   0.2050    0.0329    0.0075   0.0014   0.0001   0.0003
40-44    3   0.1137   0.2229   0.5134    0.1225    0.0241   0.0022   0.0001   0.0011
         4   0.0790   0.0769   0.2936    0.4213    0.1113   0.0157   0.0003   0.0018
         5   0.0640   0.0392   0.0759    0.3281    0.3763   0.1055   0.0038   0.0072
         6   0.0295   0.0382   0.0342    0.1605    0.2773   0.3613   0.0539   0.0450
         7   0.0081   0.0091   0.0049    0.0502    0.1079   0.2240   0.4247   0.1710
         1   0.8148   0.1736   0.0059    0.0028    0.0012   0.0006   0.0002   0.0009
         2   0.2267   0.5059   0.2229    0.0329    0.0093   0.0013   0.0001   0.0010
45-49    3   0.0653   0.2027   0.5708    0.1309    0.0258   0.0031   0.0001   0.0012
         4   0.0427   0.0712   0.2877    0.4655    0.1153   0.0140   0.0005   0.0029
         5   0.0303   0.0438   0.0475    0.3570    0.3964   0.1101   0.0058   0.0090
         6   0.0153   0.0266   0.0211    0.1118    0.2919   0.4163   0.0607   0.0563
         7   0.0038   0.0057   0.0027    0.0314    0.1021   0.2321   0.4298   0.1923
         1   0.8117   0.1740   0.0056    0.0035    0.0020   0.0008   0.0004   0.0020
         2   0.2283   0.4979   0.2228    0.0377    0.0101   0.0016   0.0002   0.0015
50-54    3   0.0602   0.1799   0.5727    0.1509    0.0317   0.0027   0.0001   0.0018
         4   0.0398   0.0648   0.2660    0.4930    0.1160   0.0155   0.0007   0.0041
         5   0.0274   0.0387   0.0426    0.3666    0.3866   0.1182   0.0075   0.0124
         6   0.0130   0.0222   0.0179    0.1084    0.2688   0.4220   0.0746   0.0732
         7   0.0028   0.0042   0.0020    0.0265    0.0819   0.2049   0.4600   0.2176
Source: German Claims Panel Data. Sample includes all years, 25-
30 year old enrollees, and uses the ACG© score as .



                                        A10
        Table C2:  Risk Category Transitions by Age Group--Ages 55+

                                                t +1
Age     t      1         2        3        4           5      6        7      8 ()
        1    0.7261   0.2537   0.0101    0.0037    0.0020   0.0013   0.0004   0.0027
        2    0.0932   0.6432   0.2123    0.0357    0.0110   0.0018   0.0004   0.0025
55-59   3    0.0002   0.1739   0.6167    0.1690    0.0335   0.0044   0.0001   0.0024
        4    0.0001   0.0637   0.2426    0.5404    0.1287   0.0180   0.0007   0.0058
        5    0.0001   0.0356   0.0363    0.3758    0.4009   0.1282   0.0069   0.0163
        6    0.0000   0.0195   0.0145    0.1061    0.2662   0.4370   0.0650   0.0917
        7    0.0000   0.0037   0.0016    0.0260    0.0813   0.2126   0.4016   0.2732
        1    0.7558   0.2147   0.0145    0.0044    0.0042   0.0019   0.0011   0.0033
        2    0.1023   0.6414   0.1981    0.0387    0.0120   0.0031   0.0004   0.0040
60-64   3    0.0002   0.1612   0.6076    0.1836    0.0394   0.0053   0.0001   0.0028
        4    0.0001   0.0555   0.2243    0.5507    0.1419   0.0204   0.0008   0.0063
        5    0.0001   0.0292   0.0317    0.3610    0.4168   0.1370   0.0075   0.0168
        6    0.0000   0.0153   0.0122    0.0980    0.2660   0.4489   0.0686   0.0910
        7    0.0000   0.0028   0.0013    0.0235    0.0794   0.2136   0.4143   0.2651
        1    0.3707   0.5949   0.0172    0.0076    0.0030   0.0015   0.0009   0.0042
        2    0.0624   0.6492   0.2407    0.0352    0.0065   0.0012   0.0004   0.0045
65-69   3    0.0008   0.1058   0.6561    0.2082    0.0223   0.0013   0.0000   0.0056
        4    0.0002   0.0335   0.2013    0.6242    0.1261   0.0052   0.0005   0.0090
        5    0.0000   0.0128   0.0159    0.3546    0.4985   0.0763   0.0019   0.0400
        6    0.0000   0.0000   0.0107    0.0551    0.4067   0.3517   0.0195   0.1563
        7    0.0006   0.0066   0.0029    0.0264    0.0553   0.1690   0.5289   0.2103
        1    0.3848   0.5793   0.0225    0.0060    0.0011   0.0003   0.0014   0.0048
        2    0.0070   0.6771   0.2554    0.0406    0.0105   0.0012   0.0000   0.0082
70-74   3    0.0001   0.0810   0.6277    0.2599    0.0230   0.0014   0.0001   0.0068
        4    0.0002   0.0115   0.1625    0.6579    0.1404   0.0080   0.0002   0.0195
        5    0.0000   0.0015   0.0184    0.2829    0.5654   0.0736   0.0010   0.0572
        6    0.0000   0.0000   0.0000    0.0327    0.3039   0.4052   0.0065   0.2516
        7    0.0005   0.0056   0.0033    0.0184    0.0172   0.0263   0.7192   0.2094
        1    0.1770   0.5900   0.0442    0.0995    0.0598   0.0063   0.0083   0.0150
        2    0.0006   0.6237   0.2903    0.0471    0.0094   0.0012   0.0000   0.0277
75+     3    0.0000   0.0525   0.5876    0.2988    0.0254   0.0012   0.0000   0.0344
        4    0.0000   0.0029   0.1012    0.6668    0.1623   0.0055   0.0008   0.0605
        5    0.0000   0.0000   0.0060    0.2262    0.5581   0.0837   0.0028   0.1232
        6    0.0000   0.0000   0.0019    0.0206    0.3127   0.4064   0.0225   0.2360
        7    0.0000   0.0000   0.0000    0.0000    0.1111   0.1481   0.4630   0.2778
Source: German Claims Panel Data. Sample includes all years, 25-
30 year old enrollees, and uses the ACG© score as .




                                        A11
C2     Sample Selection: Robustness Checks

     This robustness section focuses on plans with low deductibles. We consider a stricter sample se-

lection rule, where we only include plans with deductibles below $400.55 These plans have approxi-

mately full coverage and thus more reliable information on the universe of health care expenditures.

Summary statistics for this subsample are provided in Table C3. A comparison with the numbers in

Table A1 makes clear that the two samples are very similar in terms of age, gender and history with

the company. On the other hand, the restricted sample has a greater share of employees and civil

servants, but a smaller share of self-employed. The plan characteristics are also similar to a great

extent--with the obvious exceptions of deductible size and average claims.

                            Table C3: Summary Statistics: Low-Deductible Plans

                                                     Mean        SD      Min        Max              N

            Socio-Demographics
            Age (in years)                             44.8     11.8     25.0       99.0          879,468
            Female                                    0.256    0.437     0.0         1.0          879,468
            Policyholder since (years)                 7.7      5.3      1.0        40.0          879,468
            Client since (years)                       13.9     11.7     1.0        84.0          879,468
            Employee                                  0.414    0.493     0.0         1.0          879,468
            Self-Employed                             0.281    0.449     0.0         1.0          879,468
            Civil Servant                             0.280    0.449     0.0         1.0          879,468
            Health Risk Penalty                       0.338    0.473     0.0         1.0          879,468
            Pre-Existing Condition Exempt             0.015    0.121     0.0        1.0           879,468

            Health Plan Parameters
            TOP Plan                                  0.342    0.475     0.0        1.0           879,468
            PLUS Plan                                 0.397    0.489     0.0        1.0           879,468
            ECO Plan                                  0.261    0.439     0.0        1.0           879,468
            Annual premium (USD)                      5,208    2,005      0       33,037          879,374
            Annual risk penalty (USD)                  133      347       0       21,214          879,468
            Deductible(USD)                            154      164       0         395           879,468
            Total Claims (USD)                        3,868    9,064      0      2,345,126        879,468

            Source: German Claims Panel Data. Policyholder since is the number of years since the
            client has enrolled in the current plan; Client since is the number of years since the client
            joined the company. Employee and Self-Employed are dummies for the policyholders'
            current occupation. Health Risk Penalty is a dummy that is one if the initial underwrit-
            ing led to a health-related risk add-on premium on top of the factors age, gender, and
            plan; Pre-Existing Conditions Exempt is a dummy which equals one if the initial un-
            derwriting led to a coverage exclusion of services for some conditions. The mutually
            exclusive dummies TOP Plan, PLUS Plan and ECO Plan capture the generosity of the
            plan. Annual premium is the annual premium, and Annual Risk Penalty is the amount
            of the health risk penalty charged. Deductible is the deductible and Total Claims the
            sum all claims in a calendar year. See Section 4.1 for further details.
  55 This is the lowest cutoff for the deductible which gives us a sufficient number of observations to analyze health risk
transitions within each age group.


                                                           A12
   Figure C4 compares the distributions of  in the two samples. As expected, the zero-deductible

plans have higher ACG© scores in general.




                    2
                                                                          Main Sample
                    1.5                                                   Low-Deductible Sample
              Density
                    1
                    .5
                    0




                          0            2            4                 6              8             10
                                                   ACG Score (t)

             Figure C4: Distribution of  for Main Sample vs. Low-Deductible Plans.


   Table C4 shows how clients distribute over different risk categories by age in the low-deductible

sample. A comparison with Table 2 confirms that the individuals in the low-deductible sample are

in slightly worse health.

            Table C4: Health Risk Categories  by Age Group: Low-Deductible Sample

               Age        1 (Healthiest)    2       3          4          5      6       7 (Sickest)
              25-30           0.739        0.190   0.049      0.016   0.006    0.001       0.000
              30-35           0.672        0.225   0.069      0.025   0.007    0.002       0.000
              35-40           0.559        0.282   0.112      0.034   0.011    0.003       0.000
              40-45           0.507        0.291   0.141      0.043   0.015    0.003       0.000
              45-50           0.406        0.317   0.190      0.060   0.021    0.005       0.001
              50-55           0.316        0.311   0.244      0.090   0.030    0.008       0.001
              55-60           0.172        0.309   0.320      0.139   0.045    0.013       0.002
              60-65           0.093        0.263   0.361      0.190   0.069    0.022       0.003
              65-70           0.038        0.200   0.423      0.252   0.072    0.014       0.002
              70-75           0.011        0.131   0.403      0.333   0.107    0.015       0.001
               75+            0.000        0.055   0.286      0.453   0.179    0.024       0.003
              Source: German Claims Panel Data. Sample includes all age
              groups and uses the ACG© score for the classification.


   Table C5 shows the transition probabilities between different health states in the low-deductible

sample. The probabilities are very similar to those reported in Table 3.

                                                        A13
Table C5: Health Risk Category Transitions: Low-Deductible Sample

                                      t +1
  t      1       2       3       4           5    6       7      8 ()
   1   0.797   0.192   0.007   0.002     0.001   0.000   0.000   0.001
   2   0.186   0.536   0.234   0.033     0.008   0.001   0.000   0.001
   3   0.038   0.167   0.602   0.160     0.026   0.003   0.000   0.003
   4   0.015   0.041   0.237   0.555     0.126   0.012   0.000   0.014
   5   0.014   0.018   0.034   0.339     0.453   0.103   0.004   0.035
   6   0.007   0.012   0.016   0.104     0.311   0.401   0.051   0.097
   7   0.000   0.000   0.003   0.028     0.113   0.228   0.423   0.204
  Source: German Claims Panel Data. Sample includes all years, all
  age groups, and uses the ACG© score for the classification.




                                 A14
Appendix D

D1                                  German LTHI Premium Profiles

                    Figure D1 compares the (a) calibrated and (b) observed premium profiles for individuals entering

their plan at different ages. In both figures, the highest category (t > 2) is a weighted average

calculated according to the actual distribution of t in the different age groups.
                           20,000




                                                                                                            20,000
                                         >2                                                                              >2
                                         =2                                                                              =2
  Annual Premium (Pt(t); USD)




                                                                                   Annual Premium (Pt(t); USD)
                                         =1                                                                              =1
                           15,000




                                                                                                            15,000
                           10,000




                                                                                                            10,000
                           5,000




                                                                                                            5,000
                           0




                                                                                                            0


                                25-30      35-40     45-50        55-60   65-70                                  25-30    35-40        45-50        55-60   65-70
                                                   Age at Inception                                                                  Age at Inception

                                               (a) Calibrated                                                                     (b) Observed

                                        Figure D1: Calibrated vs. Actual Starting Premiums Pt ( t ) by Age at Inception
Source: German Claims Panel Data. In Figure D1 (b), the sample includes all years and all health plans, and clients who
have been in their contract for 2 to 5 years. We adjusted premiums for the three benefit categories TOP, PLUS, ECO and
deductible size.




                                                                                  A15
Appendix E

E1    Trading Off the Medicare Payroll Tax and Medicare Premiums

     In this section, we evaluate the welfare consequence of changing the timing of payments into

Medicare. Our baseline scenario assumes that Medicare coverage is completely free without any

premium. However, the actual Medicare program in the US entails a premium (Part B) and cost-

sharing provisions (Part A and B). In the context of our lifecycle model, premiums and cost-sharing

provisions backload Medicare expenses by reducing the Medicare tax rate required to fund Medicare.

     As a first approach, we maintain the assumption of no cost-sharing, but vary the level of pre-

miums charged during retirement. Specifically, we assume a Medicare premium p has to be paid,

starting at age 65. The associated Medicare tax rate  ( p) is such that the revenue neutrality condi-

tion holds
                                                64                      94
                                       ( p) E    St t-24 yt        =E    St t-24 (mt - p)
                                                25                      65

     It is clear from this equation that a higher premium at old age is compensated by a lower tax rate

at younger ages. Figure E1 shows this trade-off, where the x-axis depicts the tax rate that is needed

for each premium level depicted on the y-axis.
                                  3
                                  2.5
                       Tax rate (%)
                                  2
                                  1.5




                                        0            1         2             3     4        5
                                                         Annual Premium (Th USD)


                                         Figure E1: Tax Rate and Medicare Premium



     Figure E2 shows welfare for the combined GLTHI + Medicare case, and when charging a Medicare

premium in addition to the Medicare tax. The x-axis shows different premium levels, and the y axis

shows the welfare consequences.

     Three findings emerge from Figure E2: (1) a higher Medicare premium (and thus lower tax rate) is


                                                               A16
                                             26,000
                                             25,500
                     CE (USD)
                                             25,000
                                             24,500
                                             24,000




                                                                                                0           1            2          3             4           5
                                                                                                                     Premium (Th USD)
                                                                                                          GHHW (25-94)             GLTHI (25-64) + Medicare


               Figure E2: Welfare of GHHW and Medicare with different Premiums



desirable from a welfare perspective, and (2) at any premium level, GHHW does better than GLTHI.

   To understand the intuition behind the welfare result in Figure E2, Figure E3 shows the expected

lifecycle consumption profiles under (a) GHHW over the entire lifecycle, (b) GLTHI + Medicare with

a zero premium and the corresponding tax rate in Figure E1, (c) GLTHI + Medicare with a premium

of $5K and the corresponding tax rate in Figure E1.
                                             20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000 45,000 50,000
                     Average Consumption (USD)




                                                                                                                                     GHHW
                                                                                                                                     GLTHI+Medicare, P=5K
                                                                                                                                     GLTHI+Medicare, P=0
                                                                                                20              40           60              80               100
                                                                                                                             Age


                                                                                                     Figure E3: Expected Consumption Profile



   Figure E3 illustrates that a higher Medicare premium increases consumption in early ages (be-

cause it decreases the tax rate). Under the GLTHI + free Medicare scencario, one observes a sharp

increase in consumption at retirement, because individuals stop paying GLTHI premiums and stop


                                                                                                                         A17
paying Medicare taxes. Under the GLTHI + Medicare with a $5K premium scenario, one observes

a reduction in consumption at retirement because the Medicare premiums exceeds the GLTHI pre-

mium. Figure E3 also illustrates than even a very large Medicare premium (and almost zero Medicare

tax) does not outperform GHHW because it fails to achieve the same level of consumption at early

ages. Compared with the optimal contract, it still has too much frontloading.




                                                A18
Appendix F

      We provide the derivation for the formula of the certainty consumption equivalent for Epstein-

Zin preferences, provided in Equation (13). Preferences are defined recursively as


                                             Vt = F (ct , Rt (Vt+1 )),


with Rt (Vt+1 ) = G -1 (Et G (Vt+1 )). As mentioned in the main text, we use the CES aggregator for
                                        1
F (c, z) = (1 - )c1-1/ + z1-1/        1-1/
                                             , and incorporate the CARA utility function as G (c) = u(c) =
1 -c
e    .

      Throughout we have assumed that utility is zero if the individual is dead. We can re-interpret Vt

as the value of being alive in period t. Under that interpretation, one can write preferences recursively

as:
                                                                                1
                                               1-1/
                                                      + st  Rt (Vt+1 )1-1/
                                                                              1-1/
                              Vt = (1 - ) ct                                                          (14)

where st is the probability of survival between t and t + 1.

      We now derive an expression for the certainty equivalent consumption c for any given value Vt

under recursive preferences. Consider the situation in which consumption (while alive) is constant

and equal to c. This means that Rt (Vt+1 ) = Vt+1 , and therefore we can re-write

                                                                               1

                               Vt = (1 - ) c1-1/ + st  (Vt+1 )1-1/
                                                                             1-1/
                                                                                                      (15)


      Replacing the Vt+1 in Equation (15) as a function of Vt+2 yields



                                                                                              1

                    Vt = (1 - ) c1-1/ + st  (1 - ) c1-1/ + st+1 (Vt+2 )1-1/
                                                                                            1-1/


                                                                                       1
                                                                             1-1/    1-1/
                      = (1 - ) c1-1/ + st  (1 - ) c1-1/ + st st+1 2 Vt+1


      Iterating forward we can show that

                                           1-1/        T
                                        Vt
                                                       c1-1/  j-t St
                                                                         j
                                            =
                                         1-            j=t

          j     j
where St  k=t sk is the survival probability from t to j. Solving for c, we get an expression defining

the certainty equivalent:



                                                       A19
                                                                   1
                                                       1-1/
                                                               1-1/
                                                  Vt
                                                   1 - 
                                           c=   
                                                       j-t j
                                                                                                        (16)
                                                 T
                                                 j=t      S t

       Equation (16) provides the certainty equivalent consumption to a program that provides value

Vt .

       We are interested in the certainty equivalent taking into account the uncertainty regarding the

"birth state"  t0 . Denote the value of this lottery Vb . It can be expressed as a function of Vt0 (the value

at age 25):

                                         Vb = G -1 (E0 ( G (Vt0 ( t0 ))))                               (17)

where E0 () takes expectations with respect to the uncertain "birth" state,  t0 .

       For each contract, we can compute the value Vt0 ( t0 ), for each state  t0 , via backwards induction.

Plugging Equation (17) into Equation (16), applied to the initial period t0 we get the expression in the

text.




                                                      A20
