                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SAME-SEX COUPLES AND THE MARITAL SURPLUS:
                  THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LEGAL ENVIRONMENT

                                      Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                       Scott Delhommer

                                      Working Paper 26875
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26875


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank Dan Black, Kitt Carpenter, Lisa Dickson, Marcus Dillender, Frances Hamermesh,
Shelly Lundberg, Michael Martell, Dario Sansone, Barnard undergraduate students, participants
in seminars at several universities, and especially Gerald Oettinger and Steve Trejo for helpful
suggestions. No organization provided financial support for this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Scott Delhommer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Same-Sex Couples and the Marital Surplus: The Importance of the Legal Environment
Daniel S. Hamermesh and Scott Delhommer
NBER Working Paper No. 26875
March 2020
JEL No. J12,J16,K30

                                          ABSTRACT

Same-sex couples' marital surplus, their excess total income over that predicted by their work
times and predicted wages, increases little as the duration of their relationship lengthens. When/
where same-sex marriage is legal, it rises sharply as duration increases. The availability of legal
domestic partnership or civil union has no effect on the surplus. The likelihood of home
ownership conditional on demographic characteristics also increases with partnerships' duration
only when/where same-sex marriage is legal. These results, based on data from the American
Community Survey 2013-17, support the notion that greater legal protection enhances partners'
incentives to invest in their relationship.


Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Barnard College
3009 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

Scott Delhommer
Department of Economics
The University of Texas at Austin
sdelhommer@utexas.edu
    I.       Introduction and the Problem

         With rising pressures for legalizing same-sex marriage in the U.S., a plethora of studies

examining how gays/lesbians are treated in various markets arose. Much of the focus was on

discrimination in labor markets (Badgett, 1995 and Black et al., 2003, are two early examples),

not specifically looking at marriage. The importance of persistent preferences and community

standards in affecting these outcomes has also garnered attention (Brodeur and Haddad, 2018).

         More recently the focus has altered to considering various aspects of same-sex partnership

or marriage. The impacts on opposite-sex marriage rates and fertility have been examined

(Dillender, 2014; Trandifir, 2015), as have those on employment (Burn (2018); Delhommer, 2019;

Sansone, 2020); partners' labor supply and household bargaining (Oreffice, 2011; Hansen et al.,

2019), including effects of taxation (Isaac, 2018); and even on mental health (Anderson et al.,

2019) and sexually transmitted diseases (Francis et al., 2012). 1 All of these considerations are

important in understanding the position of this particular minority group in American society and

generally. No doubt legalization has had or will have major implications for how individuals in

this minority are treated in the labor and other markets. The essential question, however, may

rather be: How does legalizing same-sex marriage alter a couple's well-being both in and beyond

the labor market? The push for legalization presumably stems from its proponents' beliefs that,

more than legal or unsanctioned same-sex partnerships, it will directly improve the well-being of

members of this minority within this crucial domestic relationship.

         With the complete legalization of same-sex marriage in the U.S. in Obergefell v. Hodges

(2015), and with the legal sanctioning of the view that marriage choice is a civil right (United

States v. Windsor, 2013), federal policy has placed same-sex marriage on the same legal footing


1
There has been a substantial focus on these topics outside the United States too, e.g., Plug and Berkhout (2004) on
wage discrimination, and Chen and van Ours (2018) on subjective well-being by type of relationship.

                                                        1
as opposite-sex marriage. While this change is recent, the legalization of same-sex partnership,

going back at the state level to California in 1999, and of same-sex marriage in Massachusetts in

2004, has generated a substantial number of same-sex partnerships and marriages that are or at

least could have been legally sanctioned. This increasingly lengthy history allows studying how

such partnerships have fared over time under an increasingly tolerant legal system. In particular,

we can examine how couples' benefits from legalized same-sex marriage differ from those from

legalized same-sex domestic partnership, and how benefits from the latter differ from those when

even partnerships are not legally sanctioned. 2 Thus we consider in a new context the idea that

marriage is a commitment device that protects and induces couples' investments in their

relationship (Matouschek and Rasul, 2008).

    II.      Theoretical Motivation--the Marital Surplus

          The idea of marital surplus--the excess value of a marriage beyond the partners' threat

points--goes back at least to McElroy and Horney (1981). How the distribution of the surplus

between the partners occurs and how it affects how each spends money and time has been

examined by, e.g., Chiappori (1992). A marital surplus can be viewed as any extra income or

efficiency in using time (in household production or leisure) produced by the couple's prior

investment in their relationship. Presumably it is greater the longer the couple has been together

and the more effort the partners have expended in developing their relationship--investing in

activities that raise the surplus. But while the concept has been used often, its extent has not been

examined directly, only inferred from the changes in behavior that it might engender.



2
 The opinion in Perry et al. v. Schwarzengger et al., 704 F.Supp.2d 921 (2010), one of the cases that fed into the
Windsor decision, stated that one purpose of marriage was to "create stable households." The second author's expert
report in that case argued that legalizing same-sex marriage would give the partners incentives to create marital capital
in a way that the then-legal domestic partnerships in California could not:
 https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/california/candce/ 3:2009cv02292/215270/284.


                                                           2
        With this view in mind, consider a couple operating in T periods, with certainty that it will

survive through Period T. In Period 1 it chooses to spend some of its resources investing in the

relationship. We do not need to consider how the surplus that is produced is split--just that a

surplus is created by the couple's efforts. The couple maximizes the following joint utility

function:

    (1)  = (1 -  , 1 ) +  ( ,  ) ,

where R is a discount factor, I is investment in the relationship in the first period, C is the gross

value of the household production that is generated by the partners' endowments of human capital

and time and their efficiency in combining these; and S is the marital surplus. S1 is its initial value,

presumably positive because of the assortative matching that generates the relationship (since if it

were not positive, the match would not have occurred). Investment in the first period increases the

surplus after Period 1, so that:

    (2)  = ( , 1 ),  = 2, ... ,   ,

with St/I, St/S1 > 0, 2St/2I <0, and T* some specific horizon.

        In this very simple model, what happens if T increases to T**> T*, perhaps because

expected longevity rises, divorce is made more difficult and the parties cannot reallocate the

marital surplus, or because legal protections of the partnership are increased? With greater T, the

parties have more incentive to invest in the marriage in Period 1--to increase the marital surplus--

so that the surplus thereafter is higher. Moreover, the actions that the parties take to alter the surplus

themselves increase T--reduce the likelihood that the partnership dissolves. This discussion

implies that any legal change that makes a partnership more secure will enhance the partners'

incentives to invest in the relationship and thus to increase the marital surplus in future periods.

We should observe that, at the same stage of a partnership--the same duration since its inception--



                                                    3
those that have functioned when and where the partnership is legally sanctioned will have

developed a greater marital surplus.

       III.      Data, Sample and General Estimates

              Starting in 2013 the American Community Survey (ACS) has contained information on

whether a couple is of the same-sex or not. We thus include in the samples from the 2013-17 yearly

ACS all same-sex couples whose members state that they are married, distinguishing by whether

they are gay or lesbian. With information on the year they state that they were married, we know

the duration of their relationship. This duration clearly exceeds the amount of time that most

couples could have been legally married, so henceforth we refer to the couple as a partnership. To

reduce errors in matching partners in these data, we exclude all couples residing in group quarters

and all for which the indicator of marital status was flagged in the ACS. 3 Finally, in order to avoid

including couples with a possibly temporary relationship and to increase the homogeneity of the

sample, we restrict it to couples with both members between ages 25 and 74 inclusive (deleting 11

percent of the original sample of same-sex couples). 4

              These restrictions generate samples of 9,453 gay and 10,110 lesbian (i.e., 19,563 same-

sex) couples in which both partners state that they are a couple. Some may not be legally married--

in their state at the time of the survey, they could not be; but all responded in the ACS that they

are married. The fraction same-sex among all couples in these samples is 0.0073, somewhat higher

than the fraction of people in the 1990s who were viewed as gay/lesbian under a stringent definition

(Black et al., 2000).




3
    In all the couples in the samples that we use each partner listed the same duration of partnership.
4
    This exclusion has no qualitative impact on any of the results obtained here.


                                                              4
        Table 1 presents statistics describing married opposite-sex couples (for contrast), all same-

sex couples, then gay and lesbian couples separately. For all groups the statistics show the averages

of the characteristic across the two partners. Given the sample sizes, all the inter-group differences

are statistically significant. The biggest difference between the opposite- and same-sex couples is

that the latter are much better educated, with over half having at least a college education,

compared to 40 percent among members of opposite-sex couples. They are also less likely to be

members of one of the larger American minority groups (more likely to be non-Hispanic whites);

and their relationship (their statement of the length of time that they have been married) is much

shorter than that of opposite-sex couples--9 versus 21 years.

        Among same-sex couples the most striking difference is that members of lesbian couples

are on average younger than members of gay couples, have not been together quite so long, and

are less likely to have at least a college degree. They are more likely to be non-Hispanic whites,

but also more likely to be African Americans. While none of these differences is large, their

statistical significance suggests examining gay and lesbian couples separately in estimating models

describing the marital surplus. 5

        While the notion of marital surplus has been used often in the literature, it has been inferred

from its effects on spending, time use (particularly labor supply) or marital stability. Its magnitude

and development have not been examined directly. We propose to do exactly that--to chart how

marital surplus varies with the length of the couple's relationship and with the legal protections, if

any, under which it operates. Assume that the members' earning potential--what the observer

expects the partners to earn or to receive in other forms of income--is described by W1(X1) and

W2(X2), where the X are large vectors of characteristics describing each partner i's (i = 1,2) human


5
 As in Jepsen and Jepsen (2002), the differences in characteristics (age and education) between members of same-sex
couples are greater than those between members of opposite-sex couples.

                                                        5
capital and any discrimination or favoritism faced in the labor market. Then the marital surplus S

enjoyed by the couple can be viewed as the excess of their total income over the incomes that they

would receive separately:

   (3) () = () ­ [1 1 (1 ) + 2 2 (2 )],

where D is the duration of the partnership, Hi are hours worked by the partner, and Y is the couple's

total income.

       The idea here is that marital surplus is measurable as the excess of income over what would

be expected given the partners' choices about how much to work and their past and current

earnings ability conditional on all of their observable characteristics. A successful partnership

allows members of the couple to enhance their income-generating capacities by having specialized

in the past and by currently specializing in various household tasks; by having made and currently

making choices about how to spend other non-market time in ways that enhance their incomes;

and by engaging in activities together that enhance their utility and that offer them the ability to

develop their human capital in ways that is not predictable based on their observable characteristics

(Hamermesh, 2002). Presumably these utility-enhancing investments are made early in a

relationship that is expected to be long-lasting and will taper off as the relationship lengthens. Thus

their impact should be such that S'(D) > 0, S"(D) < 0.

       The description in (3) suggests an estimating equation in which the W are proxied by all

the information available to the econometrician about the partner's characteristics. In the ACS this

means information on age, education, race/ethnicity and location. For the partnership we include

the state of residence, whether and where in a metropolitan area the couple resides, and the year

of inclusion in the ACS. For each partner we include a vector of single years of age (49 indicators

for each partner), a vector of indicators of each partner's educational attainment (23 indicators for



                                                  6
each partner) and his/her race/ethnicity (4 indicators for each partner). Also included are each

partner's usual weekly working hours (0 for non-workers). We calculate D as the years elapsed

between the time the couple reported having gotten married and the year it was included in the

ACS, and we use ACS sampling weights.

       To account for the expected shape of S(D), we add a quadratic term in D after first

estimating a linear relationship. Column (1) of Table 2 lists estimates of:

    (4) () = () +  ,

where  is a vector of parameters describing the impacts of all the demographic characteristics on

family income (F), and g is a function of the stated duration of the partnership. 6 Equation (4) thus

measures the response of the logarithm of family income to the duration of the partnership among

the 19,563 same-sex couples, including the large vectors of covariates describing their

demographics. The estimates show evidence of an increase in the surplus with duration of the

partnership, but the impact of additional years together is tiny: Even at the average of 9 years into

a relationship family income, conditional on all the covariates, is only 1 percent higher than in a

new same-sex relationship. Moreover, as the estimates in Column (2) show, there is no evidence

of the predicted concave relationship between the surplus and the duration of the partnership.

       Columns (3)-(6) present the same estimates as in Columns (1) and (2), separately for gay

and lesbian couples. The estimates are qualitatively like those for the aggregate of same-sex

couples. The linear effects are quite small, around 0.1 percent per annum, and only very marginally

statistically significant. There is also no evidence of the expected concavity in the relationship of

family income to the duration of the same-sex relationship.




6
 The ACS provides two measures of total income, family and household income. The estimates using them
unsurprisingly differ little from each other; to save space we present here only those based on ln(F).

                                                  7
    IV.      Partnership, Marriage and the Law

          The results for same-sex partners suggest little evidence that the partners are investing in

the relationship. But in a sense the results for same-sex couples should not be surprising: Over

one-fourth of same-sex couples in this sample could never have been in a legally-sanctioned

relationship, either domestic partnership or marriage, up to the time when they are included in the

ACS. Only 65 percent of them were ever together at a time when same-sex marriage was legal in

the jurisdiction where they resided. The comparisons in Section III are thus among same-sex

couples, many of which could not have been married legally or even have been in a legal alternative

relationship (domestic partnership, civil union or similar) during much of the time that they state

they were married.

          To examine how differing legal institutions affect the development of the marital surplus

among same-sex couples, we create indicators of the legal environment in each jurisdiction (state

and the District of Columbia) for each year, from 1999, when domestic partnership was recognized

in California, through 2015 and later, when same-sex marriage was legalized nationwide. Let Ts,Alt

be the year when alternative partnerships were legalized in jurisdiction s, Ts,Same when same-sex

marriage was legalized there. For years before 2012, we use the classifications created by Dillender

(2014), while for 2012 and later use those constructed by Hansen et al. (2019). 7 We assume that

if the couple was together at the time of legalization it could have been legally married from that

time forward. 8 We make a similar assumption for couples that were together at the time when




7
 Based on Hansen et al. (2019) we also code same-sex partnerships as being legal in New York City beginning in
1997.
8
 A number of states legalized same-sex marriage in the fourth quarter of 2014. Most of the partnerships that began in
2014 could not have been entered into under this regime in those states. We thus treat the effective date of legalized
same-sex marriage in those states as being 2015, as in all other states that had not legalized the institution before
Obergefell.

                                                          8
domestic partnership was legalized where they resided, with it converted to the possibility of same-

sex marriage when this greater level of legal protection was instituted in the jurisdiction.

       Let tM be the year a couple in the ACS reports itself as having gotten married, and t be the

year the couple is included in the ACS. Then for each couple we can calculate:

                    - ,              ,
   (5)  = 
                    -               > ,

We can make the same calculations for DAlt, so that D can thus be decomposed as:

   (6)    +  +  ,

where DPre is the length of the relationship pre-legalization. DSame is thus the number of years the

couple was together since same-sex marriage became legal in the jurisdiction, and DAlt the number

of years together since domestic partnership became legal but before same-sex marriage was

legalized there. In estimating our basic model, we include D, DAlt and DSame, with the parameters

on the latter two variables thus indicating whether the presence of legislation sanctioning same-

sex relations provided any extra fillip to commitment beyond the passage of time in a relationship.

       Table 3 presents the distributions of DSame and DAlt in this sample of same-sex couples.

Over half of the partnerships came into existence at a time when domestic partnership or same-sex

marriage was not legal. Relatively few existed at any time when alternative relationships alone

were legal in a jurisdiction; but over 13 percent were functioning for at least 5 years under this

legal regime, and the mean of those that were in existence under these laws for at least one year is

5.2 years. Only 6.5 percent of the partnerships existed for 5 or more years under a regime allowing

same-sex marriage. The majority (clearly, all those observed in 2016 and 2017, after Obergefell)

endured for between 1 and 4 years at a time when same-sex marriage was legal, with a mean of

2.5 years among those that we can view as possibly legally married for at least one year. Of the

average duration of partnerships of 9.37 years shown in Table 1, 1.68 years passed under a

                                                  9
legalized marriage regime, 1.19 years under a legalized partnership regime, and 6.50 years without

legal protections.

         Column (1) of Table 4 re-specifies the basic estimating equation by adding DSame and DAlt

to the equation shown in Column (1) of Table 2, with the same large vectors of covariates included.

Sampling weights are used, and standard errors are clustered on the state indicators. The results

are striking: Extra duration of an alternative legal arrangement does nothing extra to increase

family income (conditional on all the locational, racial/ethnic and human capital covariates).

Indeed, the impact is negative. Additional years of a relationship that could be legally sanctioned

as marriage, however, add substantially and statistically significantly to the surplus, about 1

percent for each extra year of a marriage beyond the effect of an extra year of a partnership without

the possibility of such legal sanction. 9 The effect of an additional year under legal same-sex

marriage is statistically significantly larger than a year under legal partnership or no sanction at

all. The exogenous variation that identifies these effects stems from differences by years of the

duration of the relationship under the three regimes (no legalization, legal domestic partnership,

legal same-sex marriage) within states and in the year the couple is observed. 10

         This specification essentially measures the impact of exposure to an additional year of the

possibility of same-sex marriage (or partnership) out of a fixed number of years in the relationship.

We are essentially inferring the results of an intention to treat with legal protection, as we cannot

know which couples in the sample are legally married (or legally partnered). This may explain the


9
 The evidence that hours worked are affected by the nature of the same-sex partnership means that some of the impact
of hours usually worked by each member of the couple on family income partly reflects the impact of the legislation.
To examine this possibility, we re-estimate the basic equation excluding usual hours. The estimated impact of DSame
on family income hardly changes, falling to 0.00921 (s.e. = 0.00342).

10
  Some couples at times and in states that did not sanction domestic partnerships or same-sex marriage might have
entered into such arrangements by traveling to jurisdictions that did so, but that are coded as not in our data. This
difficulty would bias the estimated impact of DSame toward zero, implying that we understate the impact of legalizating
same-sex marriage.

                                                          10
discrepancy between the fraction gay/lesbian couples among tax-filing couples in 2015 estimated

by Fisher et al. (2018), 0.0048, and the fraction among same-sex couples in the ACS 2015, 0.0073.

       This discussion suggests, as would be expected, that the fraction actually treated (who avail

themselves of the opportunity for legal marriage) is less than those who might do so--that the

treated group, which we cannot observe, is a subset of those for whom the laws can be viewed as

having created an intention to treat. Would the estimates in Column (1) differ if we could observe

which couples are legally married? Perhaps, especially given Dutch evidence that legalization of

same-sex marriage causally leads some existing partnerships to dissolve and others to become

formal marriages (Chen and van Ours, 2019). But arguably knowing and using only the intention

to treat is superior to knowing which couples were legally married, since the latter group is

selected, perhaps consisting of those same-sex couples with partners who see greater advantages

to being legally married. We thus measure the impact of offering couples the opportunity to marry,

not the impact of their choice whether to take advantage of the opportunity.

       This demonstration of the importance of the partnership being legally sanctionable as

marriage does not arise from different annual increases in the surplus among longer lasting

compared to new legal partnerships, a possible concern given the nature of sorting/matching

among same-sex couples. Column (2) of Table 4 adds indicators for the first year of legality of

same-sex marriage and of same-sex domestic partnership. Neither indicator is significantly

nonzero, and the estimate for the initial year of legal same-sex marriage is tiny. These results

support the conclusion that legal same-sex marriage allows the growth of the marital surplus as

the duration of the relationship increases after it is formed, not that it jumps up once the couple

could be legally married.




                                                11
         It is also possible that legalization encourages new partnerships of couples that are, other

things equal, less successful than those couples whose relationship has been legal for one or more

years. If so, the coefficients in Column (1) overestimate the growth in the marital surplus with the

duration of same-sex marriage. To examine this possibility, we include in Column (3) indicators

of whether the relationship has been newly legally sanctioned, either as marriage or domestic

partnership. To some extent the concern that newly sanctioned relationships differ from ones that

have endured as legal longer is correct: The coefficient estimates on both indicators are negative,

and both t-statistics are greater than one (but not statistically significant by usual standards).

Nonetheless, adding these indicators to the estimating equation increases rather than decreases the

estimated effect of an additional year of legal same-sex marriage on the surplus.

         With these re-specifications failing to alter the conclusions based on the estimates in

Column (1), we disaggregate the sample by gender. Columns (4) and (5) of Table 4 show the

estimates of the model of Column (1) separately for gays and lesbians. 11 They suggest that the

positive effect observed for all same-sex couples arises chiefly because additional time spent under

the protection of same-sex marriage increases the marital surplus of gay couples. Additional years

of a legally sanctioned lesbian marriage increase the surplus, but not statistically significantly.

Moreover, the increase is only one-third as rapid as among gay couples and is statistically

significantly smaller.




11
 Quadratic terms in D, DSame and DAlt are not statistically significant individually or jointly; but for both DSame and
DAlt they suggest the expected concave relationships.


                                                          12
     V.       Robustness and Selection Considerations

          A. Alternative Specifications

          The estimated positive effects of duration on the surplus cannot arise because the longer-

partnered individuals were older and had more time to accumulate assets and generate non-wage

income than unpartnered individuals: All the estimates have accounted for the ages of both

partners. Other problems may, however, be inducing positive biases to the estimated impacts of

the duration of eligibility for legal marriage on the estimated surplus. The simplest ones have to

do with the choice of sample and possible mis-specifications. The estimates in Table 4 are based

partly on some very long-duration same-sex partnerships, since partners as old as 74 are included

in the sample. Also, in many of the older couples one or both partners are not in the labor force.

To check whether the results in Section IV are generated by comparisons of the behavior of older

to other couples, we re-estimate the equation described in Column (1) of Table 4, restricting the

sample to couples with both partners ages 25-59. This eliminates 32 percent of the sample; but the

estimated effect of additional years under a same-sex marriage regime actually increases, to

0.01498 (s.e. = 0.00340). 12

          In 66 percent of same-sex partnerships both partners report being in their first marriage.

Restricting the sample to those couples and re-estimating the model in Column (1) of Table 4

yields a larger estimate of the impact of DSame, 0.01429 (0.00377). Yet another potential difficulty

is that the longest-duration partnerships that existed under the possibility of legal marriage come

from Massachusetts. To examine possible biases, we remove the roughly 5 percent of the sample

resident there, so that the distribution of DSame includes no observations with more than 9 years,


12
  The estimated impact of additional years under an alternative partnership regime remains negative, statistically
insignificant and nearly zero; that of additional years in an unsanctioned relationship is only one-fifth the size of that
estimated in Column (1) of Table 4, and nowhere nearly statistically significant. The same greater effect of additional
years of legalized same-sex marriage is produced if we restrict the sample to couples with at least one spouse working.

                                                           13
and only 4 percent with at least 5 years of access to same-sex marriage. When re-estimating the

equation in Column (1) of Table 4. none of the estimated parameters changes very much; and that

on DSame increases to 0.01228 (s.e. = 0.00652). That increase makes sense, since, as Footnote 11

noted, the relationship between S and DSame is slightly concave. Disproportionately deleting longer

same-sex marriages increases the estimate of the impact of DSame in a linear specification.

        Another potential problem is that the vector X has not accounted for the presence of

children in the household. Having children might induce the partners to invest more in their human

capital in order to provide for their offspring and might be correlated with the duration of the

relationship. To examine the effect of this possibility on the estimated impact of DSame, we re-

estimate the basic equation adding the integer variable, number of children in the household. Its

addition reduces the estimated impact of DSame to 0.00893 (s.e. = 0.00323), only slightly less than

in the main results and still highly significant statistically.

        Still another possibility is that the results are driven by behavior in one ethnic group. Re-

estimating the basic model for the 68 percent of same-sex couples in which both partners are non-

Hispanic whites, the estimated impact of DSame is 0.01017 (s.e. = 0.00384), of DAlt is -0.00598 (s.e.

= 0.00261), and of D is 0.00112 (s.e. = 0.00074). Estimating the model over the 15 percent of

same-sex couples in which neither partner is a non-Hispanic white, the impact of DSame is

0.02475 (s.e. = 0.01366), of DAlt is -0.00180 (s.e. = 0.00431), and of D is 0.00381 (s.e. = 0.00167).

While the estimates are larger among minority same-sex couples, their pattern is like that among

majority same-sex couples and cannot be responsible for the results in Column (1) of Table 4.

        Given evidence that gays/lesbians sort into same-sex friendly occupations (Plug et al.,

2014), it might be that such sorting occurs differentially depending upon whether same-sex

marriage has been legalized and the time since legalization. To examine this possibility we re-



                                                   14
estimate the basic equation in Column (1) of Table 4, including indicators for each partner's

occupational category (private or public, self-employed, etc.). 13 Including vectors of indicators of

each partner's class as a worker (or not) barely changes the estimated impact of same-sex marriage

legalization, to 0.01076 (s.e. = 0.00342).

         Another potential problem is that tolerance of same-sex relationships might have been

increasing after Obergefell, so that our observation that household incomes of same-sex couples

rise with the duration of eligibility for same-sex marriage merely reflects increasing tolerance and

concomitantly higher labor-market and other returns. Delhommer (2019) provides tabulations by

state and year of Pew Foundation polls of respondents' attitudes toward same-sex marriage. These

polls do show that tolerance rose during this period, with 53.3 percent of respondents supporting

or even strongly supporting same-sex marriage in 2013, rising to 55.2 in 2014, to 57.6 in 2015, to

57.2 in 2016 and to 64.5 in 2017. 14

         To examine the possibility that more favorable attitudes rather than the lengthening

applicability of state and federal legalization are producing the basic results, we re-estimate the

model including indicators of attitudes toward same-sex marriage in each state and year (strongly

support, support, oppose or strongly oppose). The estimate of the impact of years since legalization

of same-sex marriages changes barely perceptibly, to 0.01056 (s.e. = 0.00336). Moreover, the

vector of indicators of attitudes is statistically insignificant with parameter estimates that are tiny.




13
   Detailed information on occupational category is available, but its inclusion in the regression leads to a substantial
reduction in sample size because most cells are very sparsely occupied.
14
 Obversely, the percentage opposing or strongly opposing same-sex marriage fell during this period from 38.6 to
29.9.

                                                           15
        B. Selection

        Non-random selection into partnerships could be generating the results in Section IV. For

example, perhaps those same-sex partnerships that began before same-sex marriage was legalized

are based on differences in the extent of assortative mating compared to those partnerships that

began afterward. We can examine differences in the correlations of the main observable

determinants of predicted incomes--age and education. We do this using couples only in the first

three years of their partnerships to obviate issues of selection out of the relationships and to retain

reasonable sample sizes. Also, to avoid partnerships that occurred after same-sex marriage was

legalized nationwide, the comparison is restricted to couples observed in the ACS in 2013 or 2014.

These restrictions leave 1,029 couples that could possibly have been legally married when or after

same-sex marriage was legalized in their jurisdictions and 970 couples whose partnership was

formed before it was legal where they currently reside.

        Divide the members of these couples into those with or without at least a college education

(roughly half of the partners in each group). The within-couple correlation of the indicator of

having this much education among partners in couples formed before legalization is 0.42; among

couples formed afterward the correlation is 0.35. Partners' ages, on the other hand, are slightly

more highly correlated among post-legalization couples (r = 0.79) compared to couples formed

before legalization (r = 0.75). These comparisons provide no strong evidence that couples formed

once same-sex marriage was legal were better or worse matched along observable characteristics

and thus might have been more or less able to generate a more rapidly increasing partnership

surplus in the early years of the potential legality of their relationship.

        Another possible difficulty is that couples might migrate to states that are friendly to same-

sex partnerships, so that the legal regime facing a couple might be endogenous. The ACS only



                                                   16
provides information on the partners' location one year before their inclusion in the survey.

Deleting the 1.3 percent of couples in which one partner lived elsewhere a year before their

inclusion in the ACS hardly changes the estimates in Table 4, with the parameter on DSame

increasing slightly (to 0.01153, s.e. = 0.00326). 15

         Another selection issue--non-random departure from marriage--might also alter the

results, since we know that the more rapid development of marital surplus reduces the likelihood

of the couple splitting up, perhaps because the partners remain happier with each other (Lundberg,

2012; Guven et al., 2012). Non-random selection out of marriage might be generating the

estimated growth of the marital surplus with duration; but the slight concavity that we observe is

not consistent with non-random selection. Involuntary selection out of marriage--through death

of one partner--is also not producing the results here: the estimate on the variable DSame is larger

when couples with even one partner age 50 or over are deleted.

         Among same-sex couples the majority of the longer-term relationships proceeded before

legality. The estimated slow increase in the surplus before legality is if anything upward biased by

any selection out of the partnership among couples whose surplus has been rising more slowly.

With only 6.5 percent of the same-sex couples having possibly been legally married for more than

4 years, it seems unlikely that non-random selection out of the partnership is generating the sharp

increases in surplus that are observed over the first few years of access to same-sex marriage.




15
   There is no significant difference in these one-year migration rates between couples located in states where same-
sex marriage was sanctioned before Obergefell (1.24 percent) compared to those where it was legalized through
Obergefell (1.35 percent). Estimating the model over these two roughly equal-sized sub-samples yields similar
estimates of the effect of DSame in each; and restricting the former sample to ACS respondents in 2013, 2014 and 2015
also does not alter the estimated impact of DSame.

                                                         17
   VI.      A Different Indicator of Partners' Commitment

         The results thus far have relied upon measuring the surplus family income over what would

be predicted given extremely detailed demographic information describing each partner. That the

surplus rises with the length of time that the partners could have been together under a legal regime

of same-sex marriage indicates the importance of the legal environment in affecting partners'

commitment. The surplus income, however, is a very general measure, not a specific indication of

the effect of legislation on an outcome that explicitly signifies the role of commitment. Partners'

home ownership is a specific measure; and given the transaction costs of owning rather than

renting, it does indicate commitment. In this section we thus examine how home ownership among

same-sex couples varies with the legal environment that they face.

   A. Home Ownership and the Legal Environment

         The ACS includes a question about whether a respondent is a renter or an owner (or has an

owner-occupied unit under contract). Among the same-sex couples (with partners ages 25-74) 76.1

percent list themselves as owners, a percentage that varies only slightly across the five years in the

sample. Using this (binary variable) as an indicator of commitment that might increase with greater

duration of a relationship and perhaps to a greater extent when/where same-sex relationships are

legally sanctioned, we estimate the same equations for which Table 4 presented results. The

estimated parameters are shown in Table 5, with Column (1) listing results of an equation specified

exactly as that underlying the results shown in Column (2) of Table 2, and the results in the other

columns corresponding to those in Columns (1), (3), (4) and (5) respectively of Table 4.

         The estimates for the simple quadratic in partnership duration (Column (1)) demonstrate

that the incidence of ownership rises with duration at a decreasing rate (and in this sample is




                                                 18
monotonically increasing over the entire length of the partnerships). 16 Column (2) shows the

results for the analog to the main equation discussed in the previous section. As in the estimates

shown in Table 4, additional years of a partnership increase the outcome (here, raise the likelihood

of home ownership). Spending more of those years under a regime of legalized domestic

partnership has no significant positive impact on the likelihood of ownership, just as it did not on

a household's surplus income. Additional years of the partnership when same-sex marriage is

legal, however, significantly increase the likelihood of home ownership--the same direction as

their effect on surplus income shown in Table 4. The results here are a remarkable confirmation

of those demonstrated for a different outcome in the previous section.

         Column (3) of Table 5 asks whether the results in Column (2) might be attributable to

partnerships forming when alternative arrangements, or same-sex marriages, were legalized.

Clearly this kind of selection is not producing the results: The estimated impacts of additional

duration of a partnership under legal regimes of domestic partnership or same-sex marriage hardly

change between the columns; and the estimated impacts of indicators of entry into a relationship

in the year when legalization occurred are statistically insignificant. Results in the final two

columns separate gay and lesbian couples. As in Table 4, the impact of legalization of same-sex

marriage has a greater impact upon the increase in gay couples' likelihood of home ownership

with duration, although here the estimates do not differ statistically from those for lesbian couples.




16
  Including family income as an additional regressor changes the relationship to partnership duration by less than 1 in
the third significant digit in the estimated parameters on D and D2. The impact of family income is, not surprisingly,
positive and very significant statistically, even with all the covariates included. This same absence of change when
family income is added to the equations pervades all the results presented in this section.

                                                          19
   B. Robustness of the Estimates of the Legislative Impact on Home Ownership

       To examine the robustness of these estimates, we consider the same issues as in Section

V.A, presenting the estimated impacts of DSame, in each case using the equation described in

Column (2) of Table 5 as the base. Eliminating couples with at least one partner age 60 or over

raises the estimated impact of a year of legalized same-sex marriage to 0.01506 (s.e. = 0.00425).

Restricting the sample to couples with both partners in their first marriage hardly changes the

estimated impact of DSame, 0.01279 (0.00370). Using couples that reside outside Massachusetts

produces a larger estimate than in Table 5, 0.01693 (s.e. = 0.00313).

       Accounting for the presence of children in the household slightly reduces the estimated

impact of DSame to 0.01193 (s.e. = 0.00345), Restricting the sample to non-Hispanic white couples

changes the estimated impact of DSame to 0.01266 (s.e. = 0.00371), while restricting it to couples

with neither partner non-Hispanic white raises the estimated impact of years under a legal same-

sex marriage regime to 0.01743 (s.e. = 0.00628), Accounting for attitudes toward same-sex

marriage using the Pew polling results also has only a minute impact on the estimated effect of

DSame, with the parameter estimate becoming 0.01280 (s.e. = 0.00370). These results all follow

very closely the same pattern as the robustness checks in Section V.

   VII.    A Test for Non-random Correlated Variation

       Additional years of a same-sex relationship spent under a regime of legal same-sex

marriage increase the household's income beyond what is predicted by large vectors of their

demographic characteristics and increase the likelihood of home ownership. Additional years spent

under legalized alternative arrangements for same-sex couples add little to these outcomes. What

if, however, other unmeasurable determinants of income and home ownership happen to be

correlated with the timing and location of the passage of legislation sanctioning same-sex marriage



                                                20
(or alternative arrangements), a correlation that might be generating the estimates in Tables 4 and

5?

     A. A Placebo Test Using Opposite-sex Couples

        To account for this potential difficulty, we estimate the same equations as in those tables,

except we do so over the samples of opposite-sex married couples from the ACS 2013-17, again

with both partners under age 75. We present these estimates in Columns (2)-(5) of Table 6. In

Column (1) we list the estimates describing the marital income surplus as a quadratic function of

the duration of the marriage. This equation is specified exactly like that in Column (2) of Table 2,

but the results are completely different. The surplus (family income in excess of that predicted by

very large vectors of demographic covariates) rises monotonically, but at the predicted decreasing

rate, as the duration of the marriage increases 17 Among same-sex couples there was a much weaker

relation between this outcome and the duration of the couple's reported time together.

        To examine the apparent effects of legal sanctioning of same-sex relationships on opposite-

sex couples, Column (2) presents estimates of the basic equation describing household income,

and Column (4) presents estimates describing home ownership, both based upon couples with both

partners under age 75. Extra years of an opposite-sex marriage spent at times and in locations

where same-sex marriage was legal increase the income surplus and increase the likelihood of

home ownership. There are positive, but statistically insignificant effects of additional years of

such marriages spent under regimes of legalized alternative arrangements for same-sex partners.

        One might be concerned that the samples of opposite- and same-sex partners are inherently

different, if for no other reason than, as shown in Table 1, the average duration of the former is


17
 Given that marriages that are less successful are more likely to terminate and given the length of opposite-sex
marriages in this sample, there may be some upward bias in the cross-section relationship between earnings and these
marriages' duration (Korenman and Neumark, 1991).


                                                        21
over twice that of the latter. To account for this potential non-comparability, we re-estimate the

models shown in Columns (2) and (4) using only opposite-sex couples married fewer than 20

years. This cuts the sample in half and yields a mean duration of reported marriage of 9.47 years,

almost identical to that of the entire sample of same-sex couples. 18 Estimates over this reduced

sample are shown in Columns (3) and (5) of Table 6. The only major change resulting from

excluding long-term married opposite-sex partners is that the estimate on DAlt becomes more

positive and statistically significant. The estimated effects of DSame on both outcomes reamin

significantly positive.

      B. The Net Effect of Legislation on Same-sex Couples

            The results in this Section suggest that the apparent relationship between the time a same-

sex couple has spent under a regime of legalized marriage and the couple's income surplus and

likelihood of home ownership may be due to correlated non-random factors affecting these

outcomes. To infer whether there is any special effect on same-sex partnerships of legalizing same-

sex marriage (or alternative protections for them), we calculate:

     (7a)           = (, - , ) ,

and

     (7b)           = (, - , ) ,

where the SameSex,k are the parameter estimates from Tables 4 and 5, and the OppSex,k are from

Table 6. 19




18
   Not surprisingly, the distributions of DSame and DAlt are quite similar in this sample to those in the sample of same-
sex couples, with 42.6 percent of these opposite-sex couples observed under regimes without or with just-enacted
same-sex marriage, and 69.4 percent observed in regimes without or just-enacted alternative legal protections.
19
  The estimated i are equivalent to interaction terms of the Di with an indicator of same-sex couples in equations
specified over both types of couple and in which a full set of interactions of all the covariates is also included.

                                                           22
       Table 7 lists estimates of the i. Columns (1) and (2) are based on comparisons of the

marital income surplus and the incidence of home ownership to all married opposite-sex couples,

Columns (3) and (4) to those opposite-sex couples whose marriage occurred fewer than 20 years

in the past. There is no evidence that additional years of a relationship spent under alternative legal

arrangements, such as domestic partnerships, raise the values of the outcomes; indeed, the impact

on the income surplus is significantly negative. Additional years of a relationship spent under a

regime of legalized same-sex marriage, however, significantly increase both the income surplus

and the likelihood of owning a home.

       Using the estimates of Same based on the comparisons in Columns (3) and (4) of this table,

consider the estimated effect of moving from a regime where same-sex marriage has just been

enacted to one where such marriages have been legal for 3 years (e.g., comparing the situations in

most states from 2015 to 2018). This is equivalent to moving from the 17th to the 87th percentile

of the distribution of DSame in the sample of same-sex couples. These 3 additional years together

with the possibility of strong legal protection raise the couple's surplus household income by 1.7

percent, and they increase its likelihood of owning a home by 3.6 percentage points (on a mean of

76 percent).

   VIII. Conclusion and Implications

       Among same-sex partners, unlike among opposite-sex partners, there is almost no relation

between the duration of their partnership and the excess of their family income, conditional on

their demographic characteristics. The same is true for their likelihood of home ownership. If more

of their time together was spent with the possibility of legalized alternative arrangements, that too

does not increase income or home ownership. Access to additional time in a legally sanctioned

same-sex marriage, however, increases the excess of household income over its predicted value,



                                                  23
identified as a marital surplus; and it also increases the likelihood of home ownership. Stated

differently, taking two otherwise observationally identical same-sex couples who have been

partnered for the same length of time, the couple whose partnership spent more time under the

institution of legalized same-sex marriage has a higher family income and a greater probability of

owning a home. The findings are consistent with the role of increased certainty about the length

of a horizon leading to increased commitment to the relationship and growing incentives to invest

in activities that raise the benefits from it.

        While much of the discussion about the benefits of legalization of same-sex marriage has

dealt with access to partners' health insurance or issues of inheritance, the fundamental ability to

develop a relationship is a basic economic benefit from legalization. It does not arise when

alternative partnerships are legalized, indicating that only with legalized marriage do the same

benefits accrue to same-sex partners that have been available to opposite-sex partners since

Western legal systems were established. The results here, coupled with prior evidence that

legalization does not reduce marriage rates among opposite-sex couples and does not lower

fertility, suggest that legalizing same-sex marriage increased the well-being of same-sex couples

without reducing the well-being of opposite-sex couples. Legalization appears to be generally

welfare-enhancing.




                                                 24
REFERENCES

D. Mark Anderson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa and Joseph Sabia, "Marriage Equality Laws and Youth
      Mental Health, "IZA Discussion Paper No. 12819, Dec. 2019.

M. V. Lee Badgett, "The Wage Effects of Sexual Orientation Discrimination," Industrial and
      Labor Relations Review, 48 (July 1995): 726-39.

Dan Black, Gary Gates, Seth Sanders and Lowell Taylor, "Demographics of the Gay and Lesbian
      Population in the United States: Evidence from Available Systematic Data Sources,"
      Demography, 37 (May 2000): 139-54.

Dan Black, Hoda Makar, Seth Sanders and Lowell Taylor, "The Earnings Effects of Sexual
      Orientation," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56 (April 2003): 449-69.

Abel Brodeur and Joanne Haddad, "Institutions, Attitudes and LGBT: Evidence from the Gold
      Rush," IZA Discussion Paper No. 11957, November 2018.

Ian Burn, "Not All Laws are Created Equal: Legal Differences in State Non-Discrimination Laws
       and the Impact of LGBT Employment Protections." Journal of Labor Research, 39 (2018):
       462-497.

Shuai Chen and Jan van Ours, "Subjective Well-being and Partnership Dynamics: Are Same-Sex
       Relationships Different?" Demography, 55 (Dec. 2018): 2299-2320.

---------------- and -------------------, "Symbolism Matters: The Effect of Same-Sex Marriage
         Legalization on Partnership Stability," Unpublished paper, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
         Dec. 2019.

Pierre-André Chiappori, "Collective Labor Supply and Welfare," Journal of Political Economy,
       100 (June 1992): 437-67.

Scott Delhommer, "Sexual Orientation Discrimination in the Workplace," Unpublished paper,
       University of Texas, Dec. 2019.

Marcus Dillender, "The Death of Marriage? The Effects of New Forms of Legal Recognition on
      Marriage Rates in the United States," Demography, 51 (2014): 563-85.

Robin Fisher, Geof Gee and Adam Looney, "Same-Sex Married Tax Filers after Windsor and
      Obergefell," Demography, 55 (2018): 1423-46.

Andrew Francis, Hugo Mialon and Handie Peng, "In Sickness and in Health: Same-Sex Marriage
      Laws and Sexually Transmitted Infections," Social Science and Medicine, 75 (2012): 1329-
      41.




                                               25
Cahit Guven, Claudia Senik and Holger Stichnoth, "You Can't Be Happier Than Your Wife:
       Happiness Gaps and Divorce," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 82
       (2012): 110-30.

Daniel Hamermesh, "Timing, Togetherness and Time Windfalls," Journal of Population
       Economics, 15 (2002): 601-23.

Mary E. Hansen, Michael E. Martell and Leanne Roncolato, "A Labor of Love: The Impact of
      Same-Sex Marriage on Labor Supply," Review of Economics of the Household, 2019.

Elliott Isaac, "Suddenly Married: Joint Taxation and the Labor Supply of Same-Sex Married
        Couples After U.S. v. Windsor," Tulane University, Working Paper No. 1809, Nov. 2018.

Lisa Jepsen and Christopher Jepsen, "An Empirical Analysis of the Matching Patters of Same-Sex
       and Opposite-Sex Couples," Demography, 39 (Aug. 2002): 435-53.

Sanders Korenman and David Neumark, "Does Marriage Really Make Men More Productive?"
       Journal of Human Resources, 26 (Spring 1991): 282-307.

Shelly Lundberg, "Personality and Marital Surplus," IZA Journal of Labor Economics (2012): 1:3.

Michael E. Martell, "Do ENDAs End Discrimination for Behaviorally Gay Men?," Journal of
      Labor Research, 34 (2013): 147-169.

Niko Matouschek and Imran Rasul, "The Economics of the Marriage Contract: Theory and
      Evidence," Journal of Law and Economics, 51 (Feb. 2008): 59-110.

Marjorie McElroy and Mary Jean Horney, "Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: Toward a
       Generalization of the Theory of Demand," International Economic Review, 22 (June 1981):
       333-49.

Sonia Oreffice, "Sexual Orientation and Household Decision Making. Same-Sex Couples' Balance
       of Power and Labor Supply Choices," Labour Economics, 18 (2011): 145-58.

Erik Plug and Peter Berkhout, "Effects of Sexual Preference on Earnings in the Netherlands,"
       Journal of Population Economics, 17 (2004): 117-31.

Erik Plug, Dinand Webbink and Nick Martin, "Sexual Orientation, Prejudice and Segregation,"
       Journal of Labor Economics, 32 (Jan. 2014):

Dario Sansone, "Pink Work: Same-Sex Marriage, Employment and Discrimination," Journal of
       Public Economics, forthcoming, 2020.

Mircea Trandifir, "Legal Recognition of Same-Sex Couples and Family Formation," Demography,
       52 (2015): 113-51.



                                              26
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics of Couples, ACS 2013-17*
                                                                      Same-sex
                               Opposite-Sex


                                                            All          Gay             Lesbian
 Average partners':

 Marriage Duration                  20.71                    9.37         9.70             9.06
                                   (13.86)                  (12.44)      (12.51)          12.33)

 Age                                49.55                   48.87         49.66           48.17
                                   (12.63)                  (12.35)      (11.98)          (12.59)

 % HS Grad                          23.8                     15.7         15.5             15.9

 % Some College                     29.3                     27.8         26.4             29.0

 % College                          22.7                     25.8         28.2             24.0

 % Graduate Degree                  14.9                     25.7         24.9             26.4

 % Non-Hispanic White               71.5                     74.7         73.7             75.5

 % Hispanic                         13.1                     11.6         12.8             10.6

 % Afr.-American                     7.1                     6.6           5.4              7.7

 % Asian-American                    6.4                     4.4           5.6              3.3

 N =                              2,668,134                 19,563         9,453          10,110

*All couples with both partners ages 25-74, with available demographic and income information, marital indicator
not flagged, and not living in group quarters. Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                       27
Table 2. Estimation of the Relation Between the Marital Surplus and Stated Partnership Duration,
ACS 2013-17, Dep. Var. ln(Family Income)*

                                           All                                  Gay                           Lesbian
Ind. Vars.:

Duration                        0.00109          -0.00006            0.00119          -0.00201           0.00065        -0.00029
                               (0.00049)         (0.00134)           (0.00087)          (0.0234)         (0.00067)      (0.00197)


(Duration/10)2                    -----          0.00003                -----           0.00008             -----       0.00002
                                                 (0.00003)                            (0.00005)                         (0.00005)


Adj. R2                          0.439            0.439                0.427             0.427             0.454          0.454

N=                                        19,563                                9,453                          10,110

 *Standard errors in parentheses. Includes for each partner usual weekly working hours, indicators of race/ethnicity, indicators
 for each year of age, for each level of educational attainment, for year in sample, for state of residence, and for metropolitan/rural
 location by type.




                                                             28
Table 3. Same-sex Partnership Duration Pre-Legal or While Partnership or Marriage Allowed,
Percent Distributions, ACS 2013-17 (N = 19,563)

Duration                   DSame                 DAlt
(Years)

 0                          35.1                 76.5
1-4                         58.4                 10.2
5-9                          5.0                  9.7
10-14                        1.5                  3.6




                                         29
    Table 4. Marital Surplus Since Partnerships Legal (Same-sex Partners), ACS 2013-17,
     Dep. Var.: ln(Family Income)*


                                            All                     Alla                    (All)b             Gay           Lesbian


    DSame                                  0.01057                  0.01032                 0.01290          0.01675         0.00545

                                           (0.00333)                (0.00396)               (0.00403)        (0.00602)       (0.00502)

    Initial year of legality                 -------                0.00168                 -0.02585          -------         -------
                                                                    (0.01810)               (0.01677)



    DAlt                                   -0.00356                 -0.00548                -0.00380         -0.00457        -0.00222
                                            (0.00163)               (0.00205)              (0.00166)         (0.00274)       (0.00264)

    Initial year of legality                 -------                -0.02188               -0.06806             -------       -------
                                                                    (0.02728)              (0.06081)

    D                                      0.00120                   0.00115                0.00092            0.00127       0.00073
                                           (0.00052)                (0.00054)               (0.00054)          (0.00084)     (0.00068)


    Adj. R2                                 0.439                     0.439                  0.440              0.428          0.454

    N=                                      19,563                   19,563                 19,563              9,453        10,110

    *Standard errors in parentheses clustered on states. Includes for each partner usual weekly working hours, indicators of
    race/ethnicity, indicators for each year of age, for each level of educational attainment, for year in sample, for state of residence,
    and for metropolitan/rural location by type.
 a
   In Column (2) the legality variables are for observations with no duration during the time of legality (included as 0
in Table 3).
b
In Column (3) the legality variables are for observations where the relationship began in the first year of legality--
were entered into when partnerships or marriages were recognized.




                                                               30
    Table 5. Housing Ownership Since Partnerships Legal (Same-sex Partners), ACS 2013-17,
    Dep. Var.: Own House*

                                            All                      All                     Alla              Gay           Lesbian

    DSame                                                           0.01272                 0.01301          0.01462         0.01172
                                                                    (0.00364)               (0.0406)         (0.00352)       (0.00525)

    Initial year of legality                                          ------                -0.00327           ------         -------
                                                                                            (0.01368)



    DAlt                                                            0.00216                 0.00206          -0.00191        0.00606
                                                                    (0.00188)              (0.0194)          (0.00226)       (0.00224)

    Initial year of legality                                         -------               0.00397              -------       -------
                                                                                           (0.04202)

    D                                       0.00397                  0.00128                0.00125            0.00124       0.00121
                                            (0.00078)               (0.00043)               (0.00048)          (0.00048)     (0.00045)


    D2                                     -0.00006                   ------                ------               ------       ------
                                           (0.00002)
    Adj. R2                                  0.220                    0.221                  0.221               0.206        0.247

    N=                                       19,563                  19,563                 19,563               9,453       10,110

    *Standard errors in parentheses clustered on states except in Column (1). Includes for each partner usual weekly working hours,
    indicators of race/ethnicity, indicators for each year of age, for each level of educational attainment, for year in sample, for state
    of residence, and for metropolitan/rural location by type.
a
In Column (3) the legality variables are for observations where the relationship began in the first year of legality--
were entered into when partnerships or marriages were recognized.




                                                               31
 Table 6. Marital Surplus Since Same-Sex Partnerships Legal (Opposite-sex Married Couples
 Partners), ACS 2013-17*

                          Dep. Var:                    Ln(Family Income)                                     Homeowner

                                         All                     All               D<20                    All            D<20

 DSame                                    ------                0.00288             0.00485              0.00872          0.00713
                                                              (0.00157)             (0.00182)           (0.00166)         (0.00115)



 DAlt                                     ------                0.00001             0.00053              0.00496          0.00358
                                                                (0.00035)           (0.00038)            (0.00253)        (0.00117)

 D                                      0.00629                 0.00380             0.00363              0.00278          0.00737
                                       (0.00050)                (0.00009)            (0.00036)           (0.00014)        (0.00032)

 D2                                     -0.00005                  ------              ------               ------          ------
                                        (0.000001)


 Adj. R2                                 0.409                     0.409               0.188              0.193            0.188

 N=                                   2,668,134                  2,668,134           1,281,714           2,676,303        1,285,609

*Standard errors in parentheses clustered on states except in Column (1). Includes for each partner usual weekly
working hours, indicators of race/ethnicity, indicators for each year of age, for each level of educational attainment,
for year in sample, for state of residence, and for metropolitan/rural location by type.




                                                           32
Table 7. Difference in Impacts of Extra Years of Partnership Under Different Legal Regimes on
Measures of Commitment, Same-sex vs. Opposite-sex Couples, ACS 2013-17*
                                                 Same-sex couples compared to:
                                All married opposite-sex                                All with D<20


                             Income surplus        Home owner           Income surplus        Home owner

Years Under Regime of:

Same-sex marriage               0.00769               0.00400                 0.00572           0.00559
                                (4.85)                 (2.38)                  (3.09)           (4.57)

Domestic partnership           -0.00357              -0.00281                -0.00409          -0.00142
                                 (9.59)                (1.11)                 (9.51)            (1.20)

*Absolute values of t-statistics in parentheses below the estimated differences. The calculations are based on the
estimates in Tables 4, 5 and 6.




                                                          33
