                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      FRED-QD: A QUARTERLY DATABASE FOR MACROECONOMIC RESEARCH

                                      Michael McCracken
                                          Serena Ng

                                      Working Paper 26872
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26872


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




Financial support to the second author is provided by the National Science Foundation (SES
1558623). We thank Aaron Amburgey and Joe McGillicuddy for excellent research assistance. A
special thanks to Yvetta Fortova for being the FRED insider who operationalized this project. The
views expressed here are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect official
positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, the Board of
Governors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael McCracken and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
FRED-QD: A Quarterly Database for Macroeconomic Research
Michael McCracken and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 26872
March 2020
JEL No. C30,C34,E01

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we present and describe a large quarterly frequency, macroeconomic database. The
data provided are closely modeled to that used in Stock and Watson (2012a). As in our previous
work on FRED-MD, our goal is simply to provide a publicly available source of macroeconomic
"big data" that is updated in real time using the FRED database. We show that factors extracted
from this data set exhibit similar behavior to those extracted from the original Stock and Watson
data set. The dominant factors are shown to be insensitive to outliers, but outliers do affect the
relative influence of the series as indicated by leverage scores. We then investigate the role unit
root tests play in the choice of transformation codes with an emphasis on identifying instances in
which the unit root-based codes differ from those already used in the literature. Finally, we show
that factors extracted from our data set are useful for forecasting a range of macroeconomic series
and that the choice of transformation codes can contribute substantially to the accuracy of these
forecasts.


Michael McCracken
Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis
PO Box 442
Saint Louis MO 63166
michael.w.mccracken@stls.frb.org

Serena Ng
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Serena.Ng@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

In our previous work, McCracken and Ng (2015), we describe and investigate a monthly
frequency database of macroeconomic variables called FRED-MD. At some level, FRED-
MD is not particularly innovative. It is, after all, just a collection of N = 128 standard
U.S. macroeconomic time series, dating back to 1959:01, that have primarily been taken
from FRED, maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and organized into
a .csv file. That description, however, misses the point. Our main goal was to facilitate
easy access to a standardized example of a data-rich environment that can be used for
academic research. By automating this data set, and maintaining a website that provides
monthly frequency vintages, those who are interested in conducting research on big data
can focus on the statistical problems associated with big data rather than having to put the
data set together themselves. This frees the practitioner from dealing with issues related
to, for example, updating the data set when new data is released, managing series that
become discontinued, and splicing series from different sources. More prosaically, FRED-
MD facilitates comparison of methodologies developed for a common purpose.
    FRED-MD has been successful. It has been used as a foil for applying big data meth-
ods including random subspace methods (Boot and Nibberin, 2019), sufficient dimension
reduction (Barbarino and Bura, 2017), dynamic factor models (Stock and Watson, 2016),
large Bayesian VARs (Giannone, Lenza, and Primiceri, 2018), various lasso-type regres-
sions (Smeekes and Wijler, 2018), functional principal components, (Hu and Park, 2017),
complete subset regression (Kotchoni, Lerous, and Stevanovich, 2019), and random forests
(Medeiros, Vasconcelos, Veiga, and Zilberman, 2019). In addition, these various meth-
ods have been used to study a wide variety of economic and financial topics including
bond risk premia (Bauer and Hamilton, 2017), the presence of real and financial tail risk
(Nicolò and Lucchetta, 2016), liquidity shocks (Ellington, Florackis, and Milas, 2017), re-
cession forecasting (Davig and Hall, 2019), identification of uncertainty shocks (Angelini,
Bacchiocchi, Caggiano, and Fanelli, 2019), and identification of monetary policy shocks
(Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco, 2017). Finally, and perhaps most rewarding, is that it
is described as the inspiration to the development of a Canadian version of FRED-MD
(Fortin-Gagnon, Leroux, Stevanovic, and Surprenant, 2018).
    While useful, FRED-MD has a glaring weakness. It does not include quarterly frequency
data and thus does not provide information on Gross Domestic Product, Consumption,
Investment, Government spending, and other macroeconomic series that come from the



                                             1
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). This is unfortunate because there are
plenty of examples in the literature in which a quarterly frequency, data-rich environment is
used for economic analysis. Examples include Stock and Watson (2012a,b), Schumacher and
Breitung (2008), Gefang, Koop, and Poon (2019), Rossi and Sekhposyan (2014), Gonçalves,
Perron, and Djogbenou (2017), Carrasco and Rossi (2016), Koopman and Mesters (2017),
and Koop (2013).
      In this paper we extend our previous work to a quarterly frequency data set we call
FRED-QD. The data set is currently operational and provided at the same website in
which FRED-MD is maintained. As we did with FRED-MD, FRED-QD is benchmarked
to previous work by Stock and Watson (S&W; 2012a). There, the authors organized a
collection of N = 200 quarterly frequency macroeconomic series dating back to 1959:Q1 that
they then used to analyze the dynamics of the Great Recession. Our quarterly frequency
version of their data set contains nearly all the series they used but, in addition, includes 48
more series with an emphasis on including series related to Non-Household Balance Sheets.
In total, the data set consists of N = 248 quarterly frequency series dating back to 1959:Q1.1
While many of the series are actually quarterly series, some are higher-frequency series that
have been aggregated up to the quarterly frequency - typically as quarterly averages of
monthly series.
      It's worth noting that we provide the data in levels - without transforming them in any
way. As such, some are stationary in levels while others likely need to be transformed by
taking logs, differencing, or both to reasonably be considered stationary. For each series
we provide benchmark transformation codes. If the series was in the S&W data set we
provide their transformation codes. For the additional series, many are taken from FRED-
MD and we therefore provide those benchmark transformation codes. One reason to do this
is to facilitate replication of the factor analysis provided in S&W as well as other results
that may have used a similar data set. Even so, given the well-documented changes in
volatility and persistence of macroeconomic series described in Campbell (2007) and Stock
and Watson (2007), it may be a good idea to reconsider the default transformation codes.
  1
    FRED-QD does not contain ten series that are in the original S&W data set. Using the S&W numbering
system these are #88 (Construction contracts), #130 (Index of sensitive materials prices), #131 (Spot mar-
ket price index of commodities), #165 & #166 (measures of credit spreads & excess bond premia developed
in Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012), #95 & #132 (ISM index of supplier deliveries and ISM commodity price
index), #152 & #164 (3-month Eurodollar deposit rate and its spread with a 3-month T-bill), and #187
(Dow Jones industrials index). In all but two cases, these are series not available in FRED. Three month
Eurodollar deposit rates are in FRED but are not updated on a regular basis because the source (i.e., the
OECD) does not update them regularly. The last of these, #187, has been replaced with the S&P 500
industrials index.



                                                    2
After providing more details on the data, we investigate this possibility through the lens of
unit root tests. While it is often the case that the unit root tests align with the original
transformation codes, the tests are not uniformly supportive.
        We then investigate whether factors extracted from FRED-QD are useful for forecasting
macroeconomic aggregates. In particular we focus on whether the unit root-implied trans-
formation codes matter for factor-based forecasting.2 Among the series that we forecast we
find that for real and financial series, factors estimated using the unit root-based transfor-
mation codes can provide additional predictive content but are more often dominated by
those using the original transformation codes. In contrast, we find that when forecasting
nominal price series, forecast accuracy is typically better when using factors estimated using
the unit root-based codes. This result coincides with evidence provided by Medeiros et al.
(2019) and Coulombe et al. (2019), who find that treating price inflation as I(0) leads to
better forecasts of inflation than treating it as I(1) - which is precisely what the benchmark
transformation codes recommend.
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a more detailed
description of the series in FRED-QD, as well as choices that were made when putting
them together. Section 3 presents a brief analysis of the behavior of factors extracted from
our data set with an emphasis on their relationship with factors extracted from the original
S&W data set. Section 4 constructs statistical leverage scores as a means of identifying
which series and data points have the greatest influence on the factors. Section 5 provides
a detailed investigation of the degree to which unit root tests agree with the benchmark
transformation codes. Section 6 investigates the degree to which factors are useful for fore-
casting, with particular attention to whether the unit root determined transformation codes
improve the accuracy of the forecasts relative to the original codes. Section 7 concludes. A
detailed list of the series is provided in the appendix.


2        FRED-QD

As with FRED-MD, the goal of FRED-QD is to provide a readily accessible, easy-to-use
macroeconomic database that can form the basis of research in big data. To do so, we make
the data set publicly available at the same website as FRED-MD so that anyone can have
    2
    Throughout we focus on factors that are I (0). In contrast, Choi and Jeong (2018) provide theoretical
and empirical results comparing the forecast accuracy of factors when one has the opportunity to construct
them so that they are either I (0) or I (1). In the context of autoregressive models, Diebold and Kilian (2000)
provide simulation evidence on a similar issue.




                                                      3
access.3 Importantly, a new vintage of the data set is created on the last business day of each
month. This means that at the end of each month, (i) the most recent data releases have
been added, (ii) revisions to the series in previous quarters have been taken on board, and
(iii) institutional changes to existing series, periodically made by the statistical agencies,
have been appropriately accounted for (e.g., a substitute series is found for a discontinued
series).
      Based on feedback we received for the FRED-MD project, the most recent vintage is
always given a hotlink denoted "current." This allows the user to include that link within
their code and thus always have access to the most recent vintage without having to go to
the website manually and download the file. Previous vintages of the data set are retained
on the website. By retaining the older vintages we facilitate replication of other research
that has used FRED-QD. For example, if a researcher develops a new statistical method
for working with big data, and wants to compare their results with that from an existing
paper, one can go back and find the exact vintage of FRED-QD used in that paper so that
differences in results can be attributed to the method rather than the data set.
      On the website, we also provide a "Changes to FRED-QD" file that keeps a running tally
of modifications that have occurred across the history of FRED-QD. For example, when
creating the September 2018 vintage of FRED-QD, three Non-Household Balance Sheet se-
ries were discontinued and replaced with comparable series. This event, and the subsequent
changes in mnemonics, was documented in the Changes file. It's worth noting that changes
can also arise due to issues not associated with statistical agencies. For example, legal issues
regarding FRED's ability to post a given series, or to do so only with a substantial delay,
sometimes arise. Examples of such are provided in the Changes to FRED-MD file, and one
can expect similar issues to ultimately arise in FRED-QD.
      With these issues in mind, FRED-QD consists of 248 quarterly series. A full list of
the data is given in the Appendix. FRED-QD seeks to keep roughly the same coverage
as the S&W data set while allowing the experts at FRED to handle data revisions and
definitional changes. The series are classified into 14 groups: NIPA; Industrial Production;
Employment and Unemployment; Housing; Inventories, Orders, and Sales; Prices; Earnings
and Productivity; Interest Rates; Money and Credit; Household Balance Sheets; Exchange
Rates; Other; Stock Markets; and Non-Household Balance Sheets. These groups are similar
to, but not the same as, those used in S&W. The original groups included (i) Housing Starts,
(ii) Housing Prices, and (iii) Stock Prices, Wealth, & Household Balance Sheets, which we
  3
      https://research.stlouisfed.org/econ/mccracken/fred-databases/



                                                     4
have rearranged to form the Housing, Household Balance Sheets, and Stock Markets groups.
In addition, Non-Household Balance Sheets is a completely new group.
      Of the 248 series, 70 series were not trivially accessed from FRED and needed some
kind of massaging prior to being comparable to the corresponding series in S&W. A large
portion of those that needed massaging were simply a matter of making nominal series real
using a deflator. For each of these series this procedure is explained in the data appendix.
For the remaining modified series, a summary of the changes is provided in Table 1. For
clarity, all series that required some form of modification are tagged with an "x" to indicate
that the variable has been adjusted and thus differs from the series at source.
      When producing each vintage of the data set, an additional quarterly observation is
added only after the first calendar month of the current quarter, which typically means
once the first NIPA data, associated with the previous calendar quarter, is released. For
example, the January, February, and March 2019 vintages of FRED-QD report quarterly
data associated with 2018:Q4 but no data associated with 2019:Q1. The first vintage that
contains any 2019:Q1 data is the April 2019 vintage. Within a calendar quarter, the existing
quarterly values can be revised due to monthly frequency revisions of quarterly series like
GDP or monthly frequency series like Retail Sales.
      Due to data availability and the timing of data releases, FRED-QD is not a balanced
panel. As we noted above, we introduce a new calendar quarter to the panel one month
into the following quarter. In this vintage, any series that is released with more than a
one-month lag is treated as missing (e.g., series associated with the Productivity and Costs
release by the BLS). In the following vintage, any series that is released with more than a
two-month lag is treated as missing (e.g., series associated with the Financial Accounts of
the United States (Z.1) data release by the Federal Reserve Board). In the final vintage
for that calendar quarter, all series have typically been released and there are no missing
values.4 As an example, the vintages for July, August, and September 2019 were missing 41,
18, and 0 observations associated with 2019:Q2, respectively. Another, less-regular reason
for missing observations arises during government shutdowns. For example, U.S. statistical
agencies were closed from December 22, 2018 through January 25, 2019. Because this led to
delays in the release of many series, the January 2019 vintage of FRED-QD, which typically
would be missing 40 or so observations associated with 2018:Q4 data, is instead missing 87
observations.
  4
    The S&P PE ratio and dividend yield are taken from Shiller's website. These series are updated less
consistently than the other series in the dataset. In some idiosyncratic cases, these may be missing for a
longer sequence of vintages.


                                                    5
    All but thirty-eight series are available starting in 1959:Q1. There are a variety of reasons
for series to have missing observations at the beginning of the sample: (1) Some series, like
Housing Permits, simply didn't exist in 1959:Q1 and only became available in 1960:Q1.
(2) Similarly, the Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment is missing two observation at
the beginning of the sample because the survey was not conducted on a regular basis until
1959:Q4. (3) For other series like the Trade-weighted Exchange Rate, the series is available
in FRED only through 1973:Q1, and we have not found other documented sources with
which to splice the series. (4) Finally, FRED primarily holds NAICS data (though some
older SIC data exist and are used whenever possible) from the Census Manufacturers Survey,
and hence a few Value of Manufacturer's Orders components like Nondefense Capital Goods
and especially Consumer Goods have a limited history.
    In many applications of big data, it is expected that the series are stationary. Since
it is clear that not all of the series in FRED-QD are stationary in levels, we also provide
benchmark transformation codes that are intended to transform the series so that they are
stationary. In each instance, a decision is made to treat the series in levels or log-levels,
and then, based on whether that series is considered I (0), I (1), or I (2), the variable is
differenced to the appropriate degree. For a given series x, these codes take the following
forms: (1) no transformation; (2) xt ; (3) 2 xt ; (4) log (xt ); (5)  log(xt ); (6) 2 log(xt );
and (7) (xt /xt-1 - 1.0). For most of the series, these codes are the original transformations
used by S&W. For series that we've added, many are monthly series taken from FRED-MD
that we have aggregated to a quarterly frequency. For these series we use the benchmark
transformation codes reported in FRED-MD. Finally, we also provide an indicator that
identifies those series in FRED-QD that were used by S&W to estimate factors.


3    Factor Estimates

In this section we provide an analysis of principal component analysis (PCA)-based factors
extracted from FRED-QD. Principal components remain a simple way of transforming the
information content in a large number of series into a smaller number of manageable series.
Once the components have been extracted they have been used for many purposes, including
recession dating (Stock and Watson, 2016), forecasting (Boivin and Ng, 2005), measuring
uncertainty (Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015), and evaluating monetary policy (Bernanke
and Boivin, 2003). Under certain assumptions, principal components provide consistent
estimates of common factors and we will use the two terms interchangeably. We are mainly
interested in differences in the data through the lens of PCA rather than the method itself.

                                               6
      Another motivation for analyzing the factors is that we have purposefully benchmarked
FRED-QD to the large data set of quarterly frequency series used by S&W. In that paper,
the authors extract PCA-based factors and use them to disentangle the causes of the Great
Recession. Hence, as a means of verifying that we have adequately captured the information
in their data set, we also provide a direct comparison of factors extracted from FRED-QD
to those extracted from the original data set used by S&W.5 To do so, we use the September
2019 vintage of FRED-QD, but only those observations and series that were used to estimate
factors in the original data set. Keeping in mind that FRED-QD does not have 10 of the
series in the original data set, but provides a substitute for one of them, this ultimately
gives us T = 211 observations ranging from 1959:Q1 to 2011:Q3 and N = 125 or 132 series
when using FRED-QD or the original data set, respectively.
      Because FRED-QD has missing values and outliers that we treat as missing,6 we estimate
the factors by PCA adapted to allow for missing values. Our approach to doing so is closely
related to the EM algorithm given in Stock and Watson (2002). Each series is demeaned and
normalized to unit variance using the sample means and standard deviations respectively.
If the time t = 1, ..., T observation for series i = 1, ..., N is missing, we initialize it to the
unconditional sample mean based on the non-missing values (which is zero since the data are
demeaned and standardized) so that the panel is re-balanced. Based on this panel, and for
a given number of factors r, a T × r matrix of factors F = (f1 , . . . , fT ) and a N × r matrix
of loadings  = (1 , . . . , N ) are estimated using the normalization that  /N = Ir . We
then update the missing values for each series from zero to ^ f ^
                                                              i t . This is multiplied by the
standard deviation of the series and the mean is re-added. The resulting value is treated
as an observation for series i at time t, and the mean and variance of the complete sample
are re-calculated. The process of demeaning, standardizing, and estimating the factors and
loadings is repeated using the updated panel. The iteration stops when the factor estimates
do not change.7
      We then select the number of significant factors r. We use the ICp criteria developed in
Bai and Ng (2002), which are generalizations of Mallow's Cp criteria for large dimensional
panels. The number of factors is chosen to minimize the sum of squared residuals while
                                                                              N +T
keeping the model parsimonious. For this analysis, we use the penalty         NT     log(min(N, T )),
which is shown by Bai and Ng (2002) to have good finite sample properties. This criterion
  5
    The data are currently posted on Mark Watson's website. https://www.princeton.edu/~mwatson/publi.html
  6
    See Section 4 for further discussion.
  7
    The dominant factors are almost identical when the missing values are imputed using the method in Bai
and Ng (2019b).



                                                  7
is referred to as ICp2 . For both the original data set and the subset of FRED-QD used for
this comparison, ICp2 selects r = 4 factors.
      In Figure 1 we plot the four factors based on each data set. The NBER recession
dates are shaded in grey. Visually, each of the four factors is very similar across the entire
sample.8 This is particularly true for the first factor for which the two estimates are nearly
identical and have a correlation exceeding 0.99. The remaining three correlations are only
marginally lower, with values of 0.988, 0.968, and 0.980 for the second through fourth
factors, respectively.
      While the figure gives a visual characterization of the similarities of the factors, it is
instructive to provide a more quantitative comparison. We do this by identifying which
series are best explained by the factors. To do so, we regress the i-th series in the data set
on a set of the r factors. For k = 1, . . . , r, this yields coefficients of determination Ri (k )2
for each series i. Because the factors are orthogonal and organized in decreasing order of
their respective eigenvalues, the incremental explanatory power of factor k for series i is
mRi 2 (k ) = R2 (k ) - R2 (k - 1), k = 2, . . . , r with mR2 (1) = R2 (1). The average importance
              i         i                                  i        i
                              1 N
                     2
of factor-k is mR (k ) = N i=1 mRi (k ). Table 2 lists mR2 (k ) and the ten series with
                                           2

              2 (k ) for factor k . The upper panel does so for the factors estimated using
the highest mRi
FRED-QD, while the lower panel does the same but with the original S&W data set. To
simplify interpretation of the factors, we also include the group numbers for each of the ten
series.
      A quick look at Table 2 immediately reinforces the visual similarity from Figure 1.
Regardless of which data set is used to estimate the factors, the total variation explained
by all four factors is nearly the same (i.e., 0.41), and the mR2 (k ) values are nearly the same
as well (i.e., 0.21, 0.09, 0.06, and 0.05 for factors k = 1, ..., 4). The similarity also carries
                                              2 (k ) values. While the rank ordering of the
over to the top ten series with the highest mRi
series varies a bit, 10, 8, 9, and 9 of the top ten series coincide across the four factors,
respectively. This is convenient because it implies that the interpretation of the factors
remains unchanged when using FRED-QD rather than the original S&W data set. The
first factor is a real activity indicator that weighs heavily on series from the employment,
industrial production, and NIPA groups. The second factor is dominated by forward-looking
series such as term interest rate spreads and inventories. The third factor has explanatory
power concentrated in the prices group as well as housing sector prices. Finally, the fourth
factor is extensively weighted on both the price group and exchange rates.
  8
      The factors have been multiplied by -1 where necessary to make the two estimates positively correlated.



                                                      8
   Figure 1 and Table 2 suggest that FRED-QD provides a reasonable replication of the
original data set - at least through the lens of PCA-based factor analysis. Even so, it also
contains additional series not in the original S&W data set, and thus it is reasonable to
wonder if those series provide additional information. Using all of the series and observations
in FRED-QD, ICp2 selects three additional factors bringing the total up to r = 7. These
are plotted in Figure 2. The first two factors remain closely related to those constructed
using the S&W data set with correlations of 0.99 and 0.96, respectively. Beyond that,
the correlations drop off dramatically with the third and fourth factors only exhibiting
correlations of roughly 0.70.
   The similarities and differences are more readily seen in Table 3. There we report the
marginal R2 values associated with the seven factors identified using the entirety of FRED-
QD. As expected, the first two factors retain the same interpretation as those reported in
Figure 1 and Table 2. The first is a real activity factor that correlates strongly with series
in the Employment and Industrial Production groups, while the second remains a forward-
looking factor that correlates heavily on interest rate term spreads as well as housing permits
and starts. In contrast, while the third factor from the S&W data set was a mixture of
consumer prices and housing prices, when estimated using FRED-QD, the third factor is a
                                                    2 (3) values associated with the Prices
pure consumer price index with all of the top ten mRi
group. In contrast, when using the full FRED-QD data set, the fourth factor appears to
be a second employment-oriented factor rather than a second prices-oriented factor, as we
observed using the S&W data set.
   The interpretation of factors four to seven are less clear. While most of these factors
exhibit considerable correlation with series in the Earnings and Productivity group (i.e.,
group 7), a variety of other groups are represented. The fifth factor also correlates with
Employment and both the Household and Non-Household Balance Sheet groups, while the
sixth factor correlates with several series in the Money and Credit group. Finally, the
seventh factor appears to be a weaker version of the fifth factor insofar as it too correlates
heavily with several series in the Household Balance Sheet group. It is useful to note that
these smaller factors are discarded using the criterion in Bai and Ng (2019a) that guards
against outliers, an issue to which we now turn.


4 Outliers and High Leverage Observations

As previously noted, we estimate the factors after first identifying any outliers. In this
section we provide a brief investigation into the importance of these outliers and the related

                                              9
concept of high leverage observations. As in S&W, we define an outlier as an observation
that deviates from the sample median by more than ten interquartile ranges. By this defini-
tion, the S&W data set and the corresponding subset of FRED-QD each have seven outliers.
These are identified in 1971:Q1 and 1997:Q1 for a consumer credit series, in 2008:Q4 for
three producer price series, and in 2010:Q2 for federal employment and consumer loans.9
The full FRED-QD data has 30 outliers, 17 of which are found between 2008:Q1 and
2010:Q4 and are predominantly bank reserves variables. Two interest rate variables and
a prices variable are also identified to be outliers in 1980:Q3/Q4, as well as oil price in
1974:Q1 and six Non-Household Balance Sheets variables between 2017:Q4-2018:Q1. As
exogeneity of these events is questionable, it is also debatable whether they should be re-
moved. In fact, without the outlier adjustment, the ICp2 criterion identifies eight factors
in the data instead of seven. Nonetheless, the first six factors estimated with and without
outlier adjustments are almost perfectly correlated, suggesting that the effect of outliers on
the largest factors is quite minimal.
       The statistics literature makes a distinction between outliers and high leverage points.10
In a regression context, a data point is said to have high leverage if its x values are far
from the mean of its xi values. FRED-QD has 248 series and 242 quarters, and it seems
likely that some series and some data points are more important than others. As discussed
in Mahoney (2011), statistical leverage scores can be informative about the non-uniform
structure of importance in the data. Consider a T × N data matrix X with singular
value decomposition X = U V  and assumed to have a low rank component of rank r.
                                                                           
                                                         ~, 
The factor estimates reported above can be expressed as (F  ~  ) = ( T Ur , N Vr Dr ). A
different aspect of the eigenvectors will now be explored. Let u(t) be the t-th row of the
T × r matrix of left singular vectors Ur , and v (i) be the i-th column of the r × N matrix of
right singular vectors Vr . Define the normalized row and column leverage scores as

                                        u(t) 2 2                      v (i) 2
                                  pt = T               ,        pi = n        2
                                                                                   .
                                       t=1  u ( t )  2
                                                     2               i=1   v (i) 2
                                                                                 2

       T              N       i
As       t=1 pt   =   i=1 p       = 1, these probabilities also define an "importance sampling dis-
tribution" for the rows and the columns of X , respectively. The row scores are simply
the diagonal entries of the "hat" matrix sometimes used to detect influential observations
   9
     For the S&W data, these are REVOLSL, WPU0561, PPIDC, PPITM, CES9091000001, and CON-
SUMER. For the subset of FRED-QD data, PPITM is replaced by WPSID61.
  10
     In a regression setting with predictors x, an observation is an outlier if the residual or its standardized
variant is far from its mean. An influential point is one whose inclusion changes the estimates. See Chatterjee
and Hadi (1986) and Rousseeuw and Zomeren (1990).


                                                           10
in regression settings. Here, it is used to evaluate the strength of each row of the top r
left singular vectors, giving information about the relative importance of the time series
data points. The column score evaluates the strength of each column of the top r right
singular vectors and hence is informative about the relative importance of the data in the
cross-section.
    We compute the row leverage scores for the full and balanced FRED-QD data with and
without outlier adjustment. The results are similar, and hence to conserve space, in Figure
3 we plot the leverage scores for the full-sample of FRED-QD without outlier adjustment.
If the information is uniformly dispersed over time, each of the T observations should have
             1
a score of   T.   In the FRED-QD data, six data points account for 20% of the mass in pt :
2008:Q4, 2009:Q1, 1975:Q1, 1980:Q4, 1980:Q2, and 2009:Q2. These roughly coincide with
the outliers detected by the method of interquartile range.
                                                               1
    Turning to the column leverage scores, each pi should be   N   if information in the series is
evenly dispersed. This is apparently not the case, as the (unreported) histogram of pi is quite
skewed. For the sub-panel of FRED-QD data corresponding to the S&W data set, the series
with the top three scores are the US/Euro exchange rate (EXUSEU), WPSID61, and PPIDC
regardless of whether an outlier adjustment is made. For the full FRED-QD panel, the
series with the top scores are COMPRMS, EXUSEU, GS5 without outlier adjustment, and
NWPIx, S&P 500, and real household networth (TNWBSHNOx) with outlier adjustment.
Apparently, the variables added to the full panel do change the information content of the
panel. Nonetheless, these variables are already known to play an important role in business
cycle modeling. This analysis simply reinforces their importance.


5    Transformation Codes

As we noted earlier, the data set provides benchmark transformation codes that are designed
to make each series stationary. After having made the decision that the series should be
managed in levels or log-levels, the transformation codes are first and second differences
based on whether the series is believed to be I (0), I (1), or I (2). In this section we revisit
the benchmark transformation codes and do so through the lens of unit root tests. In
particular, we apply unit root tests to each series in FRED-QD to see whether or not the
unit root tests imply the benchmark transformation codes.
    For each series we apply two variants of the Dickey-Fuller GLS tests as delineated in
Elliott, Rothenberg, and Stock (1996). These two tests differ only in how the number
of autoregressive lags are chosen. One uses the Schwarz's Information Criterion (SIC) to

                                              11
choose the appropriate number of lags, and the other uses a Modified Akaike Information
Criteron (MAIC), developed in Ng and Perron (2001).11 In each case the maximum number
of lags is based on the recommendation in Schwert (1989) and hence for a given sample size
T , kmax = 12(T /100)1/4 .
    We use the results of these tests to identify the appropriate transformation codes. For
example, recall that for the DFGLS tests, the null hypothesis is that the series is I (1).
Hence, if we fail to reject, the series is differenced and the test is repeated until we reject
the null. Depending on when this algorithm rejects the null determines the transformation
code. For each test, and at each stage of the algorithm, we consider nominally 5% tests of
the respective null.
    For brevity we do not report the results of all the unit root tests. Instead, in Figure
4 we provide histograms of the implied transformation codes for all the series.12 In the
top diagonal of the first panel is the histogram of the codes reported in FRED-QD. All
series have transformation codes of either 1, 2, 5, or 6, and hence no series are considered
stationary in log-levels (4) or second differences of levels (3). By far the bulk of the codes
are 5s, and hence the series are considered stationary in log-first differences. These patterns
change when we consider the unit root-based transformation codes. The largest changes
occur when using the MAIC variant of the DFGLS test. Here we find that much of the mass
associated with a code of 5 has shifted into a code of 6 leading to more than a doubling of the
number of series that require double differencing in log-levels. That said, some mass from
the 5s has settled into the 4s, suggesting that some of the series may be I (0) in log-levels
rather than log first differences. There is also a modest shift in mass from the 1s and 2s into
3s and hence the tests indicated some of the series are stationary in the second difference
of the levels. In contrast, the SIC-based DFGLS test implies more modest deviations from
the original transformation codes. There remains almost no mass on the 3s and 4s. The
largest deviation from the benchmark codes comes from a shift of mass from the 6s into the
5s and hence the SIC-based test indicates that some of the series have been overdifferenced.
    The histograms convey the fact that the unit root tests can imply transformation codes
that don't align with the benchmark codes. Nevertheless, they do not convey where the
changes are coming from. To address this issue, in Table 4 we report the median transfor-
   11
      In unreported results we chose lag lengths based on the the Sequential t-test (Seq.t), as described in Ng
and Perron (1995). The results were very similar to those for the MAIC and hence we do not report them
for brevity.
   12
      We omit nonborrowed reserves from these figures because it is the only series with a transformation code
of 7. This code exists because nonborrowed reserves, which should be positive, turned negative during the
financial crisis. This precludes the use of transformation code 5.



                                                      12
mation by group. For the MAIC-based tests, much of the shift toward log second differences
occurs in the NIPA, Industrial Production, and Earnings and Productivity groups. In con-
trast, for the SIC-based tests, the biggest change occurs for Prices in which case the test
recommends treating Prices as log first differences instead of log-second differences. Both
versions of the DFGLS tests disagree with the benchmark codes for Housing, of which
several of the series are considered stationary in log-levels and hence do not need to be
differenced.
   It's clear that the unit root tests recommend changes in some of the transformations.
Even so, it's worth keeping in mind that many of the unit root-implied codes continue to
coincide with the benchmark codes. It therefore need not be the case that factors based
on the benchmark codes deviate significantly from factors based on the unit root codes.
In Figure 5 we plot the first four factors based on the benchmark codes along with the
corresponding factors constructed after using the unit root test determined codes. For the
1st factor, the SIC- and benchmark-implied factors largely coincide and exhibit a correlation
of 0.95. In contrast, the MAIC-based variant deviates substantially from that constructed
using the benchmark codes, with which they have a modest correlation of 0.56. For the
remaining factors, substantial differences exist among the unit root-implied factors and
those based on the benchmark codes.
   In Table 5, more detailed evidence on the differences in the factors can be gleaned from
the marginal R2 values for the factors plotted in Figure 5. Rather than go through these
in detail we make only a few notable observations. One noticeable distinction among the
factors is that while the MAIC-based factors remain heavily concentrated in the employment
and industrial production groups, the mR2 (1) values are substantially lower than those
associated with the benchmark and SIC-based codes. This likely follows from the propensity
of the MAIC-based unit root tests to treat many NIPA and employment series as I (2) rather
than I (1), which, apparently, leads to a loss of information due to overdifferencing. Another
is the relatively clear interpretability of the SIC-based factors. The first factor is a clear
employment factor, while the second is a pure consumer prices factor. The third is arguably
an unemployment factor, and the fourth is heavily correlated with producer prices with an
emphasis on energy and, specifically, oil prices.


6 Predictability of Factor-based Models

In this section we investigate the usefulness of factors for predicting macroeconomic aggre-
gates. The structure of the forecasting exercise is motivated by a similar forecasting exercise

                                              13
conducted by Stock and Watson (2012b). Specifically, we construct 1- and 4-quarter-ahead
forecasts of Real GDP (log-level), Industrial Production (log-level), the Unemployment rate
(level), and the Federal Funds Rate (level), as well as the CPI, PCE, GDP deflator, and
PPI price indices (each in log-level). These variables were chosen based on the results of
the unit root tests in the previous section, with an eye toward emphasizing the role that
transformation codes have on the predictive content of factors. For each permutation of the
eight dependent variables Y and two horizons h, we have three goals: (1) document that the
FRED-QD factors have predictive content above-and-beyond that contained in a baseline
autoregressive model, (2) document whether the choice of transformation codes can have
a material effect on the predictive content of factors extracted from FRED-QD, and (3)
document those factors that exhibit the most predictive content for the target variables.
     In each case, the models used for forecasting take the direct multistep form
                                        p-1
                                        
                                               j yt-h-j +  (h) ft-h + t
                         (h)                    (h)                                 (h)
                        yt     = h +                                                                         (1)
                                        j =0

where                                                             
                                          Yt       if Yt is I (0) 
                        (h)
                       yt     =       Yt - Yt-h    if Yt is I (1)  .                                         (2)
                                                                  
                                 Yt - Yt-h - hYt-h if Yt is I (2)
                                                                            (1)
For brevity, when h = 1 we drop the superscript and define yt                     as yt . At each forecast origin
                                                                                          (h)
the model is estimated by OLS, and the h-step-ahead forecast of yt+h is then constructed
as
                                                 p-1
                                                 
                               y
                                (h)
                               ^t,h = ^ h,t +           ^(h) yt-j + ^(h) ft .                                (3)
                                                         j,t         t
                                                 j =0

Forecasts of Yt+h are then computed in accordance with the order of integration of Y :
                                                (h)                                
                                               y
                                               ^t,h                 if Yt is I (0) 
                        ^t,h =                        (h)
                        Y                Yt + y
                                              ^t,h                  if Yt is I (1)  .                        (4)
                                                              (h)
                                                                                   
                                      Yt + hYt +            y
                                                            ^t,h    if Yt is I (2)

     Following Stock and Watson (2012b), we fix the number of autoregressive lags p at 4
and only consider a single lag of the factor(s). Since it is not obvious which of the 7 factors
should be used to forecast any particular target variable, and since those factors could vary
by horizon, we consider all 27 - 1 = 127 possible choices of ft as a potential predictor.
Hence, in some cases, f is a scalar consisting of just one of the 7 possible factors, while in
other models f is a vector consisting of up to all 7 factors.


                                                       14
    All models are estimated using a rolling window of 106 (109) observations when h = 1
(4). The first forecast origin is R = 1985:Q1 + h, and the last forecast origin is T =
2018:Q4 - h, for a total of P = 134 (128) forecasts. At each forecast origin we estimate
the factors two different ways. For the first, we use the benchmark transformation codes
provided in FRED-QD. For the second, at each forecast origin we perform unit root tests
on all series in FRED-QD using the past 106 (109) observations when h = 1 (h = 4). Based
on the outcome of these tests, we select transformation codes using the same algorithms
described in the previous subsection. For brevity, we only consider the SIC-based DFGLS
unit root test in this forecasting exercise. Using the MAIC-based unit root test leads
to different results. Our goal is not to provide the "correct" set of results, but rather
to demonstrate that sticking to previously established transformation codes may lead to
inferior results.13
    It's important to keep in mind that by taking a rolling window approach to forecasting,
we have potentially time-varying transformation codes and this has multiple effects on our
forecasting exercise. Obviously, different transformation codes lead to distinct estimated
factors as shown in Figure 5. In addition, given our direct multi-step forecasting environ-
ment, different transformation codes also lead to time varying definitions of y (h) . For this
reason we measure accuracy of the forecasts relative to Y rather than y (h) . In particu-
lar, we evaluate accuracy of the forecasts under quadratic loss using mean squared errors
     
P -1 T t=R (Yt+h - Yt,h ) .
                   ^ 2
    For each target variable Y and horizon h, there is a benchmark AR(4) model that
is estimated using the original (OLD) transformation codes. In addition, there are 127
models that augment the benchmark AR(4), with at least one factor formed using the OLD
transformation codes. The same is done using transformation codes based on the unit-root
testing algorithm (NEW). This leads to 128 more models, including an AR(4) based on the
NEW codes and 127 models that augment this AR(4) with at least one of the seven factors.
    For each of the 254 models that include at least one factor, we conduct a one-sided
test of the null that the factors do not contribute finite-sample predictive content relative
to the benchmark AR(4). The null is stated in the context of the test of unconditional
finite-sample predictive ability advocated by Giacomini and White (2006). However, in
contrast to their recommended testing procedure, we follow Coroneo and Fabrizio (2018)
and apply a Fixed-b asymptotic approximation to the test statistic. Specifically, for each
  13
     In part we focus on the SIC-based factors because of our intution on what some transformations "should"
be. For example, MAIC-based tests recommend treating real GDP as I (2) in log-levels. This does not strike
us as reasonable.


                                                    15
model j = 1, ..., 254 that includes at least one factor, the test statistic takes the form
       T
P -1/2         u2
              (^         -u ^2t+h,j )/^ j where  ^j2 is an estimate of the long-run variance of
         t=R t+h,AR                                                                    
^2
ut+h,AR - ^
          u 2
            t+h,j . This is estimated    using the Bartlett kernel and bandwidth  1 . 3 P  + 1 as
advocated in Lazarus, Lewis, Stock, and Watson (2018). Critical values for the asymptotic
distribution are approximated using the formula provided in Table 1 of Kiefer and Vogelsang
(2005; p. 1146).
       While this testing procedure allows us to ascertain whether the factors exhibit finite-
sample predictive content beyond that in the benchmark AR(4), there is an obvious multiple-
testing problem. To mitigate the potential for multiple testing, we provide complementary
evidence on accuracy using the model confidence set procedure advocated by Hansen, Lunde,
and Nason (2011). This allows us to identify the subset of all 256 models that are statistically
as accurate as the single most accurate model. Note that this information is related to, but
not the same as, the previous test comparing each model to the benchmark. For example,
it could be the case that the benchmark is the best model, and hence factors do not provide
additional predictive content. Even so, many of the factor-based models may be contained
in the model confidence set because they are approximately as accurate as the benchmark.
With this difference of interpretation in mind, we use the TR,M  maxi,j M |ti,j | statis-
tic when implementing the model confidence set procedure. The distribution of this test
statistic is approximated using a circular block bootstrap with block length l = 12 using
software distributed by Sheppard (2018).To help identify the most accurate models, we use
a restrictive significance level of 25% - that is associated with the model confidence set
M75 .14
       Rather than report all of the testing results, we focus on a concise subset that provides
evidence on our three forecasting goals. For each permutation of target variable Y and
horizon h, we report the root mean squared error (RMSE) for the benchmark AR(4), along
with the relative RMSEs associated with the ten most accurate models. An asterisk denotes
whether or not the models were more accurate than the AR(4) at the 5% level using the
Fixed-b critical values. In addition, we report the number of OLD and NEW models that
outperform the benchmark AR(4). Finally, we report the number of models contained in
the model confidence set. Since we want to identify the importance of the transformation
codes, we also specify the number of models in the model confidence set that use the NEW
factors based on the unit-root driven transformation codes.
  14
     In unreported work, we also considered a weaker 10% level of significance. For several of the variables,
nearly all of the models were included in the model confidence set despite, what appeared to be, substantial
differences in MSEs.


                                                     16
   Tables 6 and 7 provide the results. In the first table we focus on the real and financial
target variables, while in the second we focus on the price series. In Table 6 we find
numerous evidence that the factors can provide additional predictive content beyond that
of the benchmark AR(4). For all four target variables and at both forecast horizons, the
number of factor-based models that significantly outperform the benchmark range from as
low as 3 models when forecasting the federal funds rate at the one-quarter horizon, to as
high 142 models when forecasting the unemployment rate at the four-quarter horizon. To
be fair, many of those that outperform the benchmark only do so to a modest degree. The
largest gains occur for the unemployment rate at the four-quarter horizon where accuracy is
improved by a substantial 25%. For the other target variables and/or horizons, the largest
gains range from 17% to as low as 3%.
   One obvious feature of Table 6 is the dominance of the factors constructed using the OLD
transformation codes. Across all target variables and horizons, exactly 16 out of a possible 80
top ten most accurate models are based on factors estimated using the NEW transformation
codes. Seven of these instances occur when forecasting GDP growth, another seven occur
when forecasting the federal funds rate, and the remaining two occur when forecasting the
unemployment rate, and in all cases these occur at the four-quarter horizon. In addition,
for all but one permutation of target variable and horizon, there are more models based on
the OLD transformation codes that outperform the AR(4) benchmark.
   Among those factor-based models that perform in the top ten, it isn't obvious that
one particular factor is dominant and should always be used when forecasting. Even so, it
is true that at least one of the first two factors (i.e., 1 or 2) occur in all but two top ten
factor-based models. While that might suggest that those factors associated with the largest
eigenvalues provide the most predictive content, one should not conclude the contributions
are monotone. There are many instances, like that when forecasting industrial production
at either horizon, where the 2nd , 6th , and 7th factors are included, but the 1st , 3rd , 4th , and
5th are not. It's also worth noting that the number of factors necessary to improve accuracy
relative to the benchmark AR(4) varies across series and, to a lesser extent, horizon. When
forecasting the federal funds rate, maximal gains are achieved when including only two
factors, but when forecasting the unemployment rate, the best models include five factors.
In fact, there are instances in which including all seven factors in the model lead to forecasts
of the unemployment rate and GDP growth that outperform those based on the benchmark
AR(4) model.
   Moving to Table 7, that associated with predicting the four price series, we again find


                                                17
substantial evidence that the factors can provide marginal predictive content beyond the
benchmark AR(4). In some cases, like when forecasting the GDP-deflator at the four-
quarter horizon, the number of factor-based models that have marginal predictive content
is as low as 42, but in other cases, like when forecasting PPI at the same horizon, the
number is as high as 191. Relative to the benefits of using factor-based models observed
in Table 6, the top gains are typically smaller. When forecasting PPI at the four-quarter
horizon, the gains are as large as 23% but are less than 10% for all other permutations of
target variable and horizon.
   But in contrast to the results in Table 6, when forecasting prices, factor-based models
using the NEW transformation codes generally dominate those that use the OLD codes.
Among the 80 possible top ten models, only 19 are based on models that use the OLD
transformation codes. Interestingly, none of these instances occur when forecasting PPI,
which is dominated by factors estimated using the NEW transformation codes. In addition,
relative to Table 6 there tends to be more models in the confidence set that use the NEW
transformation codes. Similarly, relative to Table 6 a larger number of factor models that
use the NEW transformation codes outperform the benchmark AR(4) ­ and do so especially
at the longer forecast horizon.
   In terms of which factors are most useful for forecasting, there is a bit more heterogeneity
when forecasting prices. In Table 6, nearly every top ten model had at least one of the first
two factors based on either the OLD or NEW transformation codes. While it is the case
that a majority of the top ten models in Table 7 contain one of the first two factors, some
of the best models include neither of the first two factors and, instead, include the 4th or
5th factor ­ this is particularly true when forecasting PPI for either forecasting horizon.
Nevertheless, it remains true that many of the top 10 models contain more than just one
or two factors and, in fact, several include as many as five or six factors.


7 Conclusion

As was the case for FRED-MD, the purpose of introducing FRED-QD is to provide easy
access to a large set of macroeconomic data that can be used to conduct research using "big-
data" methods. The primary difference between the two data sets is simply that FRED-QD
provides quarterly frequency data and, as such, permits the inclusion of lower frequency
series like those from the NIPA releases. Regardless of this difference, like FRED-MD, the
data set has been, and will continue to be, updated by the data specialists at FRED on
a regular basis to account for newly released data, data revisions, and other complicating

                                              18
issues that sporadically arise with data collection. We (again!) sincerely thank them for
their support in this work.




                                           19
                                      References

Angelini, G.; Bacchiocchi, E.; Caggiano G. and Fanelli L. "Uncertainty Across Volatility
   Regimes." Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2019, 34, pp. 437-455.

Bai, J. and Ng, S. "Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor Models."
    Econometrica, 2002, 70, pp. 191-221.

Bai, J. and Ng, S. "Rank-Regularized Estimation of Approximate Factor Models." Journal
    of Econometrics, 2019a, 212, pp. 78-96.

Bai, J. and Ng, S. "Matrix Completion, Counterfactuals, and Factor Analysis of Missing
    Data." 2019b, arXiv.org, 1910.06677.

Barbarino, A. and Bura, E. "A Unified Framework for Dimension Reduction in Forecasting."
   2017, FEDS Working Paper, 2017-004.

Bauer, M.D. and Hamilton J.D. "Robust Bond Risk Premia." Review of Financial Studies,
   2017, 31, pp. 399-448.

Bernanke, B.S. and Boivin, J. "Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment." Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 2003, 50, pp. 525-546.

Boivin, J. and Ng, S. "Understanding and Comparing Factor-Based Forecasts." International
    Journal of Central Banking, 2005, 1, pp. 117-151.

Boot, T. and Nibbering, D. "Forecasting Using Random Subspace Methods." Journal of
   Econometrics, 2019, 209, pp. 391-406.

Campbell, S.D. "Macroeconomic Volatility, Predictability, and Uncertainity in the Great
   Moderation: Evidence From the Survey of Professionsl Forecasters. " Journal of Busi-
   ness and Economic Statistics, 2007, 25, pp. 191-200.

Carrasco, M. and Rossi B. "In-Sample Inference and Forecasting in Misspecified Factor
    Models." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2016, 34, pp. 313-338.

Chatterjee, S. and Hadi, A. "Influential Observations, Leverage Points, and Outliers in
   Linear Regression." Statistical Science, 1986, 1, pp. 379-393.

Choi, I. and Jeong, H. "Differencing versus Non-Differencing in Factor-Based Forecasting."
   2018, Sogang University Working Paper.

Coroneo, L. & Fabrizio, I. "Comparing Predictive Accuracy in Small Samples Using Fixed-
   Smoothing Asymptotics." 2018 SSRN Electronic Journal.

Coulombe, P.G.; Leroux, C.; Stevanoic, D. and Surprenant, S. "How is Machine Learning
   Useful for Macroeconomic Forecasting?" 2019, CIRANO Working Paper.

Davig, T. and Hall, A.S. "Recession Forecasting Using Bayesian Classification." Interna-
   tional Journal of Forecasting, 2019, 35, pp. 848-867.



                                           20
Diebold, F.X. and Kilian, L. "Unit Root Tests are Useful for Selecting Forecasting Models."
    Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2000, 18, pp. 265-273.

Ellington, M.; Florackis, C. and Costas, M. "Liquidity Shocks and Real GDP Growth:
     Evidence from a Bayesian Time-Varying Parameter VAR." Journal of International
     Money and Finance, 2017, 72, pp. 93-117.

Elliot, G.; Rothenberg, T.J. and Stock, J.H. "Efficient Tests for an Autoregressive Unit
     Root." Econometrica, 1996, 64, pp. 813-836.

Fortin-Gagnon, O.; Leroux, M.; Stevanovic, D. and Surprenant, S. "A Large Canadian
    Database for Macroeconomic Analysis." CIRANO Working Paper, 2018.

Gefang, D.; Koop, G. and Poon, A. "Variational Bayesian Inference in Large Vector Au-
    toregressions with Hierarchical Shrinkage." CAMA Working Papers, 2019-08.

Giacomini, R. and White, H. "Tests of Conditional Predictive Ability." Econometrica, 2006,
    74, pp. 1545-1578.

Giannone, D.; Lenza, M. and Primiceri, G.E. "Economic Predictions with Big Data: The
   Illusion of Sparsity." FRB of New York Staff Reports, 2018, 847.

Gilchrist, S. and Zakrajsek, E. "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations." American
    Economic Review, 2012, 102, pp. 1692-1720.

Gonçalves, S.; Perron, B. and Djogbenou, A. "Bootstrap Prediction Intervals for Factor
   Models." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2017, 35, pp. 53-69.

Hansen, P.R.; Asger, L. and Nason, J.M. "The Model Confidence Set." Econometrica, 2011,
   79, pp. 453-497.

Hu, B. and Park, J.Y. "Econometric Analysis of Functional Dynamics in the Presence of
    Persistence." Working Paper, 2017.

Jurado, K.; Ludvigson, S.C. and Ng, S. "Measuring Uncertainty." American Economic Re-
    view, 2015, 105, pp. 1177-1216.

Kiefer, N.M. and Vogelsang, T.J. "A New Asymptotic Theory for Heteroskedasticity-Autocorrelation
    Robust Tests." Econometric Theory, 2005, 21, pp. 1130-1164.

Koop, G. "Forecasting with Medium and Large Bayesian VARs." Journal of Applied Econo-
   metrics, 2013, 28, pp. 177-203.

Koopman, S.J. and Mesters G. "Empirical Bayes Methods for Dynamic Factor Models."
   The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2017, 99, pp. 486-498.

Kotchoni, R.; Leroux, M. and Stevanovic, D. "Macroeconomic Forecast Accuracy in a Data-
   Rich Environment." Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2019.

Lazarus, E.; Lewis, D.J.; Stock, J.H. and Watson, M.W. "HAR Inference: Recommenda-
    tions for Practice." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2018, 36, pp. 541-559.


                                            21
Mahoney, M.W. "Randomized Algorithms for Matrices and Data." Foundations and Trends
   in Machine Learning, 2011, 3, pp. 123-224.

McCracken, M. and Ng, S. "FRED-MD: A Monthly Database for Macroeconomic Research."
   Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2015, 34, pp. 574-589.

Medeiros, M.C.; Vasconcelos, G.; Veiga, A. and Zilberman, E. "Forecasting Inflation in
   a Data-Rich Environment: Benefits of Machine Learning Methods." Central Bank of
   Chile Working Paper, 2019.

Miranda-Agrippino, S. and Ricco G. "The Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks." CFM
   Discussion Papers 1711, 2017.

Ng, S. and Perron, P. "Unit Root Tests in ARMA Models with Data Dependent Methods for
    the Selection of the Truncation Lag." Journal of the American Statistical Association,
    1995, 90, pp. 268-281.

Ng, S. and Perron, P. "Lag Length Selection and the Construction of Unit Root Tests with
    Good Size and Power." Econometrica, 2001, 69, pp. 1519-1554.

Nicolò, G.D. & Lucchetta, M. "Forecasting Tail Risks." Journal of Applied Econometrics,
    2016, 32, pp. 159-170.

Rousseeuw, P. and van Zomeren, B. "Unmasking Multivariate Outliers and Leverage Points."
   Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1990, 85, pp. 633-639.

Schumacher, C. and Brietung, J. "Real-Time Forecasting of German GDP Based on a Large
    Factor Model with Monthly and Quarterly Data." International Journal of Forecasting,
    2008, 24, pp. 386-398.

Schwert, G.W. "Tests for Unit Roots: A Monte Carlo Investigation." Journal of Business
   and Economic Statistics, 2008, 7, pp. 147-159.

Sheppard, Kevin. https://www.kevinsheppard.com/code/matlab/mfe-toolbox/; documented
   in "MFE MATLAB Function Reference Financial Econometrics," §8.2.2, "Model Confi-
   dence Set mcs," https://www.kevinsheppard.com/files/code/matlab/mfe-toolbox-documentation.pdf,
   2018.

Smeekes, S. and Wijler, E. "Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Penalized Regression Meth-
   ods." International Journal of Forecasting, 2018, 34, pp. 408-430.

Stock, J.H. "VAR, Error Correction and Pretest Forecasts at Long Horizons." Oxford Bul-
    letin of Economics and Statistics, 1996, 58, pp. 685-701.

Stock, J.H. and Watson, M. "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast." Journal
    of Money, Credit and Banking, 2007, 39, pp. 3-33.

Stock, J.H. and Watson, M. "Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009 Recession."
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2012a, Spring, pp. 81-156.

Stock, J.H. and Watson, M. "Generalized Shrinkage Methods for Forecasting Using Many


                                           22
    Predictors." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2012b, 30, pp. 481-493.

Stock, J.H. and Watson, M.W. "Dynamic Factor Models, Factor-Augmented Vector Au-
    toregressions, and Structural Vector Autoregressions in Macroeconomics." Handbook of
    Macroeconomics, 2016, 2, pp. 415-526.




                                           23
                           Figures and Tables

                    Table 1: Series adjusted by FRED-QD

Number   Variable                                Adjustment
60       Unemployment Rate (< 27 weeks)          (UNEMPLOY - UEMP27OV)/CLF16OV
61       Unemployment Rate (> 27 weeks)          UEMP27OV/CLF16OV
80       Help-Wanted Index                       splice LMJVTTUVUSM647S with Barnichon series
88       Real Manu. and Trade                    (i) adjust M0602BUSM144NNBR for inflation using PCEPI
                                                 (ii) seasonal adjust with ARIMA X12
                                                 (iii) splice with NAICS series CMRMTSPL
89       Retail/Food Sales                       splice SIC series RETAIL with NAICS series RSAFS
90       New orders (durables)                   splice SIC series AMDMNO and NAICS series DGORDER
92       Unfilled orders (durables)              splice SIC series AMDMUO and NAICS series AMDMUO
93       New orders (nondefense)                 splice SIC series ANDENO and NAICS series ANDENO
130      Crude Oil                               splice OILPRICE with MCOILWTICO
153      30yr Mortage to 10yr Treasury           MRTG - GS10
154      6mth Tbill - 3mth Tbill                 TB6M - TB3M
155      1yr Treasury - 3mth Tbill               GS1 - TB3M
156      10yr Treasury - 3mth Tbill              GS10 - TB3M
157      3mth Commercial - 3mth Tbill            CPF3M - TB3M
172      Household/Nonprof Liab to Income        TLBSHNO/PI
174      Household/Nonprof Networth to Income    TNWBSHNO/PI
178      S&P 100 Volatility: VXO                 splice Bloom series with VXOCLS
184      Switzerland/U.S. FX                     filled back to 1959 from Banking/Monetary statistics
185      Japan/U.S. FX                           filled back to 1959 from Banking/Monetary statistics
186      U.K./U.S. FX                            filled back to 1959 from Banking/Monetary statistics
187      Cdn/U.S. FX                             filled back to 1959 from Banking/Monetary statistics
188      Consumer Sentiment                      splice UMSCENT1 with UMSCENT
220      Help Wanted to unemployed               HWI/UNEMPLOY
221      Initial Claims                          splice monthly series M08297USM548NNBR with weekly ICSA
222      Business Inventories                    splice SIC series and NAICS series BUSINV
223      Inventory to sales                      splice SIC series and NAICS series ISRATIO
224      Consumer credit to P.I.                 NONREVSL/PI
235      Business Liabilities to Income          TLBSNNCB/BDI
238      Business Net Worth to Income            TNWMVBSNNCB/BDI
240      NonCorp Busi. Liabilites to Income      TLBSNNB/BDI
243      NonCorp Busi. Net Worth to Income       TNWBSNNB/BDI
244      Business Income                         (CNCF - FCTAX)/IPDPS




                                      24
                                Figure 1: FRED-QD and S&W Factor Estimates


                                                           Factor 1 Estimates
             1

             0

             -1
                     NBER Recession
                     FRED-QD
             -2      S&W



             1960      1965           1970   1975   1980        1985       1990   1995   2000   2005   2010

                                                           Factor 2 Estimates

             1

            0.5

             0

           -0.5

             1960      1965           1970   1975   1980        1985       1990   1995   2000   2005   2010

                                                           Factor 3 Estimates
            0.5

             0

           -0.5

             -1
             1960      1965           1970   1975   1980        1985       1990   1995   2000   2005   2010

                                                           Factor 4 Estimates


             0


             -1


             -2
              1960     1965           1970   1975   1980        1985       1990   1995   2000   2005   2010




Note: This figure shows the estimates of factors 1-4 for both the S&W and FRED-QD data sets. For estimation of
factors in the FRED-QD data set, only series and observations that correspond to those in the S&W data set are
used.




                                                               25
                            Table 2: Factor Estimates from FRED-QD and S&W: Total Variation Explained, 0.413
                                                                        FRED-QD
                                                        Total variation explained by factors: 0.413
      mR2(1)                    0.211    G#     mR2(2)           0.091 G# mR2(3)                  0.063         G#     mR2(4)                     0.048    G#
      LNS14000025               0.784    3      OPHMFG           0.643 7        COMPRMS           0.608         7      EXUSEU                     0.680    11
      DMANEMP                   0.760    3      TCU              0.496 2        USSTHPI           0.329         4      TWEXMMTH                   0.412    11
      LNS13023621               0.746    3      CUMFNS           0.427 2        COMPRNFB          0.319         7      PPIIDC                     0.286    6
      USTPU                     0.726    3      PERMIT           0.414 4        WPSID61           0.311         6      WPSFD49502                 0.284    6
      IPBUSEQ                   0.683    2      BUSLOANSx        0.368 9        ULCMFG            0.306         7      DGOERG3Q086SBEA            0.271    6
      USPBS                     0.662    3      GS10TB3Mx        0.356 8        RCPHBS            0.305         7      EXUSUKx                    0.229    11
      LNS14000026               0.649    3      HOUSTS           0.332 4        ACOGNOx           0.294         5      WPSID61                    0.224    6
      PNFIx                     0.642    1      USEPUINDXM       0.309 12       SPCS20RSA         0.275         4      WPU0561                    0.223    6
      USTRADE                   0.640    3      PRFIx            0.304 1        WPU0561           0.267         6      EXCAUSx                    0.208    11
      Y033RC1Q027SBEAx          0.609    1      CPF3MTB3Mx       0.301 8        PPIIDC            0.239         6      EXSZUSx                    0.154    11




26
                                                                           S&W
                                                        Total variation explained by factors: 0.417
      mR2(1)                    0.215    G#     mR2(2)           0.097 G# mR2(3)                  0.059         G#     mR2(4)                     0.046    G#
      LNS14000025               0.772    3      OPHMFG           0.526 7        COMPRMS           0.487         7      EXUSEU                     0.561    11
      DMANEMP                   0.750    3      TCU              0.485 2        WPSID61           0.358         6      DGOERG3Q086SBEA            0.233    6
      LNS13023621               0.741    3      PERMIT           0.417 4        COMPRNFB          0.322         7      PPIIDC                     0.223    6
      USTPU                     0.714    3      CUMFNS           0.414 2        USSTHPI           0.312         4      WPSFD49502                 0.216    6
      IPBUSEQ                   0.665    2      BUSLOANSx        0.365 9        WPU0561           0.309         6      TWEXMMTH                   0.203    11
      USPBS                     0.644    3      GS10TB3Mx        0.363 8        RCPHBS            0.305         7      EXCAUSx                    0.195    11
      LNS14000026               0.638    3      USEPUINDXM       0.331 12       PPIIDC            0.284         6      EXUSUKx                    0.193    11
      PNFIx                     0.630    1      HOUSTS           0.328 4        SPCS20RSA         0.247         4      WPU0561                    0.181    6
      USTRADE                   0.628    3      NAPM             0.324          ULCMFG            0.218         7      TNWBSHNOx                  0.165    10
      Y033RC1Q027SBEAx          0.622    1      INVCQRMTSPL 0.321 5             WPSFD49502 0.210                6      WPSID61                    0.154    6
      Note: This table lists the 10 series that load most heavily on all four factors along with the R2 in a regression of the series on the factor. For example,
     factor 1 of FRED-QD explains 0.784 of the variation in LNS14000025. The first factor of FRED-QD has an mR2 of 0.211. This is the fraction of the
     variation in 125 series explained by the first factor. Results for the S&W data set are also listed.
                        Figure 2: FRED-QD Factor Estimates


                     Factor 1 Estimate                           Factor 2 Estimate
          1                                           1

          0
                                                      0
         -1
                      NBER Recession
         -2           Factor Estimate
                                                     -1
               1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015               1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015

                     Factor 3 Estimate                           Factor 4 Estimate
          1
                                                    0.5
          0
                                                      0
         -1
                                                    -0.5
         -2
               1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015               1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015

                     Factor 5 Estimate                           Factor 6 Estimate
        0.5
                                                      1

          0                                         0.5
                                                      0
        -0.5                                        -0.5
               1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015               1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015

                     Factor 7 Estimate
        0.5


          0


        -0.5

               1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015




Note: This figure plots the PCA-based factors estimated using the full FRED-QD data set
based on the benchmark transformation codes.




                                               27
                                 Table 3: Factors Estimated from FRED-QD: Total Variation Explained, 0.497
     mR2 (1)             0.199    G#   mR2 (2)            0.083   G#   mR2 (3)            0.073   G#   mR2 (4)         0.047   G#
     USPRIV              0.838    3    AAAFFM             0.506   8    CUSR0000SA0L2      0.753   6    IMFSLx          0.394   9
     USGOOD              0.820    3    T5YFFM             0.475   8    CUSR0000SAC        0.737   6    CES9093000001   0.341   3
     OUTMS               0.814    1    PERMIT             0.462   4    DGDSRG3Q086SBEA    0.734   6    CES9092000001   0.306   3
     PAYEMS              0.811    3    BUSINVx            0.432   5    PCECTPI            0.718   6    USGOVT          0.237   3
     IPMANSICS           0.797    2    HOUST              0.421   4    CPITRNSL           0.703   6    GFDEBTNx        0.237   14
     INDPRO              0.784    2    PERMITS            0.407   4    DNDGRG3Q086SBEA    0.693   6    REVOLSLx        0.225   9
     MANEMP              0.776    3    TCU                0.394   2    CUSR0000SA0L5      0.676   6    COMPRMS         0.211   7
     HOANBS              0.774    3    S&P div yield      0.393   13   CPIAUCSL           0.669   6    USFIRE          0.203   3
     UNRATE              0.768    3    GS10TB3Mx          0.380   8    WPSID61            0.642   6    USSERV          0.203   3
     DMANEMP             0.765    3    CPF3MTB3Mx         0.360   8    CPIULFSL           0.635   6    EXUSEU          0.194   11




28
     mR2 (5)             0.037    G#   mR2 (6)            0.030   G#   mR2 (7)            0.027   G#
     OPHMFG              0.359    7    CONSPIx            0.274   10   USEPUINDXM         0.257   12
     NWPIx               0.295    10   ULCNFB             0.228   7    TNWBSHNOx          0.208   10
     AWHMAN              0.293    3    ULCBS              0.227   7    TABSHNOx           0.202   10
     HWIx                0.290    3    CONSUMERx          0.220   9    TARESAx            0.192   10
     OPHPBS              0.284    7    EXUSEU             0.208   11   TFAABSHNOx         0.192   10
     OPHNFB              0.247    7    NONREVSLx          0.194   9    S&P 500            0.183   13
     UNLPNBS             0.223    7    AHETPIx            0.187   7    S&P: indust        0.182   13
     UNRATELTx           0.221    3    TOTALSLx           0.164   9    NASDAQCOM          0.171   13
     ULCMFG              0.214    7    TB3SMFFM           0.149   8    GS10TB3Mx          0.155   8
     TLBSNNCBBDIx        0.200    14   B020RE1Q156NBEA    0.143   1    TB6M3Mx            0.135   8
     See Table 2 note.
                                        Figure 3: FRED-QD Leverage Scores



                       NBER Recession
                       Leverage Score
                       Outliers


            0.06




            0.04




            0.02




              0
                      1965               1975         1985             1995            2005            2015




Note: This figure plots the statistical leverage score, pt , of each quarter. Blue circles represent quarters where at least
one series' value was an outlier and are sized relative to how many outliers were detected.




                                                             29
Table 4: FRED-QD Median Transformation Codes by Group

Group   Group Name                       OLD   SIC   MAIC
1       NIPA                             5     5     6
2       Industrial Production            5     5     6
3       Employment and Unemployment      5     5     5
4       Housing                          5     4.5   4.5
5       Inventories, Orders, and Sales   5     5     6
6       Prices                           6     5     6
7       Earnings and Productivity        5     5     6
8       Interest Rates                   1.5   1     2
9       Money and Credit                 5     5     5
10      Household Balance Sheets         5     5     5
11      Exchange Rates                   5     5     5
12      Other                            1.5   1     1
13      Stock Markets                    5     5     5
14      Non-Household Balance Sheets     5     5     5
                  All                    5     5     5




                             30
    Figure 4: FRED-QD Transformation Code Frequency by Group


                              OLD                                           SIC
                200                                       200


                150                                       150
    Frequency




                                              Frequency
                100                                       100


                50                                        50


                 0                                         0
                      1   2   3   4   5   6                     1   2   3         4   5   6
                              Code                                      Code



                              MAIC
                200


                150
    Frequency




                100


                50


                 0
                      1   2   3   4   5   6
                              Code




Note: Each subpanel provides a histogram of frequencies of transformation codes. "OLD"
refers to the benchmark codes provided in FRED-QD. "SIC" and "MAIC" refer to codes
implied by the associated DFGLS unit root test.




                                              31
         Figure 5: FRED-QD Factor Estimates by Method of Series Transformation


                                                  Factor 1 Estimates
             1

             0

             -1
                    NBER Recession   SIC
             -2     OLD              MAIC

                    1965             1975       1985               1995      2005          2015

                                                  Factor 2 Estimates
             1

            0.5

             0

           -0.5

             -1
                    1965             1975       1985               1995      2005          2015

                                                  Factor 3 Estimates
             2

             1

             0

             -1
                    1965             1975       1985               1995      2005          2015

                                                  Factor 4 Estimates


            0.5

             0

           -0.5

                    1965             1975       1985               1995      2005          2015




Note: This figures plots the first four PCA-based factors corresponding to the benchmark (OLD) codes and those
implied by the unit root tests (SIC and MAIC).




                                                       32
                                 Table 5: FRED-QD Factor Estimates by Method of Series Transformation
                                                                             Old
                                                            Total   Variation Explained, 0.4025
      mR2 (1)            0.199    G#   mR2 (2)           0.083      G#      mR2 (3)               0.073   G#   mR2 (4)           0.047   G#
      USPRIV             0.838    3    AAAFFM            0.506      8       CUSR0000SA0L2         0.753   6    IMFSLx            0.394   9
      USGOOD             0.820    3    T5YFFM            0.475      8       CUSR0000SAC           0.737   6    CES9093000001     0.341   3
      OUTMS              0.814    1    PERMIT            0.462      4       DGDSRG3Q086SBEA       0.734   6    CES9092000001     0.306   3
      PAYEMS             0.811    3    BUSINVx           0.432      5       PCECTPI               0.718   6    USGOVT            0.237   3
      IPMANSICS          0.797    2    HOUST             0.421      4       CPITRNSL              0.703   6    GFDEBTNx          0.237   14
      INDPRO             0.784    2    PERMITS           0.407      4       DNDGRG3Q086SBEA       0.693   6    REVOLSLx          0.225   9
      MANEMP             0.776    3    TCU               0.394      2       CUSR0000SA0L5         0.676   6    COMPRMS           0.211   7
      HOANBS             0.774    3    S&P div yield     0.393      13      CPIAUCSL              0.669   6    USFIRE            0.203   3
      UNRATE             0.768    3    GS10TB3Mx         0.380      8       WPSID61               0.642   6    USSERV            0.203   3
      DMANEMP            0.765    3    CPF3MTB3Mx        0.360      8       CPIULFSL              0.635   6    EXUSEU            0.194   11

                                                                             SIC
                                                            Total   Variation Explained, 0.4411
      mR2 (1)            0.169    G#   mR2 (2)           0.147      G#      mR2 (3)               0.074   G#   mR2 (4)           0.051   G#
      PAYEMS             0.844    3    PCECTPI           0.858      6       UNRATE                0.523   3    DGOERG3Q086SBEA   0.376   6
      USPRIV             0.835    3    CPIAUCSL          0.846      6       LNS14000025           0.506   3    WPU0561           0.341   6
      USGOOD             0.781    3    CUSR0000SA0L5     0.828      6       LNS14000026           0.466   3    OILPRICEx         0.324   6




33
      USTPU              0.758    3    CPIULFSL          0.797      6       SPCS20RSA             0.462   4    ACOGNOx           0.281   5
      SRVPRD             0.728    3    PCEPILFE          0.794      6       LNS14000012           0.462   3    WPSID62           0.264   6
      MANEMP             0.723    3    IPDBS             0.790      6       ISRATIOx              0.383   5    PPIACO            0.258   6
      DMANEMP            0.718    3    CPILFESL          0.787      6       UNRATELTx             0.350   3    B020RE1Q156NBEA   0.256   1
      HOAMS              0.716    3    CUSR0000SAS       0.756      6       UNRATESTx             0.348   3    PPIIDC            0.255   6
      HOANBS             0.704    3    DSERRG3Q086SBEA   0.746      6       HWIURATIOx            0.341   3    B021RE1Q156NBEA   0.244   1
      USWTRADE           0.683    3    CUSR0000SA0L2     0.742      6       CLAIMSx               0.313   3    AWHMAN            0.243   3

                                                                           MAIC
                                                            Total   Variation Explained, 0.3327
      mR2 (1)            0.127    G#   mR2 (2)           0.091      G#      mR2 (3)               0.066   G#   mR2 (4)           0.047   G#
      OUTMS              0.854    1    SRVPRD            0.481      3       CUSR0000SAC           0.476   6    CPF3MTB3Mx        0.364   8
      TCU                0.783    2    USPBS             0.412      3       CPITRNSL              0.468   6    S&P 500           0.275   13
      USPRIV             0.781    3    PPIACO            0.399      6       UMCSENTx              0.446   12   DRIWCIL           0.273   9
      USGOOD             0.774    3    WPSID61           0.396      6       WPSFD49207            0.435   6    TFAABSHNOx        0.269   10
      IPMANSICS          0.751    2    INVCQRMTSPL       0.390      5       USSTHPI               0.423   4    AAAFFM            0.264   8
      INDPRO             0.730    2    HOUST             0.368      4       WPSFD49502            0.421   6    TARESAx           0.262   10
      PAYEMS             0.727    3    PPIIDC            0.366      6       CPIULFSL              0.408   6    S&P: indust       0.262   13
      CUMFNS             0.723    2    USTRADE           0.361      3       PPIIDC                0.399   6    BAA               0.255   8
      MANEMP             0.722    3    CUSR0000SAC       0.342      6       EXUSEU                0.388   11   NWPIx             0.242   10
      DMANEMP            0.690    3    WPSFD49502        0.341      6       PPIACO                0.361   6    TNWBSHNOx         0.239   10
     See Table 2 note.
           Table 6: FRED-QD Factor-based Forecasts of Real and Financial Series
                                                          Horizon = 1
             GDPC1                         INDPRO                           UNRATE                       FEDFUNDS
 AR(4) RMSE = 0.0053804           AR(4) RMSE = 0.0088442         AR(4) RMSE = 0.19716             AR(4) RMSE = 0.40622
         Top 10 Models                   Top 10 Models                   Top 10 Models                  Top 10 Models
 Factors        Codes Ratio       Factors Codes Ratio            Factors        Codes Ratio       Factors Codes Ratio
 1,2,5,7        Old    0.94*      2,6,7      Old    0.86*        1,2,3,5,6      Old    0.83*      2,6        Old     0.97*
 1,2,5          Old    0.94*      1,2,7      Old    0.87*        1,2,5,6        Old    0.83*      2          Old     0.98*
 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 Old     0.94*      2,5,6,7    Old    0.87*        1,2,3,6        Old    0.83*      2,4        Old     0.98*
 1,2,3,4,5,7    Old    0.95*      2,7        Old    0.87*        1,2,5,6,7      Old    0.83*      2,4,6      Old     0.99
 2,5,6          Old    0.95*      2,6        Old    0.87*        1,2,3,4,5,6    Old    0.84*      6          Old     1.00
 1,2            Old    0.95*      1,2        Old    0.87*        1,2,6          Old    0.84*      2,6,7      Old     1.00
 1,2,7          Old    0.95*      1,2,6,7    Old    0.88*        1,2,3,5,6,7    Old    0.84*      2,5,6      Old     1.00
 1,2,5,6,7      Old    0.95*      1,2,6      Old    0.89*        1,2,3,6,7      Old    0.84*                 Old     1.00
 1,2,3,4,5,6    Old    0.95*      2,5,6      Old    0.89*        1,2,3,4,6      Old    0.84*      2,3        Old     1.00
 1,2,3,4,5      Old    0.95*      2          Old    0.89*        1,2,4,5,6      Old    0.84*      2,3,6      Old     1.00
 # in MCS = 256                   # in MCS = 55                  # in MCS = 66                    # in MCS = 123
 # New in MCS = 128               # New in MCS = 9               # New in MCS = 13                # New in MCS = 45
 # Old  AR(4) = 57                # Old  AR(4) = 66              # Old  AR(4) = 96                # Old  AR(4) = 3
 # New  AR(4) = 3                 # New  AR(4) = 29              # New  AR(4) = 42                # New  AR(4) = 0

                                                          Horizon = 4
            GDPC1                          INDPRO                           UNRATE                       FEDFUNDS
 AR(4) RMSE = 0.016498            AR(4) RMSE = 0.037483          AR(4) RMSE = 0.85051             AR(4) RMSE = 1.4129
         Top 10 Models                   Top 10 Models                   Top 10 Models                  Top 10 Models
 Factors        Codes Ratio       Factors Codes Ratio            Factors        Codes Ratio       Factors Codes Ratio
 1,2            New    0.86*      2,6,7      Old    0.88*        2,3,4,6,7      Old    0.75*      1,2        New     0.92*
 1,2,6          New    0.87*      2,7        Old    0.89*        1,2,3,4,5,7    New    0.75*      1,2,7      New     0.94*
 1,2,5          New    0.88*      2,6        Old    0.90*        2,3,4,6        Old    0.75*      1,2,5      New     0.95*
 2              New    0.88*      2          Old    0.90*        2,3,6,7        Old    0.75*      2          New     0.96
 2,6            New    0.89*      2,4,7      Old    0.90*        2,3,4,5,6,7    Old    0.76*      1,2,5,7    New     0.97*
 1,2,5,6        New    0.89*      2,5,7      Old    0.91*        2,3,6          Old    0.76*      2,7        New     0.99*
 2,3,4,5,6      Old    0.89*      2,4,6,7    Old    0.91*        1,2,3,4,5,6,7 Old     0.76*      6          Old     0.99*
 1,2,3,4,5      Old    0.89*      2,5,6,7    Old    0.91*        1,2,3,4,5,6    Old    0.76*      2,5        New     1.00
 2,3,4,6        Old    0.90*      2,5        Old    0.91*        1,2,3,4,6,7    New    0.76*      2,4,6      Old     1.00
 1,2,4          New    0.90*      2,4        Old    0.92*        1,2,3,4,5      Old    0.76*                 Old     1.00
 # in MCS = 135                   # in MCS = 98                  # in MCS = 124                   # in MCS = 17
 # New in MCS = 51                # New in MCS = 27              # New in MCS = 60                # New in MCS = 11
 # Old  AR(4) = 62                # Old  AR(4) = 64              # Old  AR(4) = 78                # Old  AR(4) = 1
 # New  AR(4) = 34                # New  AR(4) = 0               # New  AR(4) = 64                # New  AR(4) = 6
 Notes to Table 6 and 7: This table lists the 10 forecasting models with the lowest RMSE for four series at the 1-quarter
and 4-quarter horizons. The combination of factors, use of old or new codes, and ratio of RMSE with the benchmark model
(AR(4) w/ old codes) are given. Asterisks denote if the model is significantly better than the baseline at the 5% level using
Fixed-b critical values. The # of total/New models in the MCS and the # of Old/New models significantly better than the
baseline model are also listed for each dependent variable and horizon.




                                                     34
                Table 7: FRED-QD Factor-based Forecasts of Price Series
                                                 Horizon = 1
         CPIAUCSL                     PCECTPI                   GDPCTPI                    PPIACO
AR(4) RMSE = 0.0051166       AR(4) RMSE = 0.0036182      AR(4) RMSE = 0.0019032    AR(4) RMSE = 0.020314
       Top 10 Models                Top 10 Models              Top 10 Models             Top 10 Models
Factors      Codes Ratio     Factors     Codes Ratio     Factors Codes Ratio       Factors Codes Ratio
1,4,7        New     0.97*   1,7         New     0.97*   1         New    0.95*    4         New     0.91*
1,7          New     0.97*   1,2,7       New     0.97*   1,4       New    0.95*    4,5,6     New     0.91*
3,4,5,6,7    Old     0.97*   2,5,6,7     Old     0.98*   1,3       Old    0.95*    1,4       New     0.91*
1,3,7        New     0.97*   2,6,7       Old     0.98*   1,3,4     New    0.96*    4,5       New     0.91*
3,4,6,7      Old     0.97*   1,2,6,7     New     0.98*   1,2       Old    0.96*    4,5,7     New     0.91*
1,3,4,7      New     0.98*   2,4,6,7     Old     0.98*   1,2,3     Old    0.96*    4,6       New     0.91*
3,4,5,6      Old     0.98*   2,4,6       Old     0.98*   1,4,7     New    0.97*    1,4,5,6   New     0.91*
1,6,7        New     0.98*   2,6         Old     0.98*   1,5       New    0.97*    1,4,6     New     0.91*
1,4,6,7      New     0.98*   1,2,3,7     New     0.98*   1,2,4     New    0.97*    4,5,6,7   New     0.91*
3,4,6        Old     0.98*   2,5,6       Old     0.98*   1,4,6     New    0.97*    1,4,5     New     0.91*
# in MCS = 214               # in MCS = 193              # in MCS = 64             # in MCS = 256
# New in MCS = 105           # New in MCS = 88           # New in MCS = 33         # New in MCS = 128
# Old  AR(4) = 34            # Old  AR(4) = 34           # Old  AR(4) = 38         # Old  AR(4) = 16
# New  AR(4) = 23            # New  AR(4) = 19           # New  AR(4) = 35         # New  AR(4) = 128

                                                 Horizon = 4
         CPIAUCSL                     PCECTPI                    GDPCTPI                   PPIACO
AR(4) RMSE = 0.015208        AR(4) RMSE = 0.011441       AR(4) RMSE = 0.006606     AR(4) RMSE = 0.068741
       Top 10 Models                Top 10 Models               Top 10 Models            Top 10 Models
Factors      Codes Ratio     Factors     Codes Ratio     Factors Codes Ratio       Factors Codes Ratio
1,2,3,4      New     0.90*   1,2,3,4,7 New       0.96*   1,2,7      Old    0.94*   2,5,7     New     0.77*
1,2,3,5      New     0.91*   2,5         Old     0.96*   1,2,3,7    Old    0.95*   2,5       New     0.77*
1,2,3,4,5    New     0.91*   1,2,3,4     New     0.96*   1,5        New    0.95*   2,4,5,7   New     0.77*
1,2,3,5,7    New     0.91*   1,2,3,7     New     0.97*   1,5,6      New    0.95*   4,5,7     New     0.77*
1,2,3,4,7    New     0.92*   1,2,3       New     0.97*   1,5,7      New    0.96*   2,4,5     New     0.77*
1,2,3        New     0.92*   5           Old     0.97*   1,5,6,7    New    0.96*   5,7       New     0.77*
1,2,3,4,5,7 New      0.92*   4,5         New     0.97*   1,2,5,7    Old    0.96*   5         New     0.77*
2,3,4,5,7    New     0.92*   2,4,5       Old     0.98*   1          New    0.96*   2,5,6     New     0.77*
1,2,3,7      New     0.93*   1,2,3,5,7 New       0.98*   1,6        New    0.96*   4,5       New     0.77*
2,3,5,7      New     0.93*   2,3,4       New     0.98*   1,6,7      New    0.96*   2,5,6,7   New     0.77*
# in MCS = 103               # in MCS = 72               # in MCS = 155            # in MCS = 256
# New in MCS = 71            # New in MCS = 54           # New in MCS = 85         # New in MCS = 128
# Old  AR(4) = 26            # Old  AR(4) = 11           # Old  AR(4) = 19         # Old  AR(4) = 63
# New  AR(4) = 84            # New  AR(4) = 36           # New  AR(4) = 23         # New  AR(4) = 128




                                                35
Appendix

FRED-QD is a quarterly frequency companion to FRED-MD. It is designed to emulate the dataset
used in "Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009 Recession" by Stock and Watson (2012, NBER
WP No. 18094) but also contains several additional series. The columns denote the following: (i)
id denotes the series number, (ii) sw id denotes the series number in SW (2012), (iii) tcode
denotes one of the following data transformations for a series x: (1) no transformation; (2) xt ;
(3) 2 xt ; (4) log (xt ); (5)  log(xt ); (6) 2 log(xt ). (7) (xt /xt-1 - 1.0), (iv) sw factors denotes
whether a series was used in SW (2012) when constructing factors (i.e. 1 is yes and 0 is no), (v)
fred mnemonic denotes the mnemonic we use for the dataset, (vi) sw mnemonic denotes the
mnemonic used in SW (2012), and (vii) description gives a brief definition of the series. The
series are loosely grouped based on SW (2012).


Details on construction of the data will be forthcoming, but a few general comments are in order.
First, if the FRED mnemonic does not end in "x" then the series comes directly from the FRED
database (e.g. PCECC96; real PCE). Otherwise, the series is a modified variant of a series from
FRED (e.g. PCDGx; nominal PCE durables is manually deflated using the PCE price index).
The exception to this rule is the S&P data, which is taken from public sources. Lastly, monthly
frequency series are aggregated to a quarterly frequency using averages.




                                                 36
                                                                 Group 1: NIPA
                             sw
          id   sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic        sw mnemonic    description
     1     1     1     5      0    GDPC1                GDP            Real Gross Domestic Product, 3 Decimal (Billions of Chained 2012 Dollars)
     2     2     2     5      0    PCECC96              Consumption    Real Personal Consumption Expenditures (Billions of Chained 2012 Dollars)
     3     3     3     5      1    PCDGx                Cons:Dur       Real personal consumption expenditures: Durable goods (Billions of Chained
                                                                       2012 Dollars), deflated using PCE
     4    4     4     5       1    PCESVx           Cons:Svc           Real Personal Consumption Expenditures: Services (Billions of 2012 Dollars),
                                                                       deflated using PCE
     5    5     5     5       1    PCNDx            Cons:NonDur        Real Personal Consumption Expenditures: Nondurable Goods (Billions of 2012
                                                                       Dollars), deflated using PCE
     6    6     6     5       0    GPDIC1           Investment         Real Gross Private Domestic Investment, 3 decimal (Billions of Chained 2012
                                                                       Dollars)
     7    7     7     5       0    FPIx             FixedInv           Real private fixed investment (Billions of Chained 2012 Dollars), deflated
                                                                       using PCE
     8    8     8     5       1    Y033RC1Q027SBEAx Inv:Equip&Software Real Gross Private Domestic Investment: Fixed Investment: Nonresidential:
                                                                       Equipment (Billions of Chained 2012 Dollars), deflated using PCE
     9    9     9     5       1    PNFIx            FixInv:NonRes      Real private fixed investment: Nonresidential (Billions of Chained 2012
                                                                       Dollars), deflated using PCE
     10   10    10    5       1    PRFIx            FixedInv:Res       Real private fixed investment: Residential (Billions of Chained 2012 Dollars),




37
                                                                       deflated using PCE
     11   11    11    1       1    A014RE1Q156NBEA Inv:Inventories     Shares of gross domestic product: Gross private domestic investment: Change
                                                                       in private inventories (Percent)
     12   12    12    5       0    GCEC1            Gov.Spending       Real Government Consumption Expenditures & Gross Investment (Billions of
                                                                       Chained 2012 Dollars)
     13   13    13    1       1    A823RL1Q225SBEA  Gov:Fed            Real Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross Investment: Federal
                                                                       (Percent Change from Preceding Period)
     14   14    14    5       1    FGRECPTx         Real Gov Receipts  Real Federal Government Current Receipts (Billions of Chained 2012 Dollars),
                                                                       deflated using PCE
     15   15    15    5       1    SLCEx            Gov:State&Local    Real government state and local consumption expenditures (Billions of
                                                                       Chained 2012 Dollars), deflated using PCE
     16   16    16    5       1    EXPGSC1          Exports            Real Exports of Goods & Services, 3 Decimal (Billions of Chained 2012
                                                                       Dollars)
     17   17    17    5       1    IMPGSC1          Imports            Real Imports of Goods & Services, 3 Decimal (Billions of Chained 2012
                                                                       Dollars)
     18 18      18    5       0    DPIC96           Disp-Income        Real Disposable Personal Income (Billions of Chained 2012 Dollars)
     19 19      19    5       0    OUTNFB           Ouput:NFB          Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output (Index 2012=100)
     20 20      20    5       0    OUTBS            Output:Bus         Business Sector: Real Output (Index 2012=100)
     21 21      21    5       0    OUTMS            Output:Manuf       Manufacturing Sector: Real Output (Index 2012=100)
     22 190    n.a.   2       0    B020RE1Q156NBEA                     Shares of gross domestic product: Exports of goods and services (Percent)
     23 191    n.a.   2       0    B021RE1Q156NBEA                     Shares of gross domestic product: Imports of goods and services (Percent)
                                                      Group 2: Industrial Production
                            sw
           id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic   sw mnemonic               description
     1     22  22     5      0    INDPRO          IP:Total index            Industrial Production Index (Index 2012=100)
     2    23   23     5      0    IPFINAL         IP:Final products         Industrial Production: Final Products (Market Group) (Index 2012=100)
     3    24   24     5      0    IPCONGD         IP:Consumer goods         Industrial Production: Consumer Goods (Index 2012=100)
     4    25   25     5      0    IPMAT           IP:Materials              Industrial Production: Materials (Index 2012=100)
     5    26   26     5      1    IPDMAT          IP:Dur gds materials      Industrial Production: Durable Materials (Index 2012=100)
     6    27   27     5      1    IPNMAT          IP:Nondur gds materials   Industrial Production: Nondurable Materials (Index 2012=100)
     7    28   28     5      1    IPDCONGD        IP:Dur Cons. Goods        Industrial Production: Durable Consumer Goods (Index 2012=100)
     8    29   29     5      1    IPB51110SQ      IP:Auto                   Industrial Production: Durable Goods: Automotive products (Index 2012=100)
     9    30   30     5      1    IPNCONGD        IP:NonDur Cons God        Industrial Production: Nondurable Consumer Goods (Index 2012=100)
     10   31   31     5      1    IPBUSEQ         IP:Bus Equip              Industrial Production: Business Equipment (Index 2012=100)
     11   32   32     5      1    IPB51220SQ      IP:Energy Prds            Industrial Production: Consumer energy products (Index 2012=100)
     12   33   33     1      1    TCU             Capu Tot                  Capacity Utilization: Total Industry (Percent of Capacity)
     13   34   34     1      1    CUMFNS          Capu Man.                 Capacity Utilization: Manufacturing (SIC) (Percent of Capacity)
     14   194 n.a.    5      0    IPMANSICS                                 Industrial Production: Manufacturing (SIC) (Index 2012=100)
     15   195 n.a.    5      0    IPB51222S                                 Industrial Production: Residential Utilities (Index 2012=100)
     16   196 n.a.    5      0    IPFUELS                                   Industrial Production: Fuels (Index 2012=100)




38
                                                 Group 3: Employment and Unemployment
                           sw
          id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic   sw mnemonic           description
     1    35  35     5      0    PAYEMS          Emp:Nonfarm           All Employees: Total nonfarm (Thousands of Persons)
     2    36  36     5      0    USPRIV          Emp:Private           All Employees: Total Private Industries (Thousands of Persons)
     3    37  37     5      0    MANEMP          Emp:mfg               All Employees: Manufacturing (Thousands of Persons)
     4    38  38     5      0    SRVPRD          Emp:Services          All Employees: Service-Providing Industries (Thousands of Persons)
     5    39  39     5      0    USGOOD          Emp:Goods             All Employees: Goods-Producing Industries (Thousands of Persons)
     6    40  40     5      1    DMANEMP         Emp:DurGoods          All Employees: Durable goods (Thousands of Persons)
     7    41  41     5      0    NDMANEMP        Emp:Nondur Goods      All Employees: Nondurable goods (Thousands of Persons)
     8    42  42     5      1    USCONS          Emp:Const             All Employees: Construction (Thousands of Persons)
     9    43  43     5      1    USEHS           Emp:Edu&Health        All Employees: Education & Health Services (Thousands of Persons)
     10   44  44     5      1    USFIRE          Emp:Finance           All Employees: Financial Activities (Thousands of Persons)
     11   45  45     5      1    USINFO          Emp:Infor             All Employees: Information Services (Thousands of Persons)
     12   46  46     5      1    USPBS           Emp:Bus Serv          All Employees: Professional & Business Services (Thousands of Persons)
     13   47  47     5      1    USLAH           Emp:Leisure           All Employees: Leisure & Hospitality (Thousands of Persons)
     14   48  48     5      1    USSERV          Emp:OtherSvcs         All Employees: Other Services (Thousands of Persons)
     15   49  49     5      1    USMINE          Emp:Mining/NatRes     All Employees: Mining and logging (Thousands of Persons)
     16   50  50     5      1    USTPU           Emp:Trade&Trans       All Employees: Trade, Transportation & Utilities (Thousands of Persons)
     17   51  51     5      0    USGOVT          Emp:Gov               All Employees: Government (Thousands of Persons)




39
     18   52  52     5      1    USTRADE         Emp:Retail            All Employees: Retail Trade (Thousands of Persons)
     19   53  53     5      1    USWTRADE        Emp:Wholesal          All Employees: Wholesale Trade (Thousands of Persons)
     20   54  54     5      1    CES9091000001   Emp:Gov(Fed)          All Employees: Government: Federal (Thousands of Persons)
     21   55  55     5      1    CES9092000001   Emp:Gov (State)       All Employees: Government: State Government (Thousands of Persons)
     22   56  56     5      1    CES9093000001   Emp:Gov (Local)       All Employees: Government: Local Government (Thousands of Persons)
     23   57  57     5      0    CE16OV          Emp:Total (HHSurve)   Civilian Employment (Thousands of Persons)
     24   58  58     2      0    CIVPART         LF Part Rate          Civilian Labor Force Participation Rate (Percent)
     25   59  59     2      0    UNRATE          Unemp Rate            Civilian Unemployment Rate (Percent)
     26   60  60     2      0    UNRATESTx       Urate_ST              Unemployment Rate less than 27 weeks (Percent)
     27   61  61     2      0    UNRATELTx       Urate_LT              Unemployment Rate for more than 27 weeks (Percent)
     28   62  62     2      1    LNS14000012     Urate:Age16-19        Unemployment Rate - 16 to 19 years (Percent)
     29   63  63     2      1    LNS14000025     Urate:Age>20 Men      Unemployment Rate - 20 years and over, Men (Percent)
     30   64  64     2      1    LNS14000026     Urate:Age>20 Women    Unemployment Rate - 20 years and over, Women (Percent)
     31   65  65     5      1    UEMPLT5         U:Dur<5wks            Number of Civilians Unemployed - Less Than 5 Weeks (Thousands of Persons)
     32   66  66     5      1    UEMP5TO14       U:Dur5-14wks          Number of Civilians Unemployed for 5 to 14 Weeks (Thousands of Persons)
     33   67  67     5      1    UEMP15T26       U:dur>15-26wks        Number of Civilians Unemployed for 15 to 26 Weeks (Thousands of Persons)
     34   68  68     5      1    UEMP27OV        U:Dur>27wks           Number of Civilians Unemployed for 27 Weeks and Over (Thousands of Persons)
     35   69  69     5      1    LNS13023621     U:Job losers          Unemployment Level - Job Losers (Thousands of Persons)
     36   70  70     5      1    LNS13023557     U:LF Reenty           Unemployment Level - Reentrants to Labor Force (Thousands of Persons)
     37   71  71     5      1    LNS13023705     U:Job Leavers         Unemployment Level - Job Leavers (Thousands of Persons)
     38   72  72     5      1    LNS13023569     U:New Entrants        Unemployment Level - New Entrants (Thousands of Persons)
                                            Group 3: Employment and Unemployment, continued
                              sw
          id    sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic sw mnemonic      description
     39   73     73     5      1    LNS12032194   Emp:SlackWk      Employment Level - Part-Time for Economic Reasons, All Industries (Thousands of
                                                                   Persons)
     40   74     74    5       0    HOABS           EmpHrs:Bus Sec Business Sector: Hours of All Persons (Index 2012=100)
     41   75     75    5       0    HOAMS           EmpHrs:mfg     Manufacturing Sector: Hours of All Persons (Index 2012=100)
     42   76     76    5       0    HOANBS          EmpHrs:nfb     Nonfarm Business Sector: Hours of All Persons (Index 2012=100)
     43   77     77    1       1    AWHMAN          AWH Man        Average Weekly Hours of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees: Manufacturing
                                                                   (Hours)
     44   78     78    2       1    AWHNONAG        AWH Privat     Average Weekly Hours Of Production And Nonsupervisory Employees: Total private
                                                                   (Hours)
     45   79     79    2       1    AWOTMAN         AWH Overtime Average Weekly Overtime Hours of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees:
                                                                   Manufacturing (Hours)
     46   80     80    1       0    HWIx            HelpWnted      Help-Wanted Index
     47   197   n.a.   2       0    UEMPMEAN                       Average (Mean) Duration of Unemployment (Weeks)
     48   198   n.a.   2       0    CES0600000007                  Average Weekly Hours of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees: Goods-Producing
     49   220   n.a.   2       0    HWIURATIOx                     Ratio of Help Wanted/No. Unemployed
     50   221   n.a.   5       0    CLAIMSx                        Initial Claims




40
                                                             Group 4: Housing
                             sw
         id    sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic sw mnemonic       description
     1   81     81     5      0    HOUST         Hstarts           Housing Starts: Total: New Privately Owned Housing Units Started (Thousands of
                                                                   Units)
     2    82    82    5       0    HOUST5F       Hstarts >5units   Privately Owned Housing Starts: 5-Unit Structures or More (Thousands of Units)
     3    83    83    5       1    PERMIT        Hpermits          New Private Housing Units Authorized by Building Permits (Thousands of Units)
     4    84    84    5       1    HOUSTMW       Hstarts:MW        Housing Starts in Midwest Census Region (Thousands of Units)
     5    85    85    5       1    HOUSTNE       Hstarts:NE        Housing Starts in Northeast Census Region (Thousands of Units)
     6    86    86    5       1    HOUSTS        Hstarts:S         Housing Starts in South Census Region (Thousands of Units)
     7    87    87    5       1    HOUSTW        Hstarts:W         Housing Starts in West Census Region (Thousands of Units)
     8   179   190    5       1    USSTHPI       Real Hprice:OFHEO All-Transactions House Price Index for the United States (Index 1980 Q1=100)
     9   180   191    5       1    SPCS10RSA     Real CS_10        S&P/Case-Shiller 10-City Composite Home Price Index (Index January 2000 =
                                                                   100)
     10 181    192    5       1    SPCS20RSA     Real CS_20        S&P/Case-Shiller 20-City Composite Home Price Index (Index January 2000 =
                                                                   100)
     11 227    n.a.   5       0    PERMITNE                        New Private Housing Units Authorized by Building Permits in the Northeast
                                                                   Census Region (Thousands, SAAR)
     12 228    n.a.   5       0    PERMITMW                        New Private Housing Units Authorized by Building Permits in the Midwest
                                                                   Census Region (Thousands, SAAR)




41
     13 229    n.a.   5       0    PERMITS                         New Private Housing Units Authorized by Building Permits in the South Census
                                                                   Region (Thousands, SAAR)
     14 230    n.a.   5       0    PERMITW                         New Private Housing Units Authorized by Building Permits in the West Census
                                                                   Region (Thousands, SAAR)
                                                    Group 5: Inventories, Orders, and Sales
                            sw
         id   sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic    sw mnemonic       description
     1   88    89     5      0    CMRMTSPLx        MT Sales          Real Manufacturing and Trade Industries Sales (Millions of Chained 2012
                                                                     Dollars)
     2   89    90    5       1    RSAFSx      Ret. Sale              Real Retail and Food Services Sales (Millions of Chained 2012 Dollars), deflated
                                                                     by Core PCE
     3   90    91    5       1    AMDMNOx     Orders (DurMfg)        Real Manufacturers' New Orders: Durable Goods (Millions of 2012 Dollars),
                                                                     deflated by Core PCE
     4   91    92    5       1    ACOGNOx     Orders(ConsGoods/Mat.) Real Value of Manufacturers' New Orders for Consumer Goods Industries
                                                                     (Millions of 2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     5   92    93    5       1    AMDMUOx     UnfOrders(DurGds)      Real Value of Manufacturers' Unfilled Orders for Durable Goods Industries
                                                                     (Millions of 2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     6   93    94    5       1    ANDENOx     Orders(NonDefCap)      Real Value of Manufacturers' New Orders for Capital Goods: Nondefense
                                                                     Capital Goods Industries (Millions of 2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     7 94      96    5       1    INVCQRMTSPL MT Invent              Real Manufacturing and Trade Inventories (Millions of 2012 Dollars)
     8 222    n.a.   5       0    BUSINVx                            Total Business Inventories (Millions of Dollars)
     9 223    n.a.   2       0    ISRATIOx                           Total Business: Inventories to Sales Ratio




42
                                                               Group 6: Prices
                             sw
         id    sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic        sw mnemonic       description
     1   95     97     6      0    PCECTPI              PCED              Personal Consumption Expenditures: Chain-type Price Index (Index
                                                                          2012=100)
     2   96     98    6       0    PCEPILFE        PCED_LFE               Personal Consumption Expenditures Excluding Food and Energy
                                                                          (Chain-Type Price Index) (Index 2012=100)
     3   97    99     6       0    GDPCTPI         GDP Defl               Gross Domestic Product: Chain-type Price Index (Index 2012=100)
     4   98    100    6       1    GPDICTPI        GPDI Defl              Gross Private Domestic Investment: Chain-type Price Index (Index
                                                                          2012=100)
     5    99   101    6       1    IPDBS           BusSec Defl            Business Sector: Implicit Price Deflator (Index 2012=100)
     6   100   102    6       0    DGDSRG3Q086SBEA PCED_Goods             Personal consumption expenditures: Goods (chain-type price index)
     7   101   103    6       0    DDURRG3Q086SBEA PCED_DurGoods          Personal consumption expenditures: Durable goods (chain-type price
                                                                          index)
     8   102   104    6       0    DSERRG3Q086SBEA PCED_Serv              Personal consumption expenditures: Services (chain-type price index)
     9   103   105    6       0    DNDGRG3Q086SBEA PCED_NDurGoods         Personal consumption expenditures: Nondurable goods (chain-type price
                                                                          index)
     10 104    106    6       0    DHCERG3Q086SBEA PCED_HouseholdServ.    Personal consumption expenditures: Services: Household consumption
                                                                          expenditures (chain-type price index)
     11 105    107    6       1    DMOTRG3Q086SBEA PCED_MotorVec          Personal consumption expenditures: Durable goods: Motor vehicles and




43
                                                                          parts (chain-type price index)
     12 106    108    6       1    DFDHRG3Q086SBEA PCED_DurHousehold      Personal consumption expenditures: Durable goods: Furnishings and
                                                                          durable household equipment (chain-type price index)
     13 107    109    6       1    DREQRG3Q086SBEA PCED_Recreation        Personal consumption expenditures: Durable goods: Recreational goods
                                                                          and vehicles (chain-type price index)
     14 108    110    6       1    DODGRG3Q086SBEA PCED_OthDurGds         Personal consumption expenditures: Durable goods: Other durable goods
                                                                          (chain-type price index)
     15 109    111    6       1    DFXARG3Q086SBEA PCED_Food_Bev          Personal consumption expenditures: Nondurable goods: Food and
                                                                          beverages purchased for off-premises consumption (chain-type price
                                                                          index)
     16 110    112    6       1    DCLORG3Q086SBEA PCED_Clothing          Personal consumption expenditures: Nondurable goods: Clothing and
                                                                          footwear (chain-type price index)
     17 111    113    6       1    DGOERG3Q086SBEA PCED_Gas_Enrgy         Personal consumption expenditures: Nondurable goods: Gasoline and
                                                                          other energy goods (chain-type price index)
     18 112    114    6       1    DONGRG3Q086SBEA PCED_OthNDurGds        Personal consumption expenditures: Nondurable goods: Other
                                                                          nondurable goods (chain-type price index)
     19 113    115    6       1    DHUTRG3Q086SBEA PCED_Housing-Utilities Personal consumption expenditures: Services: Housing and utilities
                                                                          (chain-type price index)
     20 114    116    6       1    DHLCRG3Q086SBEA PCED_HealthCare        Personal consumption expenditures: Services: Health care (chain-type
                                                                          price index)
     21 115    117    6       1    DTRSRG3Q086SBEA PCED_TransSvg          Personal consumption expenditures: Transportation services (chain-type
                                                                          price index)
                                                   Group 6: Prices, continued
                          sw
         id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic   sw mnemonic           description
     22 116 118     6      1    DRCARG3Q086SBEA PCED_RecServices      Personal consumption expenditures: Recreation services (chain-type
                                                                      price index)
     23 117   119    6    1    DFSARG3Q086SBEA   PCED_FoodServ_Acc. Personal consumption expenditures: Services: Food services and
                                                                      accommodations (chain-type price index)
     24 118   120    6    1    DIFSRG3Q086SBEA   PCED_FIRE            Personal consumption expenditures: Financial services and insurance
                                                                      (chain-type price index)
     25 119   121    6    1    DOTSRG3Q086SBEA   PCED_OtherServices   Personal consumption expenditures: Other services (chain-type price
                                                                      index)
     26 120   122    6    0    CPIAUCSL          CPI                  Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items (Index
                                                                      1982-84=100)
     27 121   123    6    0    CPILFESL          CPI_LFE              Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items Less Food &
                                                                      Energy (Index 1982-84=100)
     28 122   124    6    0    WPSFD49207        PPI:FinGds           Producer Price Index by Commodity for Finished Goods (Index 1982=100)
     29 123   125    6    0    PPIACO            PPI                  Producer Price Index for All Commodities (Index 1982=100)
     30 124   126    6    1    WPSFD49502        PPI:FinConsGds       Producer Price Index by Commodity for Finished Consumer Goods (Index
                                                                      1982=100)
     31 125   127    6    1    WPSFD4111         PPI:FinConsGds(Food) Producer Price Index by Commodity for Finished Consumer Foods (Index




44
                                                                      1982=100)
     32 126   128    6    1    PPIIDC            PPI:IndCom           Producer Price Index by Commodity Industrial Commodities (Index
                                                                      1982=100)
     33 127   129    6    1    WPSID61           PPI:IntMat           Producer Price Index by Commodity Intermediate Materials: Supplies &
                                                                      Components (Index 1982=100)
     34 128   133    5    1    WPU0531           Real Price:NatGas    Producer Price Index by Commodity for Fuels and Related Products and
                                                                      Power: Natural Gas (Index 1982=100)
     35 129   134    5    1    WPU0561           Real Price:Oil       Producer Price Index by Commodity for Fuels and Related Products and
                                                                      Power: Crude Petroleum (Domestic Production) (Index 1982=100)
     36 130   135    5    0    OILPRICEx         Real Crudeoil Price  Real Crude Oil Prices: West Texas Intermediate (WTI) - Cushing,
                                                                      Oklahoma (2012 Dollars per Barrel), deflated by Core PCE
     37 205   n.a.   6    0    WPSID62                                Producer Price Index: Crude Materials for Further Processing (Index
                                                                      1982=100)
     38 206   n.a.   6    0    PPICMM                                 Producer Price Index: Commodities: Metals and metal products: Primary
                                                                      nonferrous metals (Index 1982=100)
     39 207   n.a.   6    0    CPIAPPSL                               Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Apparel (Index
                                                                      1982-84=100)
     40 208   n.a.   6    0    CPITRNSL                               Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Transportation (Index
                                                                      1982-84=100)
     41 209   n.a.   6    0    CPIMEDSL                               Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Medical Care (Index
                                                                      1982-84=100)
     42 210   n.a.   6    0    CUSR0000SAC                            Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Commodities (Index
                                                                      1982-84=100)
                                                Group 6: Prices, continued
                          sw
         id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic sw mnemonic description
     43 211 n.a.    6      0    CUSR0000SAD               Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Durables (Index
                                                          1982-84=100)
     44 212   n.a.   6     0    CUSR0000SAS               Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Services (Index
                                                          1982-84=100)
     45 213   n.a.   6     0    CPIULFSL                  Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items Less Food
                                                          (Index 1982-84=100)
     46 214   n.a.   6     0    CUSR0000SA0L2             Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All items less shelter
                                                          (Index 1982-84=100)
     47 215   n.a.   6     0    CUSR0000SA0L5             Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All items less medical
                                                          care (Index 1982-84=100)
     48 233   n.a.   6     0    CUSR0000SEHC              CPI for All Urban Consumers: Owners' equivalent rent of residences
                                                          (Index Dec 1982=100)




45
                                                    Group 7: Earnings and Productivity
                            sw
           id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic  sw mnemonic      description
     1    131 136     5      0    AHETPIx        Real AHE:PrivInd Real Average Hourly Earnings of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees: Total
                                                                  Private (2012 Dollars per Hour), deflated by Core PCE
     2    132   137    5     0    CES2000000008x Real AHE:Const   Real Average Hourly Earnings of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees:
                                                                  Construction (2012 Dollars per Hour), deflated by Core PCE
     3    133   138    5     0    CES3000000008x Real AHE:MFG     Real Average Hourly Earnings of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees:
                                                                  Manufacturing (2012 Dollars per Hour), deflated by Core PCE
     4    134   139    5     1    COMPRMS        CPH:Mfg          Manufacturing Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour (Index 2012=100)
     5    135   140    5     1    COMPRNFB       CPH:NFB          Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour (Index 2012=100)
     6    136   141    5     1    RCPHBS         CPH:Bus          Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour (Index 2012=100)
     7    137   142    5     1    OPHMFG         OPH:mfg          Manufacturing Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All Persons (Index 2012=100)
     8    138   143    5     1    OPHNFB         OPH:nfb          Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All Persons (Index 2012=100)
     9    139   144    5     0    OPHPBS         OPH:Bus          Business Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All Persons (Index 2012=100)
     10   140   145    5     0    ULCBS          ULC:Bus          Business Sector: Unit Labor Cost (Index 2012=100)
     11   141   146    5     1    ULCMFG         ULC:Mfg          Manufacturing Sector: Unit Labor Cost (Index 2012=100)
     12   142   147    5     1    ULCNFB         ULC:NFB          Nonfarm Business Sector: Unit Labor Cost (Index 2012=100)
     13   143   148    5     1    UNLPNBS        UNLPay:nfb       Nonfarm Business Sector: Unit Nonlabor Payments (Index 2012=100)
     14   216   n.a.   6     0    CES0600000008                   Average Hourly Earnings of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees:




46
                                                                  Goods-Producing (Dollars per Hour)
                                                        Group 8: Interest Rates
                            sw
           id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic   sw mnemonic     description
     1    144 149     2      1    FEDFUNDS        FedFunds        Effective Federal Funds Rate (Percent)
     2    145 150     2      1    TB3MS           TB-3Mth         3-Month Treasury Bill: Secondary Market Rate (Percent)
     3    146 151     2      0    TB6MS           TM-6MTH         6-Month Treasury Bill: Secondary Market Rate (Percent)
     4    147 153     2      0    GS1             TB-1YR          1-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate (Percent)
     5    148 154     2      0    GS10            TB-10YR         10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate (Percent)
     6    149 155     2      0    MORTGAGE30US    Mort-30Yr       30-Year Conventional Mortgage Rate© (Percent)
     7    150 156     2      0    AAA             AAA Bond        Moody's Seasoned Aaa Corporate Bond Yield© (Percent)
     8    151 157     2      0    BAA             BAA Bond        Moody's Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield© (Percent)
     9    152 158     1      1    BAA10YM         BAA_GS10        Moody's Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield Relative to Yield on 10-Year Treasury
                                                                  Constant Maturity (Percent)
     10 153     159    1    1    MORTG10YRx       MRTG_GS10       30-Year Conventional Mortgage Rate Relative to 10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity
                                                                  (Percent)
     11 154     160    1    1    TB6M3Mx          tb6m_tb3m       6-Month Treasury Bill Minus 3-Month Treasury Bill, secondary market (Percent)
     12 155     161    1    1    GS1TB3Mx         GS1_tb3m        1-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Minus 3-Month Treasury Bill, secondary market
                                                                  (Percent)
     13 156     162    1    1    GS10TB3Mx        GS10_tb3m       10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Minus 3-Month Treasury Bill, secondary market
                                                                  (Percent)




47
     14   157   163    1    1    CPF3MTB3Mx       CP_Tbill Spread 3-Month Commercial Paper Minus 3-Month Treasury Bill, secondary market (Percent)
     15   201   n.a.   2    0    GS5                              5-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate
     16   202   n.a.   1    0    TB3SMFFM                         3-Month Treasury Constant Maturity Minus Federal Funds Rate
     17   203   n.a.   1    0    T5YFFM                           5-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Minus Federal Funds Rate
     18   204   n.a.   1    0    AAAFFM                           Moody's Seasoned Aaa Corporate Bond Minus Federal Funds Rate
     19   225   n.a.   2    0    CP3M                             3-Month AA Financial Commercial Paper Rate
     20   226   n.a.   1    0    COMPAPFF                         3-Month Commercial Paper Minus Federal Funds Rate
                                                  Group 9: Money and Credit
                           sw
          id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic sw mnemonic        description
     1   158 167     5      0    BOGMBASEREALx Real Mbase         Monetary Base (Millions of 1982-84 Dollars), deflated by CPI
     2   159 168     5      0    IMFSLx        Real InsMMF        Real Institutional Money Funds (Billions of 2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     3   160 169     5      0    M1REAL        Real m1            Real M1 Money Stock (Billions of 1982-84 Dollars), deflated by CPI
     4   161 170     5      0    M2REAL        Real m2            Real M2 Money Stock (Billions of 1982-84 Dollars), deflated by CPI
     5   162 171     5      0    MZMREAL       Real mzm           Real MZM Money Stock (Billions of 1982-84 Dollars), deflated by CPI
     6   163 172     5      1    BUSLOANSx     Real C&Lloand      Real Commercial and Industrial Loans, All Commercial Banks (Billions of 2012
                                                                  U.S. Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     7   164   173    5    1    CONSUMERx       Real ConsLoans    Real Consumer Loans at All Commercial Banks (Billions of 2012 U.S. Dollars),
                                                                  deflated by Core PCE
     8   165   174    5    1    NONREVSLx       Real NonRevCredit Total Real Nonrevolving Credit Owned and Securitized, Outstanding (Billions of 2012
                                                                  Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     9   166   175    5    1    REALLNx         Real LoansRealEst Real Real Estate Loans, All Commercial Banks (Billions of 2012 U.S. Dollars),
                                                                  deflated by Core PCE
     10 167    176    5    1    REVOLSLx        Real RevolvCredit Total Real Revolving Credit Owned and Securitized, Outstanding (Billions of
                                                                  2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     11 168    177    5    0    TOTALSLx        Real ConsuCred    Total Consumer Credit Outstanding (Billions of 2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     12 169    178    1    1    DRIWCIL         FRBSLO_Consumers FRB Senior Loans Officer Opions. Net Percentage of Domestic Respondents




48
                                                                  Reporting Increased Willingness to Make Consumer Installment Loans
     13 199    n.a.   6    0    TOTRESNS                          Total Reserves of Depository Institutions (Billions of Dollars)
     14 200    n.a.   7    0    NONBORRES                         Reserves Of Depository Institutions, Nonborrowed (Millions of Dollars)
     15 217    n.a.   6    0    DTCOLNVHFNM                       Consumer Motor Vehicle Loans Outstanding Owned by Finance Companies
                                                                  (Millions of Dollars)
     16 218    n.a.   6    0    DTCTHFNM                          Total Consumer Loans and Leases Outstanding Owned and Securitized by
                                                                  Finance Companies (Millions of Dollars)
     17 219    n.a.   6    0    INVEST                            Securities in Bank Credit at All Commercial Banks (Billions of Dollars)
                                                     Group 10: Household Balance Sheets
                         sw
        id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic       sw mnemonic  description
     1 170 179     5      0    TABSHNOx            Real HHW:TASAReal Total Assets of Households and Nonprofit Organizations (Billions of 2012
                                                                Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     2 171     181    5      1    TLBSHNOx     Real HHW:LiabSA  Real Total Liabilities of Households and Nonprofit Organizations (Billions of 2012
                                                                Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     3 172     182    5      0    LIABPIx      liab_PDISA       Liabilities of Households and Nonprofit Organizations Relative to Personal
                                                                Disposable Income (Percent)
     4 173     183    5      1    TNWBSHNOx    Real HHW:WSA     Real Net Worth of Households and Nonprofit Organizations (Billions of 2012
                                                                Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     5 174     184    1      0    NWPIx        W_PDISA          Net Worth of Households and Nonprofit Organizations Relative to Disposable
                                                                Personal Income (Percent)
     6 175     185    5      1    TARESAx      Real HHW:TA_RESA Real Assets of Households and Nonprofit Organizations excluding Real Estate
                                                                Assets (Billions of 2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     7 176     186    5      1    HNOREMQ027Sx Real HHW:RESA    Real Real Estate Assets of Households and Nonprofit Organizations (Billions of
                                                                2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     8 177     188    5      1    TFAABSHNOx   Real HHW:FinSA   Real Total Financial Assets of Households and Nonprofit Organizations (Billions
                                                                of 2012 Dollars), deflated by Core PCE
     9 224     n.a.   2      0    CONSPIx                       Nonrevolving consumer credit to Personal Income




49
                                                          Group 11: Exchange Rates
                               sw
              id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic   sw mnemonic      description
       1     182 193     5      1    TWEXMMTH        Ex rate:major    Trade Weighted U.S. Dollar Index: Major Currencies (Index March 1973=100)
       2     183 194     5      1    EXUSEU          Ex rate:Euro     U.S. / Euro Foreign Exchange Rate (U.S. Dollars to One Euro)
       3     184 195     5      1    EXSZUSx         Ex rate:Switz    Switzerland / U.S. Foreign Exchange Rate
       4     185 196     5      1    EXJPUSx         Ex rate:Japan    Japan / U.S. Foreign Exchange Rate
       5     186 197     5      1    EXUSUKx         Ex rate:UK       U.S. / U.K. Foreign Exchange Rate
       6     187 198     5      1    EXCAUSx         EX rate:Canada   Canada / U.S. Foreign Exchange Rate



                                                               Group 12: Other
                           sw
          id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic sw mnemonic        description
       1 188 199     1      1    UMCSENTx      Cons. Expectations University of Michigan: Consumer Sentiment (Index 1st Quarter 1966=100)
       2 189 200     2      1    USEPUINDXM PolicyUncertainty     Economic Policy Uncertainty Index for United States
                                                               Group 13: Stock Markets
                                            sw
                           id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic sw mnemonic        description
                      1   178 189     1      1    VXOCLSx        VXO               CBOE S&P 100 Volatility Index: VXO
                      2   231 n.a.    5      0    NIKKEI225                        Nikkei Stock Average
                      3   232 n.a.    5      0    NASDAQCOM                        NASDAQ Composite (Index Feb 5, 1971=100)
                      4   245 180     5      0    S&P 500                          S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Composite
                      5   246 n.a.    5      0    S&P: indust                      S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Industrials
                      6   247 n.a.    2      0    S&P: div yield                   S&P's Composite Common Stock: Dividend Yield
                      7   248 n.a.    5      0    S&P PE ratio                     S&P's Composite Common Stock: Price-Earnings Ratio



                                                      Group 14: Non-Household Balance Sheets
                           sw
          id sw id tcode factors fred mnemonic         sw mnemonic description
     1   192 n.a.    2      0    GFDEGDQ188S                       Federal Debt: Total Public Debt as Percent of GDP (Percent)
     2   193 n.a.    2      0    GFDEBTNx                          Real Federal Debt: Total Public Debt (Millions of 2012 Dollars), deflated by PCE
     3   234 n.a.    5      0    TLBSNNCBx                         Real Nonfinancial Corporate Business Sector Liabilities (Billions of 2012 Dollars),
                                                                   Deflated by Implicit Price Deflator for Business Sector IPDBS




50
     4   235   n.a.       1       0    TLBSNNCBBDIx                Nonfinancial Corporate Business Sector Liabilities to Disposable Business
                                                                   Income (Percent)
     5   236   n.a.       5       0    TTAABSNNCBx                 Real Nonfinancial Corporate Business Sector Assets (Billions of 2012 Dollars),
                                                                   Deflated by Implicit Price Deflator for Business Sector IPDBS
     6   237   n.a.       5       0    TNWMVBSNNCBx                Real Nonfinancial Corporate Business Sector Net Worth (Billions of 2012 Dollars),
                                                                   Deflated by Implicit Price Deflator for Business Sector IPDBS
     7   238   n.a.       2       0    TNWMVBSNNCBBDIx             Nonfinancial Corporate Business Sector Net Worth to Disposable Business Income
                                                                   (Percent)
     8   239   n.a.       5       0    TLBSNNBx                    Real Nonfinancial Noncorporate Business Sector Liabilities (Billions of 2012
                                                                   Dollars), Deflated by Implicit Price Deflator for Business Sector IPDBS
     9   240   n.a.       1       0    TLBSNNBBDIx                 Nonfinancial Noncorporate Business Sector Liabilities to Disposable Business
                                                                   Income (Percent)
     10 241    n.a.       5       0    TABSNNBx                    Real Nonfinancial Noncorporate Business Sector Assets (Billions of 2012 Dollars),
                                                                   Deflated by Implicit Price Deflator for Business Sector IPDBS
     11 242    n.a.       5       0    TNWBSNNBx                   Real Nonfinancial Noncorporate Business Sector Net Worth (Billions of 2012
                                                                   Dollars), Deflated by Implicit Price Deflator for Business Sector IPDBS
     12 243    n.a.       2       0    TNWBSNNBBDIx                Nonfinancial Noncorporate Business Sector Net Worth to Disposable Business
                                                                   Income (Percent)
     13 244    n.a.       5       0    CNCFx                       Real Disposable Business Income, Billions of 2012 Dollars (Corporate cash flow
                                                                   with IVA minus taxes on corporate income, deflated by Implicit Price Deflator for
                                                                   Business Sector IPDBS)
