                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               BANK STRESS TESTING:
                     PUBLIC INTEREST OR REGULATORY CAPTURE?

                                      Thomas Ian Schneider
                                        Philip E. Strahan
                                            Jun Yang

                                       Working Paper 26887
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26887


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank seminar participants at the Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, and Kellogg. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26887.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thomas Ian Schneider, Philip E. Strahan, and Jun Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bank Stress Testing: Public Interest or Regulatory Capture?
Thomas Ian Schneider, Philip E. Strahan, and Jun Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 26887
March 2020
JEL No. G21

                                           ABSTRACT

We test whether measures of potential influence on regulators affect stress test outcomes. The
large trading banks ­ those most plausibly `Too big to Fail' ­ face the toughest tests. In contrast,
we find no evidence that either political or regulatory connections affect the tests. Stress tests
have a greater effect on the value of large trading banks' portfolios; the large trading banks
respond by making more conservative capital plans; and, despite their more conservative capital
plans, the large trading banks still fail their tests more frequently than other banks. These results
are consistent with a public-interest view of regulation, not regulatory capture.


Thomas Ian Schneider                              Jun Yang
Old Dominion University                           Notre Dame
Norfolk, VA 23529                                 South Bend, IN 46556
tischnei@odu.edu                                  jyang23@nd.edu

Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

           Stigler (1971) upended the standard analysis of regulation, arguing that "... as a rule, regulation

is acquired by the industry and is designed and operated primarily for its benefit." It is hard to overstate

the impact of this idea. Regulatory capture has replaced the public interest theory of regulation, whereby

government regulations solve market failures using Pigouvian taxes or by providing public goods, as

the dominant paradigm in economics and public choice.1 Bank regulation has often been viewed

through Stigler's lens, and his argument gained substantial influence in understanding the 2008 Global

Financial Crisis (e.g., Johnson and Kwak (2011), Admati, et al. (2013), Acemoglu, et al. (2016), and

many others).

           In this paper, we assess the implementation of bank stress testing by the U.S. Federal Reserve

(the `Fed'), which is the most important innovation in bank capital regulation to have emerged in the

wake of the Financial Crisis. We assess the integrity of the stress test regime by comparing its effects

across banks, focusing on differences between banks most likely to be able to influence regulatory

decisions and less influential banks.2 Contrary to the theory of regulatory capture, we find little evidence

that influential banks receive preferential treatment by regulators. This is perhaps surprising because

stress testing contains elements often associated with capture theory: the costs and benefits are

concentrated among the regulated entities (banks), and the rules and implementation of the regulations

are both complex and opaque.

           We use three metrics for the potential influence of banks on their regulators. First, we

focus on the largest six bank holding companies (Bank of America, Citigroup, JP Morgan Chase,

Wells Fargo, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley). These banks ­ which we will refer to as the


1
    Despite this conventional view, empirical support for regulatory capture is mixed (Kalt and Zupan, 1984).
2
  Stress tests are implemented at the level of the Bank Holding Company. To simplify the exposition, and to avoid using
clumsy acronyms like BHC, we will refer to these firms as `banks'.
                                                            1
`large trading banks' - as a group hold about $11 trillion in assets in 2018 (more than 50% of total

U.S. banking assets). They are also deeply inter-connected to the global capital markets. We

therefore argue that investors plausibly view them as Too Big to Fail (TBTF), meaning that their

failure would impose the greatest external costs on the financial system and the broader economy

(Strahan, 2012). Given this status, the public interest view of regulation predicts greater regulatory

oversight and more capital for them, compared to other banks. Simply put, the largest banks ought

to face the toughest tests. Under regulatory capture, in contrast, these largest banks would lobby

for, and likely receive, more leniency under the stress tests. We provide unambiguous evidence that

the large trading banks face tougher stress tests than other banks.

        For our second measure, we build an indicator for banks with executive officers who have

held senior positions at bank regulators (e.g., seats of Federal Reserve Bank Boards) during their

employment history. Our third measure, one with continuous variation, equals the sum of political

contributions made by banks to political candidates and their political action committees (PACs)

over the past two congressional election cycles plus their lobbying expenses on regulatory issues.

Capture theory would predict that regulatory or political connections help firms gain favoritism,

which might lead to more leniency under the tests. We find little evidence of such leniency. Banks

connected to regulators are not more affected by the quantitative or qualitative components of stress

tests than other banks. Similarly, political donations and lobbying do not correlate to any of the stress

test outcomes that we consider.

        To understand our specific findings, a few details: The 2008 Financial Crisis initiated

dramatic changes in regulation and supervision of financial institutions. In early 2009, at the height

of the crisis, the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) represented the first stress

testing effort. The SCAP aimed to ensure that the 19 largest banks had sufficient capital coming


                                                    2
out of the crisis to absorb losses under poor economic conditions and continue supplying credit to

the economy, thereby short-circuiting a negative feedback loop between real shocks and financial

shocks. Nine banks `passed' the SCAP outright, and so regulators allowed them to continue

operating without needing to raise new equity capital. Of the remaining ten, all but one succeeded

in raising sufficient capital in private markets to meet their required capital ratios.

        Following the successful SCAP, the Fed decided to implement supervisory stress tests for

the large banks (those with assets above $50 billion) on a regular basis. The newly renamed

Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), like SCAP, aims to ensure that banks have

sufficient capital to absorb losses under an economic and financial downturn to continue lending.

To implement CCAR, the Fed specifies three possible economic scenarios (baseline, adverse, and

severely adverse). These scenarios represent possible sample paths for risk drivers for the

aggregate economy during the 9-quarters following the test. Key risk drivers include housing

prices, unemployment rates, economic growth rates, asset prices, interest rates and exchange rates.

Under each scenario, the Fed simulates the path of each bank's regulatory capital ratios using its

own proprietary model. The minimum value of these ratios under the severely adverse scenario

determines the quantitative outcome of the test. All tested banks face the same model and the

same economic scenarios. Differences depend on two bank-specific factors: 1) the starting values

for positions (which determine each bank's exposure to the risk drivers); and, 2) the bank's

commitment for the path of dividends and net share repurchases during the 9-quarter-ahead

horizon.   In addition, the Fed undertakes a qualitative review of each bank's internal risk

management policies and practices. Passage of the CCAR depends on both the qualitative and

quantitative aspects of the tests.




                                                   3
         In addition to CCAR, the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Fed to conduct a parallel set of

annual stress tests, known as the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests (DFAST). These began in 2013.

The key difference: under CCAR each bank must propose a capital distribution plan incorporated

into the stress test, whereas DFAST uses a standardized capital distribution plan which holds

dividends at their current level and sets net repurchases to zero. DFAST also requires banks to run

(and disclose) stress tests using the same set of inputs (i.e., the Fed's scenarios and the standard

capital distribution plan) but with their own, internally developed model. We use all three sets of

quantitative results disclosed publicly: CCAR results; DFAST results from the Fed's proprietary

model; and the DFAST results from each bank's own model.3 Comparing results across the three

approaches allows us to draw inferences about each bank's proposed capital plan (by comparing

CCAR results with DFAST, both from the Fed's model) and also to infer how well banks

understand the Fed's proprietary model (by comparing the difference between DFAST from the

Fed's model with DFAST from the bank's model).

         Our first set of tests focuses on the quantitative impact of stress tests on bank portfolios,

measured by the decline in capital ratios under DFAST, compared to the capital ratio at the start

of the test. As we show, the large trading banks' portfolios decline much more under the stress

tests than that of other banks. The difference is large ­ on the order of two to three percentage

points of risk-weighted assets; the difference also persists across all seven stress test cycles (2013

to 2019). The largest banks face greater exposure because their tests include an additional

component designed specifically to assess trading risks (the so-called `Global Market Shock'),

which other banks do not face. Our results show that trading banks' capital ratios are hit

particularly hard during these scenarios, consistent with the public interest view of regulation. In


3
  We do not have access to the details of either the Fed's model or the banks' models, only the publicly disclosed results for
the capital ratios built from these models.
                                                             4
contrast, we find no correlation between our other two measures of potential bank influence and

the quantitative results of the stress tests.

        Second, we consider the likelihood of failing CCAR. We find that the large trading banks

are more likely to fail CCAR, even controlling for the quantitative results from their stress

tests. There are two possible reasons for this. Either the trading banks report more aggressive

capital plans; or, these banks face greater scrutiny on the qualitative dimensions of the tests. We

find that the large trading banks submit more conservative capital plans than other banks. This

suggests that they are reluctant to commit to an aggressive dividend increase for fear of failing

CCAR. The higher rate of failure for the trading banks, despite their conservative capital planning,

reflects greater regulatory scrutiny of internal risk-management practices and governance. That

is, the biggest banks fail more because of the qualitative dimensions of the test. This effect of

stress testing is consistent with good public policy, given the TBTF problem.

        In our third set of tests, we explore how banks choose their capital plans, given the

constraints imposed by CCAR. Banks face the following tradeoff in making this choice: A more

aggressive capital plan brings the benefit of greater freedom to increase dividends in the future,

but a more aggressive capital plan also raises the likelihood and cost of failing CCAR. Since banks

do not have perfect knowledge of the quantitative results CCAR will produce when they submit

their plans (due to the proprietary nature of the Fed's model), their choice can only reflect their

best guess of the CCAR results.

        We show that trading banks make more conservative capital plans. This result is partly

explained by these banks expecting to face a tougher test. In particular, we show that the difference

in their capital plans attenuates when we control for the outcomes from the DFAST version of the

stress test. We find no significance of the other two measures of potential influence on bank capital


                                                 5
planning. The capital plans, we show, in fact forecast future dividend distributions, as intended.

In other words, commitments made to regulators for the stress test regime matter. As we show,

trading banks not only submit more conservative capital plans under CCAR, they also implement

more conservative capital distributions. Once we control for their committed capital actions,

however, this loses statistical significance.

       Fourth, we test whether potentially influential banks have greater understanding of the

Fed's models that undergird CCAR by examining differences between banks' and the Fed's

minimum projected capital ratios under DFAST. We find no evidence that they do.

       We complete the analysis by comparing the evolution of both capital ratios and the two

time-varying measures of connectedness, before and after the advent of the stress-testing

regime. We show that after the stress tests, regulatory capital ratios for the large trading banks

increase relative to other stress-tested banks. Stress testing thus succeeds in recapitalizing the most

systemically important banks. We also document that neither regulatory connections nor

political/lobbying expenses for the large trading banks shifted relative to the other tested

banks. This helps allay the identification concern that exposure to stress tests might drive the

connections variables (rather than the reverse, which is the basis of our core analysis).

       We contribute to the emerging literature on bank stress testing. Much of this literature

focuses on how stress testing has affected large banks' willingness to supply credit. Acharya,

Berger and Roman (2017) document that stress-tested banks reduce large corporate loan supply

and increase prices particularly for riskier borrowers, while Bassett and Berrospide (2017) do not

find any negative impact of stress tests on bank loan growth in general. Cortes, et al. (2019) find

that banks exposed to stress tests reallocate small-business credit away from risky markets, but

that other lenders fill in the gaps. Chen et al. (2017) show a sharp decline in small business lending


                                                  6
by the four largest banks that has hurt local economies, and Bord et al. (2018) find that banks with

large losses from the Crisis reduced small business lending the most.

        There is also considerable debate about the efficacy of stress tests as a means of regulating

capital. Frame et al. (2015) illustrate the abject failure of stress testing in preventing the failure of

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac before the financial crisis. Schuermann (2016) questions whether

the efficacy of stress testing outside of crisis periods has been adequately thought out by regulators.

Hirtle et al. (2009) argue, however, that stress tests have become a key tool in banking supervision.

Goldstein and Leitner (2017) theoretically analyze the tradeoffs faced by regulators regarding

disclosure of stress test results. They focus on how disclosure of individual bank risks by

regulators can affect inter-bank markets and risk sharing. In addition to bank-level results, the Fed

has consistently disclosed many other aspects of its stress testing procedures. Disclosure probably

makes regulatory capture less likely, particularly given the strong attention of the financial press

on the disclosed outcomes of both CCAR and DFAST. Consistent with this conjecture, our results

suggest that stress test implementation has been more consistent with a public interest view of

banking regulation.

        Our paper is closest to studies focusing on distortions or conflicts of interest in regulatory

implementation. Studies of the 2008 Financial Crisis report evidence that access to bailouts was

higher for politically connected banks (Duchin and Sosyura, 2012; Li, 2013; Berger et al., 2015;

Acemoglu et al., 2016), and that recipients of bailout funds took greater risk than other banks

(Duchin and Sosurya, 2014). Cornett et al. (2019) provide evidence that stress tested banks spend

more on lobbying than other banks. More generally, Agarwal et al. (2014) report that state-

regulators are more lenient than federal ones, particularly during periods of local economic stress.

Lim et al. (2019) argue that the revolving door between regulators and financial firms leads to


                                                   7
more risk taking, although Agarwal et al. (2014) and Shive and Forster (2017) report evidence that

financial firms employ ex-regulators to acquire their risk-management expertise and other skills.

Our paper is the first to consider stress testing through the lens of theories of regulation. In contrast

to much of the extant research, our evidence suggests that stress tests have advanced the public

interest by subjecting banks plausibly viewed at TBTF to a tougher test, which has in turn led those

banks to implement more conservative capital structure policies.



II. STRESS TESTS: IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

           Stress testing began in 2009 as a means to ensure that U.S. banks had sufficient capital in

the wake of the losses from the 2008 Financial Crisis. The first round of tests (SCAP) succeeded

beyond expectation, leading to an inflow of more than $200 billion in private capital and a quick

end to arguments that U.S. banks should be nationalized (Krugman, 2009).4 Over the subsequent

years, stress testing evolved into the core of bank capital regulation, particularly for the largest

banks (those with assets over $50 billion). Our analysis uses data generated from the seven stress

test cycles from 2013 through 2019, which constitutes a stable regime in which the process had

matured.5

           To understand our analysis, we first need to describe in more detail how the process works.

As noted above, the Fed manages the stress tests, both under its authority as supervisor of banks

(CCAR) and also as mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act (DFAST). During each cycle, we use data




4
    https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100506a.htm
5
  The basic infrastructure and disclosure did not change over this period, although the sophistication of the models and data
requirements have increased over time. Also, in 2019 the smaller banks move to a biannual cycle.

                                                             8
on the effect of the tests on bank capital ratios under three distinct approaches: two mandated by

the Dodd Frank Act (DFAST) and one under CCAR.6

          Under the two DFAST regimes, the 9-quarter ahead path of regulatory capital ratios are

generated two ways, once by the Fed using its own proprietary model (which forecasts income,

expenses and losses), and in parallel by each bank using its own internal model. The minimum

value attained by a given capital ratio over its 9-quarter sample path summarizes the effect of the

test, which we often refer to as the `stressed capital ratio.'7 We use the term `DFAST-Fed' to

denote outcomes from the Fed's models and `DFAST-Bank' to denote those based on bank

models. We do not observe bank-specific inputs to the models. Both DFAST tests use the same

scenarios, determined by the Fed. The specific ratios constructed (and disclosed) have varied

somewhat over the seven cycles, so we focus on the three ratios disclosed across all seven cycles:

the Tier 1 Risk-Based Capital Ratio, the Total Risk-Based Capital Ratio, and the Tier 1 Leverage

Ratio.8

          The CCAR stress tests share all but one element with DFAST-Fed: both use the same

scenarios, the same set of starting values for bank positions, and the same model (that is, the Fed's).

The one difference comes from the assumptions regarding capital distributions over the 9-quarter-

ahead planning horizon. DFAST uses a standardized capital plan, extrapolating each bank's

current dividend payout over the horizon and zeroing out other forms of capital distributions (e.g.,

net share repurchases).           CCAR, in contrast, requires banks to provide their actual capital


6
 CCAR also requires banks to run stress tests using their own scenario, both with their own model and with the Fed's model.
These results are not publicly disclosed, however, but they are used as part of the Fed's assessment of each bank's risk
management policies and practices.
7
 The full sample path of the capital ratios are not disclosed, only their starting value, minimum value and end values. In the
vast majority of cases, the minimum value equals the end value.
8
 The Tier 1 Common Ratio was discontinued after 2015; Common Equity Tier 1 Capital was implemented in 2014 for select
banks and is now reported for all banks; and the Supplementary Leverage Ratio was adopted in 2017 for select banks.
                                                            9
distribution plans over the 9-quarter horizon, including net share repurchases and planned changes

(typically increases) in dividends. These proposed capital plans are binding on banks, in that they

may not exceed them without prior Fed approval. For our purposes, we build a measure of the

increase in each bank's planned capital distributions (as a fraction of current assets) by comparing

the difference between the minimum capital ratios from CCAR vs. those of DFAST-Fed.9 To a

first approximation, the measure equals the difference between the minimum capital ratio under

DFAST-Fed minus CCAR, because the capital ratios differ only in the assumed underlying

distributions to shareholders ­ otherwise, the two share the same model, the same scenario, and

the same set of positions.

         The Fed uses CCAR as its primary tool to assess bank regulatory capital adequacy.

According to the Fed, "Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) is an intensive

assessment of the capital adequacy of large, complex U.S. bank holding companies (BHCs), and

of the practices these BHCs use to manage their capital. The Federal Reserve expects these BHCs

to have sufficient capital to withstand a severely adverse operating environment and be able to

continue operations, maintain ready access to funding, meet obligations to creditors and

counterparties, and serve as credit intermediaries." Passing CCAR means that a bank may follow

its proposed capital plan. Failing CCAR can occur for either quantitative or qualitative reasons.

A quantitative failure occurs if one of the regulatory capital ratios over the planning horizon falls

below the regulatory minimum. In most such cases, banks may adjust their capital plan downward

in order to pass the quantitative hurdle. A qualitative failure occurs if the Fed finds deficiencies

in a bank's internal risk management policies or practices. As the Fed say, "The Federal Reserve's



9
  Unfortunately, the details of these capital plans ­ such as the breakdown between dividends and repurchases and the exact
timing of changes ­ are not publicly disclosed. So, we construct a summary measure based on the overall impact of the plans
on the capital ratios.
                                                                10
qualitative assessment of the capital plans focused on the robustness of a BHC's internal capital

adequacy processes, including each BHC's stress test under its own internally designed stress

scenario." In some cases, banks are required to make internal changes but may maintain their

stated capital plan ("conditional non-objections"). In these cases, banks commit to making

improvements to their risk management practice but receive approval of their planned capital

distributions.

        Because CCAR creates a direct link from the stress test outcomes to the path for a bank's

future dividends, the financial press follows the results closely. For example, when Citigroup

failed CCAR in 2014, according to the New York Times: "The Federal Reserve dealt an

embarrassing blow to Citigroup on Wednesday, attacking the bank's financial projections for its

sprawling operations and denying the bank's plan to increase dividends and repurchase stock."

Citi's stock fell about 6% when the CCAR failure was announced. The Wall Street Journal

described the 2015 CCAR as follows: "The Fed said Wednesday it approved revised dividend and

stock-buyback plans from the two Wall Street titans after finding their initial requests would have

left them both undercapitalized in a hypothetical severe recession. Shares of both firms rose in

after-hours trading amid relief that the Fed test wouldn't preclude dividend increases, or in Morgan

Stanley's case, a tripling of its share-buyback program."

        Over the seven stress test cycles, there were a total of 27 CCAR failures for U.S. banks.

Most of the failures involved either downward adjustments to bank capital plans or other required

changes. In five cases, however, the Fed objected to the bank's capital plan outright. Below, we

model the incidence of CCAR failure with an indicator variable, and we also use a failure score

that ranges from 0 (no objection), to 1 (downward adjustment to the capital plan or conditional

non-objection) to 2 (objection).


                                                11
            Figure 1 illustrates the timing of the annual stress test cycle, using dates from 2018 as an

example. The tests forecast the path of regulatory capital ratios from 2018 Q1 through 2020 Q1.

Model inputs reflect bank positions at the end of 2017. These positions affect the results of both

CCAR and DFAST and are used in common as inputs to both the Fed's model and to each bank's

model. The Fed announced the three economic scenarios (baseline, adverse and severely adverse)

on February 1, 2018. The scenarios announcement comes after banks' positions are determined,

thus avoiding the possibility of gaming the test by initiating hedges against positions that might be

especially ill affected in a downturn. Banks then have two months ­ until April 5, 2018 in this

example ­ to provide the Fed with their capital plan for CCAR. With the initial capital plan, the

Fed runs its model to simulate each bank's capital path over the 9-quarter-ahead forecast horizon.

If a bank's stressed capital ratio falls below the regulatory minimum, the bank may then adjust

downward its capital plan such that the stressed ratio does not fall below the minimum. (As noted,

we treat a capital-plan adjustment as a CCAR failure.) The Federal Reserve announced publicly

the results of both DFAST and CCAR in June of 2018.10



III. DATA AND RESULTS



III.A Data

            We build our measures of stress test outcomes from the publicly disclosed data for CCAR

and DFAST during the seven stress test cycles from 2013 to 2019.11 We start in 2013, the first

year of standardized disclosure for both DFAST and CCAR. Each year, the Fed releases first the


10
     The first three stress test cycles were disclosed in March, and the latter four in June.
11
     Appendix Table 1 summarizes our variable definitions.

                                                                  12
results of DFAST in a document containing the results from the Fed's proprietary model. About

one week later, they release a second document with results from CCAR, again containing

quantitative results based on the Fed's model, along with a discussion of the qualitative results of

the test.12 Whether or not a bank `passes' its stress test depends on the results from CCAR, as

these embed each bank's planned capital distribution plan. We include only tested U.S. banks

because our measures of connectedness (described below) are not available for the foreign banks.

We also construct outcomes from the DFAST results based on each bank's proprietary model;

banks must disclose summary measures of these results, as stipulated in the Dodd-Frank Act.

            Panel A of Table 1 reports summary statistics for various measures of the stress test

outcomes. We capture three capital ratios and three test configurations. The three capital ratios

are the Tier 1 Risk-Based Capital Ratio, the Total Risk-Based Capital Ratio, and the Tier 1

Leverage ratio. The first two differ in their numerator but share the same denominator (risk-

weighted assets); the Tier 1 Leverage Ratio shares the same numerator as the Tier 1 Risk-Based

Capital Ratio with a different denominator (total assets). The three test configurations are DFAST-

Fed, DFAST-Bank, and CCAR. Thus, we have nine potential sets of variables, although we focus

on a subset of these.

            Our first set of outcomes equals the difference between the stressed value for a given capital

ratio (under the severely adverse scenario) and its value at the start of the test; these variables

measure the exposure of bank portfolios to the test. For the exposure variables, we only consider

the results from DFAST, since these embed a standardized capital distribution policy. These

exposure variables measure the simulated losses from the test, as summarized by the impact on the

capital ratios. The second set of outcomes equal the minimum distance between the stressed value



12
     To access these data, go to: https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/stress-tests-capital-planning.htm.
                                                               13
of each ratio and its respective regulatory minimum. We pick the capital ratio whose stressed

value comes closest to breaching the regulatory minimum, as follows:



          Minimum Distance = Min (Stressed Tier 1 Capital ­ 6%, Stressed Total Risk-based Capital ­
          8%, (Stressed Leverage Ratio ­ 4%) x (TA/RWA)).


Negative values occur when a bank fails one of the quantitative minimums under the stress test.

Notice that we multiply the term Stressed Leverage Ratio ­ 4% by the bank's ratio of total assets to

risk-weighted assets (TA/RWA). This adjustment puts the leverage-ratio's regulatory deviation on the

same scale as the deviation for the other two.

        As shown in Panel A, the average bank's capital ratio falls by 2 to 3 percentage points

under the severely adverse scenario in the stress test. The two risk-based ratios fall more in

absolute terms. For example, the mean of Tier 1 Cap Exposure (using DFAST-Fed) equals 3.53,

meaning that the average bank's Tier 1 Capital Ratio falls by 3.53 percent of risk-weighted assets

under the severely adverse scenario. Increases in the exposure variables indicate that a bank's

portfolio is more sensitive to losses under the test scenario. In contrast, the minimum distance

measures capture how close a bank comes to breaching one of the regulatory minimums. The

average bank, for example, is 3.89 percentage points above the regulatory minimum based on its

own model (Minimum Distance using DFAST-Bank). Using the Fed's (tougher) model, this

distance falls to 3.05 percentage points (Minimum Distance using DFAST-Fed). In some cases,

including Goldman Sachs (2013) and Zions (2014), this measure goes negative, meaning that a

bank breaches one of the three capital ratios.

        Although the Fed results are more severe, the stressed capital ratios using bank models are

highly correlated with those from the Fed's models. Table 1, Panel B reports these correlations.


                                                 14
This high correlation suggests that banks can form reasonable expectations for their exposure to

the Fed's stress-testing model, which helps them optimize their capital plan under CCAR.

           To assess the outcomes of CCAR, we focus on failure. As described in Section II, we build

an indicator (Any Failure) and the slightly more informative Failure Score (which varies from 0

to 2). As shown in Panel A, banks fail CCAR about 18% of the time. CCAR uses each bank's

capital plan as a key input. By comparing the stressed capital ratio under CCAR with that under

DFAST-Fed, we are able to construct Capital Plan. As shown in Appendix 2, this variable

approximates the difference between a bank's planned future distributions to shareholders, minus

its current distribution, measured as a fraction of total assets. Thus, Capital Plan measures the

expected increase in shareholder payouts over the forecast horizon. The variable Total

Distributions equals the bank's realized dividends plus net share repurchases over the first four

quarters of the planning horizon for a given stress-test cycle (again, as a fraction of total assets).

We build Total Distributions from year-end regulatory reports for bank holding companies (Y9-

C, and Y-9LP).13 Banks distribute a little less than 1% of assets each year to shareholders, and

plan to increase this by 1.19 percentage points of assets by the end of the planned horizon, or about

half a percentage point of assets per year (0.53=1.19×4/9). This figure seems large, but it reflects

not just planned increases in dividends and repurchases, but also the fact that the DFAST capital

assumption includes only dividends (and zeros out net repurchases).14

           Panel C of Table 1 reports summary statistics for our measures of potential bank influence

over the stress testing process. We focus on two indicator variables and one continuous variable.



13
     https://www.chicagofed.org/applications/bhc/bhc-home.
14
   In our empirical analysis, we control for each bank's fraction of distributions coming from share repurchases to account for
this difference.

                                                             15
The first ­ Trading Bank ­ equals one for the six largest trading banks: JP Morgan, Bank of

America, Citigroup, Wells Fargo, Goldman Sachs, and Morgan Stanley. They together constitute

approximately 75% of the sample in terms of total assets. This set of banks, most plausibly viewed

as `Too Big to Fail,' would face greater scrutiny and more rigorous stress tests than other banks

under a public interest view of the process because their failure would impose the greatest external

costs on the financial and economic systems.

         The second ­ Regulatory Connection ­ is constructed using BoardEx data. It equals one if

any executive of the bank also holds a senior position (executive, board of director, or senior

manager) at any bank regulator during her employment history and zero otherwise. As bank

regulators, we consider the Fed, FDIC, OCC, and the Treasury, although all of our connections

come from bankers serving on the Board of a Federal Reserve Bank (Appendix 3). The regulatory-

connected banks represent a little bit less than one-third of the stress-tested banks.

         The third ­ Political Donations and Lobbying ­ measures the total amount of political

contributions made by banks to political candidates and political action committees (PACs) plus

their lobbying expenses on regulatory matters related to stress testing. These data come from

OpenSecrets.org.15 We divide total political contributions plus lobbying by lagged assets to

account for bank scale. Because contributions are small relative to bank assets, we standardize this

variable to mean zero and unit standard deviation for ease of interpretation. Regulatory capture

would predict all three measures of influence would lead to weaker application of stress tests.


15
   The value of political donations used in 2018 equals the sum of contributions made during the 2016 and 2014 election
cycles. Since contribution data is only available at the election-cycle level, including 2018 numbers in our measure for that
year would induce look-ahead bias because the 2018 stress tests were conducted in June and the election occurred in
November. The lobbying data include filer name, addresses, lobbying income/expenses, general and specific lobbying issues,
and lobbyists hired. For our purpose, we include reports that mention any of the following keywords: "stress test", "stress
testing", "comprehensive capital analysis and review", "CCAR," and "Dodd," and use the total lobby expenses reported. The
quarterly lobby amount is then aggregated to the bank-year level. The Lobbying Reports do not break down the total lobby
expenses by general or specific issues.

                                                             16
III.B Results

III.B.1 Do Stress Test Exposures Reflect Potential Bank Influence?

         To summarize how bank portfolio values decline under the stress tests, we analyze links

from our three Exposure variables and the Minimum Distance variable to the three measures of

potential bank influence. We report regressions with the following structure:

                         "#,% = '( )*+,-./0124055*6/705#,% + '9 :1.;75+<.5=# 

                         +'> (@0-7/76.-A05./705B.5;C0DD275+)#,%

                                            + "*.1FGBH#,% (1)

where subscript i indicates bank and t indicates year (2013-2019). We report four outcomes in

equation (1): Tier 1 Cap Exposure, Total Risk-Based Cap Exposure, Tier 1 Leverage Exposure,

and Minimum Distance.                We use DFAST-Fed for all four measures, which embeds the

standardized capital plan. As such, the results do not reflect heterogeneity in planned capital

distributions across banks (unlike CCAR, which we explore below). Since the outcomes depend

on a common model (the Fed's), all of the heterogeneity reflects differences in bank portfolio

sensitivity to the Fed's chosen scenario.

         We report models with year effects, although results are similar without them.16 We build

standard errors that allow for potential heteroskedasticity and within-bank error correlation by

clustering at the bank-level. The sample includes 154 bank-year observations, based on 26 banks




16
   We do not control for observable variation in bank portfolios (e.g., loan shares, off-balance sheet positions, etc.) because
they are embedded in the stress test outcomes in a much more granular way than is possible from standard datasets. Our aim
is to understand how the total impact of stress testing on bank capital varies with measures of influence; controlling for
portfolio differences would tend to obscure these differences.

                                                              17
observed across seven years. The panel is unbalanced, as some of the banks, such as Zions,

Northern Trust, and CIT Group, do not appear in all of the cycles.

        Table 2 reports the results. The large trading banks face much more exposure to stress tests

than other banks. All three capital ratios fall more under the stress tests for trading banks than for

the other banks; and, the magnitudes of these differences are very large. For example, the Tier 1

Risk-Based Capital ratio falls by almost 3 percentage points more for trading banks than for other

banks (Column 2). In contrast, we find no significant effect of connection to regulators or

donations to politicians plus lobbying on the exposure measures. The last column of Table 2 also

suggests that trading banks wind up closer to regulatory minimums under the stress scenarios than

other banks. Again, the magnitude is substantial. Trading banks are almost one percentage point

closer to breaching the regulatory minimum due to the stress test, compared to other banks. This

matters because breaching one of these lower bounds constitutes a failure of the quantitative

portion of CCAR.

        Figure 2 shows graphically the stark difference in stress-test exposure experienced by the

trading banks, and that this difference is robust across testing cycles. We find that in every year

and for each capital ratio, the trading banks experience a larger decline in capital from the test. As

noted above, these six banks face an add-on to their test based on a global market shock designed

to affect trading positions; this shock increases their simulated losses substantially and leads to

larger declines across all three capital ratios and all seven stress test cycles.

        Table 3 introduces the value of stress-test exposure constructed from the bank's own

internal models to the right-hand side of Equation (1). The large trading banks face an additional

source of downside risk in the Fed's scenario design aimed at shocking the value of their trading

positions in global capital markets. By controlling for the bank-modeled exposure, which captures


                                                   18
the effect of the global market shock, we can remove variation due to this difference.17 We find,

first, that the bank-modeled exposure correlates strongly with that produced by the Fed, as one

would expect (R2 increases substantially). More importantly, the result documents that the Fed's

model has greater impact on the large trading banks in ways that go beyond the global market

shock. Magnitudes do drop (relative to Table 2), but they remain large. For example, the Fed's

model yields an exposure based on the Tier 1 Risk-Based Capital Ratio about 1 percentage point

larger for the trading banks than for other banks. As in the results from Table 2, we find no effect

of either regulatory connections or political and lobbying expenses.

         Taken together, Tables 2 and 3 offer no support for a regulatory capture view of stress

testing. If there were, we would observe connected banks and/or the large trading banks facing

easier tests, not harder ones (as the trading banks do).

III.B.2 Who Fails CCAR?

         CCAR adds one additional component to the quantitative stress-testing framework relative

to DFAST: an explicit linkage between the test results and each bank's planned future capital

distributions to shareholders. As such, passing or failing CCAR potentially constrains a bank's

future ability to manage its capital.

         Table 4 reports regressions testing whether or not passing CCAR depends on our three

measures of potential bank influence. We estimate the outcome using either a simple indicator

variable (Failure=1 if a bank fails CCAR), and using an outcome which distinguishes between

failures that are rectified either by a reduction in the capital plan or some other mitigation verses



17
   The estimation of exposure to the global market shock embedded in DFAST-Fed comes from the bank's own internal
assessments of these exposures. According to the disclosure document for DFAST in 2013 (page 12), "The FR Y-14
schedules collect BHC estimated sensitivities of these positions to the set of risk factors specified by the Federal
Reserve, including changes in a wide range of U.S. and global market rates and asset prices as well as volatilities of
those rates and prices." Thus, exposure to the shock is presumably identical under both DFAST-Fed and DFAST-
Bank.
                                                           19
an outright rejection by the Fed. This second measure (Failure Score) takes the value of 0 for

unconditional passes, 1 for conditional passes or adjustments to the capital plan, and 2 for outright

objections. We estimate models that first condition on the DFAST-Bank results and then condition

on the DFAST-Fed results (neither of which captures banks' planned capital actions). We build

two variables: the Minimum Distance measure and an indicator equal to one if the Minimum

Distance variable falls below zero (i.e., this variable equals one if one of the stressed capital ratios

breaches its regulatory minimum). Note that this latter variable (Below Any Barrier) never takes

the value of one using the bank's model, so we cannot estimate its coefficient using the bank-

modeled results.

            As expected, failing CCAR is closely linked to a bank's quantitative results from the Fed's

model, and this result is driven by the simple indicator equal to one for banks who breach one of

the regulatory minimums (Columns 2 and 4 of Table 4). In contrast, we find no correlation

between the outcomes from bank models and CCAR failure. Both measures of bank connections

to regulators and political donations plus lobbying expenses enter the models with small

coefficients. The Trading Bank indicator enters consistently with a positive and significant

coefficient; large trading banks are more likely to fail CCAR. The magnitude is substantial, with

trading banks' failure rates 17 to 22 percentage points higher (using the indicator variable model).

The result for trading banks is robust across all four models.18 Because our model controls for the

quantitative results using the Fed's model (Columns 2 & 4), the observed result captures either

differences in banks' planned capital actions (higher planned payments raise the odds of failing),

or differences in the toughness of the qualitative portion of the test.

III.B.3 Capital Distributions: Planned Actions v. Actual Payments



18
     Appendix Table 4 reports the incidence of CCAR failure for each stress test cycle.
                                                             20
Planned Capital Actions

         Table 5 reports regressions of the Capital Plan on our measures of potential bank influence

and Minimum Distance (from DFAST-Bank). The latter variable captures each bank's exposure

to the test based on the standard capital plan. We condition on results from DFAST-Bank because

these results are known to banks when they provide the capital plan to the Fed. The regressions

test whether potentially influential banks ­ those connected to regulators, those connected to the

political system, or those most likely to be TBTF ­ are more or less aggressive in their capital

planning. By controlling for the quantitative outcome of the test, we can determine whether capital

planning is more aggressive at banks that have a larger capital cushion relative to the regulatory

minimums (after the test). Banks know the Minimum Distance from their own model before they

submit the capital plans for CCAR (recall the timeline in Figure 1). However, they do not know

the Minimum Distance from DFAST-Fed, which is what matters for CCAR. Banks must use their

internally modeled capital ratios to generate an expectation for their exposure to the Fed's model.

Hence, we expect banks' capital plans to be more aggressive if their Minimum Distance is higher.

The regressions also include the percentage of distributions from share repurchases because the

standardized capital plan under DFAST does not capture expected future repurchases. Thus, banks

that typically use repurchases will, all else equal, tend to have a higher value of Capital Plan.19

         In the simple models (column 1), we find strong evidence that trading banks make less

aggressive capital plans than other banks. The other two measures of potential influence, however,

exhibit no significance. Controlling for the quantitative results from the test ­ that is, adding

Minimum Distance ­ removes the significance of Trading Bank. Thus, the large trading banks



19
  Recall that the Capital Plan is close to the difference between the minimum value of the capital ratio under DFAST ­ the
minimum under CCAR, and some of this gap reflects the fact that CCAR captures planned share repurchases while DFAST
does not.
                                                              21
make less aggressive plans for future dividend and share repurchases because they know that they

face more exposure to the quantitative components of the stress tests. (Recall that we show this in

Tables 2 and 3.) Despite their more conservative capital planning, however, the trading banks still

fail CCAR at greater rates than other banks. These results together imply that the trading banks

face greater scrutiny from the qualitative component of CCAR.

       To summarize: stress tests have greater effect on the value of the portfolios of large trading

banks; large trading banks make more conservative capital plans for the CCAR; and, large banks

fail CCAR at higher rates than other banks.

Actual Capital Actions

       Do planned capital actions made under CCAR work as intended? That is, do they really

constrain bank capital distributions? To answer these questions, we link capital plans to actual

dividend and share repurchase behavior. We report regressions of actual dividends and share

repurchases in the four quarters following a given test (say, 2017Q3 to 2018Q2) on capital plans

submitted during that testing cycle (say, 2017). The timing takes account of the fact that the 2017

stress test cycle, for example, forecasts capital ratios from 2017Q1 to 2019Q1. We restrict our

analysis to four quarters of distributions rather than nine since payout policy is most directly

governed by the results of the most recent stress test.

       Table 6 reports these regressions, with a similar pattern to that observed from the capital

plan. That is, unconditionally the large trading banks pay less than other banks, by about 0.4

percent of total assets (Column 1). Once again, there is no significant effect of the other two

measures of potential influence on bank payouts. As shown in the even-numbered columns,

Capital Plan strongly predicts actual payments. Once we include this variable, the effect of

Trading Bank on capital distributions falls substantially (because the trading banks commit to less


                                                 22
aggressive capital plans than other banks). Hence, capital planning does in fact constrain actual

distributions, as intended.

III.B.4 Stress Test Uncertainty

       Do potentially influential banks have a better understanding of the Fed's proprietary

models? Some have argued that banks have strong incentives to try to mimic the Fed's models,

and certainly a bank's ability to do so would raise concerns about possible regulatory arbitrage

strategies (Schuermann, 2013).

       To test whether convergence between bank-modeled v. Fed-modeled results varies with

influence, we regress the absolute and squared difference between the three stressed capital ratios

using DFAST-Fed outcomes v. DFAST-Bank outcomes, again as functions of our influence

metrics (Table 7). These results do not support the idea that trading banks, banks connected to

regulators, or banks that donate more to the political system have any better ability to mimic the

Fed's specific modeling of the stress tests. This non-result suggests a level playing field across

the stress-tested banks, consistent with the public interest view of regulation. That said, it is clear

that stressed outcomes from bank models are strongly correlated with those from the Fed's models

(recall Table 3).

III.B.5 Difference-in Differences Analysis: Stress Tests and the Evolution of Bank Capital

       We have argued that the large trading banks face the toughest stress tests, which lead them

to adopt more conservative capital plans than other tested banks. If true, then their capital ratios

ought to increase after the advent of stress tests, and their ratios ought to increase more than that

of other stress-tested banks.

       The four panels of Figure 3 show exactly this pattern. We plot the average levels of the

three capital ratios for the large trading banks vs. the other stress-tested banks, as well as their


                                                  23
capital distributions.20 For each ratio, the trading banks have lower capital before the Financial

Crisis, but this difference exhibits no trend (i.e., pre-trends are parallel). After the crisis ­ that is,

after the advent of stress testing ­ capital increases for all of the banks but the differences decline.

In fact, by 2012 the large trading banks have higher levels of both measures of risk-based capital.

The differences in capital continue to trend upward until 2018 because the effects of the more

conservative capital distributions from the trading banks cumulate over time. As shown in the

fourth panel, the large trading banks paid more out to shareholders before the advent of stress

testing than the other tested banks but less after.

            To quantify the average differential effect of stress testing on the three capital ratios, Table

8 reports estimates from difference-in-differences regressions of the following type:

                    "#,% = ':1.;75+<.5=# × Post N + YearFEs + H#,% (2)

where Yi,t represents one of the three capital ratios or the payout ratio; TradingBanki equals 1 for

the six large trading banks; and, Postt = 1 from 2013 on. We drop the crisis years (2007-2009)

because the capital ratios move substantially due to both crisis interventions (e.g., government

capital injections from the Troubled Asset Relief Program) as well as from mergers (e.g., Wells

Fargo acquires Wachovia; JP Morgan acquires Washington Mutual, etc.). The Post indicator turns

to one after the stress test regime comes fully into effect.21 The regressions show that the relative

increase in capital for the trading banks is large, both statistically and economically. The increase

ranges from more than two percentage points for the risk-based capital ratios to one percentage




20
  The surprising increase in the capital ratios in 2008 for the largest banks occurs because we plot fourth quarter values, and
these ratios increased sharply at the end of 2008 due to TARP capital injections.
21
     Setting Post to one in 2010, 2011 or 2012 generates somewhat smaller estimates, consistent with Figure 3.

                                                              24
point for the leverage ratio. Capital distributions are also lower for the large trading banks, but

this difference is not statistically significant.22

III.B.6 Difference in Differences Analysis: Stress Tests and the Evolution of Regulatory

Connections and Political/Lobbying Expenses

        Our tests relating both regulatory connections and political plus lobbying expenses have

assumed one-way causation. This is potentially problematic, as one might argue that banks with

greater exposure to stress tests choose to increase their influence, either by building a closer

relationship with their regulator or by trying to influence the political system with money. Such

behavior would tend to bias the effects of regulatory capture toward zero. For example, if bankers

which are (unobservably) more affected by stress tests seek to hold board seats at their Federal

Reserve Bank, this would impart and upward bias on the coefficients in regressions such as those

in Tables 2 and 3.

        We attempt to rule out this identification problem by testing whether regulatory

connections or political/lobbying expenses react positively to an observable measure of stress-test

exposure. This comes down to estimating difference-in-differences regressions like Equation (2)

using the potentially endogenous regulatory connection indicator and political & lobbying

expenses as outcomes. Trading Bank, as we have seen, is a strong observable bank characteristic

which increases stress-test exposure.

        As reported in Table 9, we see no evidence for an endogenous response to stress-test

exposure. Trading banks ­ banks most exposed to stress testing ­ are not more likely to connect




22
   The dependent variable equal the year-end value of the regulatory capital ratios, and the sample includes only the
stress-tested banks. We include the pre-crisis years back to 2001. We have also estimated these regressions without
Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley because these two firms only became banks in the wake of the Lehman
catastrophe, so we have no `pre-period' for them. These results are similar to those in Table 8.

                                                         25
to their regulator, nor are they increasing their expenses on politics or lobbying, relative to less-

exposed banks. If anything, we see the reverse, as the coefficient on Trading Bank x Post-2013

enters negatively.



IV. CONCLUSIONS


       We have tested whether three measures of potential influence of banks over their regulators

affect stress test outcomes. The large trading banks ­ those most likely to be `Too Big to Fail' ­

face the toughest tests. Stress tests have a greater effect on the value of their portfolios; the large

trading banks respond to their greater exposure by committing to more conservative capital plans;

and, despite their more conservative capital planning ­ which is manifest not only in what banks

promise to pay but also in what they actually pay ­ the large trading banks still fail CCAR at higher

rates than other banks. We think it is hard to understand these results through the lens of regulatory

capture. On the contrary, tougher tests and more conservative capital planning for plausibly Too-

big-to-Fail banks aligns with the public's best interests. We find little evidence that measures of

either political or regulatory connections affect the tests.

       Stigler's economic theory of regulation supposes that regulators behave as self-interested,

maximizing agents. Since regulated entities (e.g., banks) typically have powerful incentives to

reward regulators while the public does not, Stigler argued that outcomes would typically be

captured by industry. Our analysis of the new capital regime which emerged from the wreckage

of the Global Financial Crisis finds no evidence of capture. In building the new regime, however,

regulators faced extreme pressure to strengthen the capital requirement, having been blamed for

the Crisis by many observers. Thus, tough capital requirements on the largest banks may well

reflect regulators' self-interested behavior after all. As we move further from the crisis, however,

                                                  26
pressure for regulatory oversight has fallen. Banks and their advocates have complained about

various aspects of stress testing, such as its opacity, and this advocacy has had an impact very

recently. For example, in 2019 the Fed increased its disclosure of both scenario design and its

own proprietary models, which increases the possibility of regulatory arbitrage in the future. In

addition, after 2019 the Fed will move the qualitative assessments into its normal supervisory

practice, which likely implies less future disclosure of the results from the stress tests.23 These

changes may suggest more influence of the industry over stress testing going forward.




23
     See Quarles (2019), at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20190709a.htm
                                                             27
                                              REFERENCES
Acharya, V., Berger, A., Roman, R., 2018. Lending implications of U.S. bank stress tests: Costs or
benefits? Journal of Financial Intermediation 34, 58­90.

Admati, A. and M. Hellwig. 2013. The Bankers' New Clothes: What's wrong with banking and what
to do about it. Princeton University Press.

Acemoglu, D, Simon Johnson, Amir Kermani, James Kwak, and Todd Mitton. 2016. The value of
connections in turbulent times: Evidence from the United States. Journal of Financial Economics 121,
368-91.

Bassett, W., Berrospide, J., 2018. The impact of post stress tests Finance and EconomicsDiscussion on
bank lending. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Series 2018­087.

Bord, V., Ivashina, V., Taliaferro, R., 2018.   Large banks and small firm lending. NBER Working
Paper No. 25184.

Cameron, A.C., J.B. Gelbach, and D.L. Miller. 2008. Bootstrap based improvements for inference with
clustered errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 414-417.

Candelon, B. and Sy, A. 2015. How did markets react to stress tests? IMF Working Paper No. 15/75.

Chen, B., Hanson S., and Stein J., 2017. The decline of big-bank lending to small business: Dynamic
impacts on local credit and labor markets. NBER Working Paper No. 23843.

Connolly, M., 2018. The real effects of stress testing. Boston College Unpublished working paper.

Cornett, M. M., K. Minnick, P Schorno, and H. Tehranian, 2019. An examination of bank behavior
around Federal Reserve stress tests. Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.

Cortés, K.R., Y. Damyanyk, L. Li, E. Loutskina and P.E. Strahan. 2019. Stress testing and small
business lending. Journal of Financial Economics.

Covas, F., 2017. Capital requirements in supervisory stress tests and their adverse impact on small
business lending. The Clearing House Staff Working Paper 2017-2.


                                                  28
Duchin R. and D. Sosyura. 2012. The Politics of Government Investment. Journal of Financial
Economics 106, 24-48.

Duchin R. and D. Sosyura. 2014. Safer Ratios, Riskier Portfolios: Banks' Response to Government
Aid. Journal of Financial Economics 113, 1-28.

Feldman, R. and Stern, G., 2004. Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts. Brookings Institution
Press, Washington, DC.

Fernandes, M., Igan D., Pinheiro, M., 2015. March madness in Wall Street: (What) does the market
learn from stress tests? IMF Working Paper 15/271.

Flannery, M., Hirtle B., and Kovner A., 2017. Evaluating the information in the Federal Reserve stress
tests. Journal of Financial Intermediation 29, 1­18.

Frame, S., Gerardi, K., and Willen P., 2015. The failure of supervisory stress testing: Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac, and OFHEO. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2015-3.

Goldstein, I., Leitner, Y., 2018. Stress tests and information disclosure. Journal of Economic Theory
177, 34­69.

Hirtle, B., Schuermann T., Stiroh K., 2009.Macroprudential supervision of financial institutions: lessons
from the SCAP. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 409.

Johnson, S. and J. Kwak. 2011. Thirteen Bankers: The Wall Street Takeover and the Next Financial
Meltdown.

Kalt, Joseph P., and Mark A. Zupan, 1984. "Capture and Ideology in the Economic Theory of Politics,"
American Economic Review, 74(3), 279-300.

Krugman, P. 2009. Banking on the Brink. New York Times, Feb. 22, 2009 Op-Ed.

Li, L. 2013. TARP funds distribution and bank loan supply. Journal of Banking and Finance.

Lim, I., J. Hagendorff, S. Armitage. 2018. Is the fox guarding the hen house? Banker in the Federal
Reserve, bank leverage and risk shifting. Journal of Corporate Finance.

                                                   29
Agarwal, S., D. Lucca, A. Seru and F. 2014. Inconsistent Regulators: Evidence from Banking. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (2), 889-938.

Schuermann, T., 2016. Stress testing in wartime and in peacetime. Oliver Wyman and Wharton
Financial Institutions Center.

Shive, S. and M. Forster. 2017. The revolving door for financial regulators. Review of Finance 21 (4),
1445-1484.

Stigler, G. 1971. The economic theory of regulation. Bell Journal of Economics, 2(1), 3-21.

Strahan, P., 2013. Too big to fail: Causes, consequences and policy implications. Annual Review of
Financial Economics 5(1), 43­61.




                                                 30
                                    Appendix 1: Data Definitions

Variable Name             Variable Description
Outcome Sources
DFAST Outcomes - Fed      Stressed capital ratios from the Dodd Frank Act Stress Test as calculated and
                          disclosed by the Fed.
DFAST Outcomes - Bank     Stressed capital ratios from the Dodd Frank Act Stress Test as calculated and
                          disclosed by Banks.
CCAR Outcomes - Fed       Stressed capital ratios from the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review as
                          calculated and disclosed by the Fed.
Capital Ratios
T1 Capital                Tier 1 Risk-Based Capital Ratio: Tier 1 Capital divided by Risk Weighted Assets.

TRBC                      Total Risk-Based Capital Ratio: Total Risk-Based Capital divided by Risk
                          Weighted Assets.
T1 Leverage               Tier 1 Leverage Ratio: Tier 1 Capital divided by Total Assets.
Ratio Measurements
Stressed Ratio            The minimum projected value of a capital ratio during the 9-quarter-ahead horizon
                          under the severely adverse stress test scenario.
Initial of Ratio          The initial (actual) value of a capital ratio prior to the stress test period.
Exposure of Ratio         The difference between a capital ratio's initial value and minimum value.
Minimum Distance          The minimum distance between a bank's minimum capital ratios and their
                          respective threshold values as mandated by the Fed.
CCAR Outcomes
Any Failure               A binary measure equal to one if a bank receives an adjustment, conditional non-
                          objection, or objection, as detailed in Appendix 3.
Failure Score             A categorical measure equal to one if a bank receives an adjustment or conditional
                          non-objection, equal to two for objections, and zero otherwise, as detailed in
                          Appendix 3.
Capital Plan Measures
Capital Plan              An imputed measure of the bank's capital plan, as detail in Appendix 2.
Total Distributions       Dividends plus net share repurchases, divided by lagged total assets, measured
                          over the four quarters following a stress test.
Percent Repurchase        Net share repurchases divided by Total Distributions.
Influence Measures
Trading Bank              A binary measure that equals one for the six largest trading banks: JP Morgan,
                          Bank of America, Citigroup, Wells Fargo, Goldman Sachs, and Morgan Stanley.
Regulatory Connection     A binary measure that equals one if any executive of the bank also holds a senior
                          position (executive, board of director, or senior manager) at any bank regulator
                          (Fed, FDIC, OCC, or Treasury) during her employment history, as detailed in
                          Appendix 4.
Political Donations and   The total amount of political contributions made by banks to political candidates
Lobbying                  and political action committees over the past two congressional election cycles,
                          plus their lobbying expenses on regulatory matters related to stress testing, divided
                          by total assets and standardized to mean zero and unit standard deviation.


                                                      31
                           Appendix 2: Measuring a Bank's Capital Plan

Assume we forecast capital at the end of the period under the stressed scenario, so we have a two period
world: today (0) and the end of the stress test (1).

Let:
        K0 = capital at the start of the test;
        A0 = `assets' at the beginning of the test (by which we mean the denominator of the relevant
        risk-weighted regulatory capital ratio);
        D = net capital distributions;
        ATNI = after-tax net income under the stress scenario.

Note: We assume that the "change in adjustments and deductions from regulatory capital + other
additions to regulatory capital" term is either zero or common across the DFAST and CCAR versions
of the test. We also assume zero growth in liabilities, which implies that the change in capital is equal
to the change in assets. We believe this is reasonable since growth will likely be low during a stress
event.

We use superscripts to distinguish variables that differ between the DFAST and CCAR. Critically,
ATNI is the same under both CCAR and DFAST. This is the random component of the stress test that
depends on the bank's starting positions, the Fed's chosen scenario, and the underlying model mapping
positions and scenarios into ATNI.

The following derivation assumes a two period world in which the flows are realized at the end of the
period. DDFAST and DCCAR are the capital distributions under the two approaches. The goal is to compute
their difference.

Let DFAST and CCAR be the minimum capital ratio from the tests, which are time 1 variables (that is,
end of period). For CCAR, we use the minimum capital ratio for each bank's initial capital plan (as
opposed to the more conservative one for bank's who must adjust their capital plan in order to avoid
having the stressed capital ratio violate one of the regulatory minimums).

K0/A0 = the starting value for the capital ratio == 0

We can observe 1DFAST and 1CCAR, but we cannot separately observe the numerator and denominator
of these two stress-test outcomes. Note that 0 is also disclosed and hence observable.

Starting with DFAST:

        DFAST = (K0 + ATNI - DDFAST) / (A0 + ATNI - DDFAST)                             (1a)

We have a similar equation for CCAR, as follows:

        CCAR = (K0 + ATNI - DCCAR) / (A0 + ATNI - DCCAR)                                (1b)


                                                   32
ATNI is the earnings (or losses) that are modeled by the stress test. It is common to both DFAST and
CCAR, hence there is no need to have a superscript. Again, the problem is that we don't observe this
number, so we need to work to get rid of it.

To do so, first re-arrange equation 1a, as follows:

        DDFAST = {(K0-ATNI) - DFAST (A0 + ATNI)} / (1 - DFAST)

                = ATNI + (K0-A0CDFAST) / (1-DFAST)                                  (2a)

Re-arrange 1b, as follows:

        DCCAR = {(K0-ATNI) - CCAR (A0 + ATNI)} / (1 - CCAR)

                = ATNI + (K0-A0CCAR) / (1-CCAR)                                     (2b)

Now, subtract (2a) from (2b), and divide both sides by A0:

        (DCCAR - DDFAST) / A0 =

        (K0/A0 - CCAR) / (1-CCAR) - (K0/A0 - DFAST) / (1-DFAST)                     (3)

Remembering that K0/A0 = 0 (which we observe) and re-arranging, we obtain:

        (DCCAR - DDFAST) / A0 =

        (DFAST ­ 0) / (1-DFAST) - (CCAR ­ 0) / (1-CCAR)                             (4)

These calculations can be made with any of the disclosed capital ratios. We find similar results,
regardless of which ratio we use. In the paper, we report results using the Tier 1 Leverage Ratio.




                                                      33
                                     Appendix 3: Regulatory Connections

This table lists the executives that are employed at a stress tested bank who also held a senior position at
any bank regulators during or before the stress test years. Senior positions include executives, supervisory
directors, and senior managers. Bank regulators include the Federal Reserve, FDIC, OCC, and the
Treasury. Executives employed by bank regulators only hold senior positions at the Fed.
                                                       Term at                                              Term at
Executive Name            Bank                                     Connected Regulator
                                                        Bank                                               Regulator
Ralph W. Babb, Jr.        Comerica Inc.                2001-2019   Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago         2004-2008

Jamie Dimon               JPMorgan                     2004-2019   Federal Reserve Bank of New York        2007-2012

James P. Gorman           Morgan Stanley               2010-2019   Federal Reserve Bank of New York        2016-2019

O. B. Grayson Hall, Jr.   Regions Financial Corp.      2008-2018   Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta         2017-2019

Joseph L. Hooley, III     State Street Corp.           2006-2018   Federal Reserve Bank of Boston          2014-2019

Kevin T. Kabat            Fifth Third Bancorp          2007-2016   Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland       2014-2016

Beth E. Mooney            Keycorp                      2010-2019   Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland       2016-2018

David W. Nelms            Discover Financial Service   2007-2018   Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago         2015-2019

William H. Rogers, Jr.    SunTrust Banks Inc.          2011-2019   Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta         2012-2016

James E. Rohr             PNC Financial Services       1992-2014   Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland       2008-2011

Stephen D. Steinour       Huntington Bancshares Inc.   2009-2019   Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland       2017-2019

John G. Stumpf            Wells Fargo                  2006-2016   Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco   2015-2016

Frederick H. Waddell      Northern Trust Corp.         2006-2019   Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago         2009-2015




                                                         34
                     Appendix 4: CCAR Failure Type by Bank and Year

                                                    Failure Score = 1         Failure Score = 2
Year   Banks                                                   Conditional
                                            Adjustment                           Objection
                                                              Non-objection

       Ally Financial Inc.                      X                       0            X
       American Express Company                 X                       0            0
2013   BB&T Corporation                         0                       0            X
       Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.                0                       X            0
       JPMorgan Chase & Co.                     0                       X            0
       Bank of America Corporation              X                       0            0
       Citigroup Inc.                           0                       0            X
2014   Citizens Financial Group/RBS             0                       0            X
       Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.                X                       0            0
       Zions Bancorporation                     0                       0            X
       Bank of America Corporation              0                       X            0
       Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.                X                       0            0
2015
       JPMorgan Chase & Co.                     X                       0            0
       Morgan Stanley                           X                       0            0
       M&T Bank Corporation                     X                       0            0
2016
       Morgan Stanley                           0                       X            0
       American Express Company                 X                       0            0
2017
       Capital One Financial Corporation        X                       X            0
       American Express Company                 X                       0            0
       Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.                X                       X            0
       JPMorgan Chase & Co.                     X                       0            0
2018   KeyCorp                                  X                       0            0
       M&T Bank Corporation                     X                       0            0
       Morgan Stanley                           X                       X            0
       State Street Corporation                 0                       X            0
       Capital One Financial Corporation        X                       0            0
2019
       JPMorgan Chase & Co.                     X                       0            0


                                           35
Figure 1: Stress Test Timeline




             36
Figure 2: Stress Test Exposure ­ Trading vs Non-Trading Banks




                             37
Figure 3: Evolution of Unstressed Bank Capital Ratios & Distributions




                                 38
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics

Sample includes all stress-tested U.S. banks from 2013 through 2019.
                      Panel A: Summary Statistics for Stress Test Outcomes
                                            Mean          Std.Dev.         p10        p50        p90
DFAST Outcomes - Fed
Stressed T1 Capital                          9.54           1.89           7.40      9.30        12.30
Stressed TRBC                                11.76          1.78           9.60      11.60       14.30
Stressed T1 Leverage                          7.04          1.65           4.90       7.00       8.80
Minimum Distance                             3.05           1.56           1.01       2.90       5.18
T1 Capital Exposure                          3.53           2.13           1.10       3.10       6.40
TRBC Exposure                                3.61           2.15           1.20      3.20         6.50
T1 Leverage Exposure                         2.36           1.12           0.80      2.30         3.70
DFAST Outcomes - Bank
Stressed T1 Capital                          10.26          1.54           8.40      10.00       12.20
Stressed TRBC                                12.57          1.53          10.90      12.50       14.60
Stressed T1 Leverage                          7.70          1.69           5.50       7.85       9.70
Minimum Distance                             3.89           1.41           2.20       3.75       5.80
T1 Capital Exposure                          2.81           1.85           0.90       2.30       5.10
TRBC Exposure                                 2.79          1.90           0.90       2.25        5.30
T1 Leverage Exposure                          1.70          0.90          0.60        1.60        2.90
CCAR Outcomes - Fed
Stressed T1 Capital                          8.06           1.63            6.30     7.70        10.30
Stressed TRBC                                10.38          1.61            8.40     10.25       12.40
Stressed T1 Leverage                          5.90          1.26            4.20      5.90       7.80
Minimum Distance                             1.58           1.32           -0.20     1.50        3.22
Any Failure                                  0.18           0.38            0.00      0.00       1.00
Failure Score                                 0.21          0.48            0.00      0.00        1.00
                     Panel B: Correlation Matrix for Stressed Capital Ratios
                            Stressed T1 Capital            Stressed TRBC           Stressed T1 Leverage
                             v1     v2    v3               v1     v2   v3           v1     v2     v3
   v1   DFAST-Fed           1.00                          1.00                     1.00
   v2   DFAST-Bank          0.76     1.00                 0.72     1.00            0.86   1.00
   v3   CCAR-Fed            0.76     0.48      1.00       0.73     0.41     1.00   0.75   0.62   1.00
            Panel C: Summary Statistics for Capital Plans and Influence Measures
Capital Plan Measures
Capital Plan                                  1.19          1.12           0.11       0.95       2.22
Total Distributions                           0.87          0.78           0.17       0.74       2.06
Percent Repurchase                           51.32         25.13           0.00      58.70       78.05
Influence Measures
Regulatory Connection                        0.31           0.46            0.00     0.00        1.00
Trading Bank                                 0.27           0.45            0.00      0.00       1.00
Political Donations and Lobbying             0.00           1.00           -1.08     -0.24       1.55
Note: All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th levels




                                                     39
                                            Table 2: Exposure to Stress Tests

This table shows that capital ratios decline more under the DFAST-Fed stress test model for Trading Banks. In Columns
1, 2, and 3, the dependent variable equals the dierence between banks' minimum stressed capital ratios from their initial
values, and Column 4 studies banks' minimum distance to regulatory capital requirement thresholds. All variables are
defined in Appendix 1. Estimation based on OLS with year fixed eects and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
clustered at the bank-level (in parenthesis).
                                                       Stress Test Outcomes from DFAST-Fed Model
                                                 (1)                (2)              (3)         (4)
                                           T1 Cap. Exposure TRBC Exposure T1 Lev. Exposure Min Distance
Regulatory Connection                            -0.38               -0.35                 -0.32               -0.23
                                                (0.41)              (0.43)                (0.26)              (0.36)
Trading Bank                                   2.95                2.95                  0.76                -0.92
                                                (0.85)              (0.83)                (0.27)              (0.39)
Political Donations and Lobbying                 0.15                0.17                  0.03                -0.10
                                                (0.22)              (0.24)                (0.13)              (0.19)
Year FEs                                         Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Observations                                     154                 154                   154                 154
Adjusted R2                                      0.35                0.35                  0.10                0.07
   p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                           40
                         Table 3: Exposure to Stress Tests, Controlling for Bank-Model Outcomes

This table shows that capital ratios decline more under the DFAST-Fed stress test model for Trading Banks. In Columns
1, 2, and 3, the dependent variable equals the dierence between banks' minimum stressed capital ratios from their
initial values, and Column 4 studies banks' minimum distance to regulatory capital requirement thresholds. All variables
are defined in Appendix 1. Estimation based on OLS with year fixed eects and heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors clustered at the bank-level (in parenthesis).
                                                       Stress Test Outcomes from DFAST-Fed Model
                                                 (1)                (2)              (3)         (4)
                                           T1 Cap. Exposure TRBC Exposure T1 Lev. Exposure Min Distance
Regulatory Connection                            -0.04               -0.10                 -0.04               -0.18
                                                (0.33)              (0.33)                (0.25)              (0.31)
Trading Bank                                    0.98               1.11                   0.44                -0.77
                                                (0.45)             (0.46)                 (0.22)              (0.39)
Political Donations and Lobbying                 0.19                0.19                  0.05                -0.17
                                                (0.16)              (0.17)                (0.12)              (0.15)
T1 Cap. Exposure, DFAST-Bank                   0.80
                                                (0.12)
TRBC Exposure, DFAST-Bank                                          0.75
                                                                    (0.12)
T1 Lev. Exposure, DFAST-Bank                                                             0.72
                                                                                          (0.14)
Min Distance, DFAST-Bank                                                                                     0.66
                                                                                                              (0.12)
Year FEs                                         Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Observations                                     154                 154                   154                 154
Adjusted R2                                      0.67                0.66                  0.41                0.42
   p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                            41
                                     Table 4: CCAR Failure

This table shows that Trading Banks are more likely to fail CCAR than other banks.
Columns 1 and 2 model CCAR failure as a binary outcome (linear probability model),
and Columns 3 and 4 employ a categorical measure that accounts for the intensity of
failure (see Appendix 4). All variables are defined in Appendix 1. Estimation based on
OLS with year fixed eects and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at
the bank-level (in parenthesis).
                                                 Any Failure           Failure Score
                                                 (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)
  Regulatory Connection                         -0.04       -0.04      -0.09       -0.09
                                               (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.08)      (0.07)
  Trading Bank                                 0.22        0.17       0.21        0.16
                                               (0.09)      (0.08)     (0.09)      (0.08)
  Political Donations and Lobbying              0.02        0.01       -0.00       -0.02
                                               (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.05)
  Below Any Barrier, DFAST-Bank                  Not                    Not
                                              Identified             Identified
  Min Distance, DFAST-Bank                      -0.00                  0.01
                                               (0.03)                 (0.03)
  Below Any Barrier, DFAST-Fed                             0.58                   1.04
                                                            (0.16)                (0.50)
  Min Distance, DFAST-Fed                                  -0.05                   -0.03
                                                           (0.02)                 (0.03)
  Year FEs                                       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
  Observations                                  154          154       154         154
  Adjusted R2                                   0.06         0.13      0.04        0.12
     p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                               42
                              Table 5: Bank Capital Plan

This table shows that Trading Banks plan less aggressive capital actions relative
to other banks. The dependent variable equals a proxy for each bank's plan
under CCAR, as described in Appendix 2. All variables are defined in Appendix
1. Estimation based on OLS with year fixed eects and heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors clustered at the bank-level (in parenthesis).
                                                          Capital Plan
                                                 (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)
 Regulatory Connection                        0.06       0.09      0.11      0.07
                                             (0.17)     (0.20)    (0.13)    (0.17)
 Trading Bank                                -0.55       -0.40
                                             (0.29)     (0.29)
 Political Donations and Lobbying             0.27       0.25      0.04      0.07
                                             (0.18)     (0.15)    (0.20)    (0.18)
 Pct Repurchases                             0.02       0.01      0.02      0.01
                                             (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)   (0.01)
 Min Distance, DFAST-Bank                               0.38                0.22
                                                         (0.10)             (0.09)
 Year FEs                                        Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes
 Bank FEs                                        No       No       Yes       Yes
 Observations                                    154     154       154       154
 Adjusted R2                                     0.21    0.41      0.64      0.68
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                            43
                        Table 6: Actual Capital Distributions

This table shows that banks' planned capital actions under CCAR are reflected
in their actual capital distributions (the dependent variable). The dependent
variable measures total distributions made in the four quarters following CCAR.
All variables are defined in Appendix 1. Estimation based on OLS with year fixed
eects and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the bank-level
(in parenthesis).
                                                        Total Distributions
                                                  (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)
  Regulatory Connection                        0.03        0.00     0.04       0.00
                                              (0.14)      (0.08)   (0.11)     (0.08)
  Trading Bank                               -0.40         -0.12
                                              (0.19)      (0.08)
  Political Donations and Lobbying             0.12        -0.03    -0.11     -0.13
                                              (0.09)      (0.04)   (0.09)     (0.08)
  Capital Plan                                           0.48                 0.36
                                                          (0.06)               (0.11)
  Pct Repurchases                             0.01         0.00    0.01        0.00
                                              (0.01)      (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)
  Year FEs                                        Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
  Bank FEs                                        No       No       Yes        Yes
  Observations                                 142         142      142        142
  Adjusted R2                                  0.26        0.72     0.71       0.82
     p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                             44
                                                Table 7: Model Convergance

   This paper tests whether measures of bank connectedness are correlated with the dierence between stressed capital
   ratios from the Fed's model vs. the banks' models. The dependent variable equals the absolute (Panel A) or squared
   (Panel B) dierence between Fed and Bank model outcomes. All variables are defined in Appendix 1. Estimation based
   on OLS with year fixed eects and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the bank-level (in parenthesis).
                                            Absolute Dierence between DFAST-Fed and DFAST-Bank Model Outcomes
                                                   (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)
                                           T1 Capital Exposure TRBC Exposure T1 Leverage Exposure Min Distance
Regulatory Connection                             -0.15               -0.21                  -0.01                 -0.10
                                                 (0.22)              (0.23)                 (0.20)                (0.28)
Trading Bank                                      0.27                0.27                   0.11                  0.43
                                                 (0.23)              (0.25)                 (0.15)                (0.32)
Political Donations and Lobbying                  0.06                0.07                   0.06                  0.11
                                                 (0.11)              (0.12)                 (0.09)                (0.12)
Year FEs                                          Yes                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Observations                                      154                 154                     154                 154
Adjusted R2                                      -0.00                0.00                   -0.03                0.02
                                             Squared Dierence between DFAST-Fed and DFAST-Bank Model Outcomes
                                                   (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)
                                           T1 Capital Exposure TRBC Exposure T1 Leverage Exposure Min Distance
Regulatory Connection                             -0.65               -1.01                  -0.11                 -0.10
                                                 (0.66)              (0.70)                 (0.50)                (1.20)
Trading Bank                                      0.78                0.89                   0.18                  1.84
                                                 (0.81)              (0.89)                 (0.37)                (1.37)
Political Donations and Lobbying                  0.19                0.17                   0.07                  0.40
                                                 (0.40)              (0.44)                 (0.22)                (0.47)
Year FEs                                          Yes                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Observations                                     154                  154                     154                 154
Adjusted R2                                      0.00                 0.01                   -0.02                0.03
   p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                              45
                    Table 8: Evolution of Bank Capital Ratios & Distributions

This table shows that Trading Banks increase their actual (unstressed) capital ratios relative to
other banks in the advent of the stress test regime. Sample includes annual data from 2001
to 2018, without the three crisis years (2007-2009). All variables are defined in Appendix 1.
Estimation based on OLS with year and bank fixed eects and heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors clustered at the bank-level (in parenthesis).
                                                  Capital Ratios               Payouts
                                           (1)        (2)        (3)              (4)
                                        T1 Capital TRBC T1 Leverage       Total Distributions
 Trading Bank  Post 2013                    2.03      2.55      1.18              -0.00
                                             (0.32)    (0.50)    (0.36)          (0.00)
 Bank FEs                                    Yes       Yes       Yes               Yes
 Year FEs                                    Yes       Yes       Yes               Yes
 Observations                                341       341       341              339
 Adjusted R2                                 0.82      0.74      0.77             0.25
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                      46
         Table 9: Evolution of Regulatory Connections and Political Contributions

This table shows that Trading Banks do not increase their regulatory or political connectedness
in the advent of the stress test regime. Sample includes annual data from 2001 to 2018. All
variables are defined in Appendix 1. Estimation based on OLS with year and bank fixed eects
and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the bank-level (in parenthesis).
                                       Regulatory Connection   Political Donations and Lobbying
                                                (1)                           (2)
Trading Bank  Post 2013                        -0.15                        -0.37
                                              (0.19)                        (0.20)
Year FEs                                       Yes                           Yes
Bank FEs                                       Yes                           Yes
Observations                                   399                           399
Adjusted R2                                    0.37                          0.76
   p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                      47
