                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CROSS-REGIONAL EMPIRICAL ESTIMATES
                         IN MACROECONOMICS?

                                         Adam Guren
                                        Alisdair McKay
                                        Emi Nakamura
                                         Jón Steinsson

                                      Working Paper 26881
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26881


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2020, Revised May 2020




An earlier version of this paper previously circulated as an appendix to "Housing Wealth Effects:
The Long View" by the same authors. We thank Joao Fonseca Rodrigues for excellent research
assistance. We thank Adrien Auclert, Gabe Chodorow-Reich, Erik Hurst, and Valerie Ramey for
helpful comments and discussions. Guren thanks the National Science Foundation (grant
SES-1623801) and the Boston University Center for Finance, Law, and Policy. Nakamura thanks
the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1056107). Nakamura and Steinsson thank the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Adam Guren, Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Do We Learn From Cross-Regional Empirical Estimates in Macroeconomics?
Adam Guren, Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 26881
March 2020, Revised May 2020
JEL No. E20,R21

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent empirical work uses variation across cities or regions to identify the effects of economic
shocks of interest to macroeconomists. The interpretation of such estimates is complicated by the
fact that they reflect both partial equilibrium and local general equilibrium effects of the shocks.
We propose an approach for recovering estimates of partial equilibrium effects from these cross-
regional empirical estimates. The basic idea is to divide the cross-regional estimate by an estimate
of the local fiscal multiplier, which measures the strength of local general equilibrium
amplification. We apply this approach to recent estimates of housing wealth effects based on city-
level variation, and derive conditions under which the adjustment is exact. We then evaluate its
accuracy in a richer general equilibrium model of consumption and housing. The paper also
reconciles the positive cross-sectional correlation between house price growth and construction
with the notion that cities with larger price volatility have lower housing supply elasticities using
a model in which housing supply elasticities are more dispersed in the long run than in the short
run.

Adam Guren                                        Emi Nakamura
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Boston University                                 University of California, Berkeley
270 Bay State Road                                685 Evans Hall
Boston, MA 02215                                  Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                          and NBER
guren@bu.edu                                      enakamura@berkeley.edu

Alisdair McKay                                    Jón Steinsson
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis               Department of Economics
90 Hennepin Avenue                                University of California, Berkeley
Minneapolis, MN 55401                             671 Evans Hall
alisdair.mckay@gmail.com                          Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                  and NBER
                                                  jsteinsson@berkeley.edu
1        Introduction

A growing literature uses variation across cities or regions to identify the effects of economic shocks
of interest to macroeconomists.1 What exactly these estimates identify is often complicated by
the fact that metropolitan and regional outcomes reflect both the partial equilibrium effects of the
shock in question as well as local general equilibrium responses to the shock. In this paper we
propose an approach by which applied researchers can isolate the partial equilibrium effect of the
shock. The partial equilibrium effect is useful for several reasons. First, it has a clear theoretical
interpretation and speaks more directly to specific economic mechanisms. In contrast, estimates
that include local general equilibrium effects reflect a combination of several economic mechanisms
and are more difficult to interpret as a result. Second, the partial equilibrium effect can more easily
be matched with a theoretical counterpart for calibration purposes. The method we propose allows
researchers to avoid formulating and solving a multi-region general equilibrium macroeconomic
model to be able to compare their empirical results to analogous concepts in a model.
        The easiest way to describe our approach is in the context of a concrete application. The
application we focus on is the analysis of so-called housing wealth effects. The US housing boom
and bust in the 2000s focused attention of economists on the effect of changes in home prices on
consumer spending. Prominent recent papers in this literature use regional data to estimate the
effect of changes in house prices on outcomes such as spending, car registrations, and employment
(e.g. Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2013; Mian and Sufi, 2014). The appropriate interpretation of these
estimates is not straightforward. House prices are endogenous at the level of a city and a shock
that changes home prices surely alters consumption through other channels. The shock may affect
consumption directly. In addition to that, the increased spending triggered by higher house prices
will raises wages and incomes locally, which will lead to more local spending (a local general
equilibrium effect). For these reasons, it is not immediately clear what we can learn from the
response of city-level consumption to a change in local house prices.
        We show how existing empirical estimates of the housing wealth effect on consumption can be
decomposed into the partial-equilibrium effect of house prices on consumption and local general
equilibrium effects. We start by drawing a distinction between prices that are determined nationally
and prices that are determined locally. For example, financial markets are highly integrated at a
    1
    Prominent examples include Mian and Sufi (2014), Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), Nakamura and Steinsson
(2014), Martin and Philippon (2017), Chodorow-Reich (2014). See Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) and Chodorow-
Reich (2019) for further discussion of this literature.




                                                    1
national level, while labor markets and markets for non-tradeable goods are quite local. This
distinction is important because variation in national prices will be absorbed by the constant in a
cross-sectional regression or the time fixed effect in a panel regression and will therefore not affect
cross-regional estimates of the housing wealth effect.
   Local general equilibrium effects that operate through local markets will, however, not be
captured by the constant or time fixed effects in cross-regional regression analysis. The key insight
in our paper is that estimates of the local fiscal multiplier can be used to gauge the strength of these
local general equilibrium effects. In particular, we derive conditions under which one can remove
local general equilibrium effects from a city-level estimate of the housing wealth effect simply by
dividing that estimate by an estimate of the local fiscal multiplier. The logic underlying this result
is that the equilibrium response to an increase in local demand will be the same whether that
demand comes from private consumption as a result of the housing wealth effect or from a fiscal
shock. Dividing by the local fiscal multiplier yields an estimate of the partial equilibrium housing
wealth effect that corresponds to the effect of a change in home prices holding fixed wages and
other non-housing prices. This partial equilibrium effect has a simple interpretation and it can be
used to discipline a partial equilibrium model of housing and consumption.
   In recent complementary work, we estimate the housing wealth effect based on city-level vari-
ation in house prices and using retail employment as a proxy for local consumption (Guren et al.,
2020). We estimate an elasticity of retail employment with respect to house prices of 0.072. We
furthermore show in that paper that retail employment has approximately a unit elasticity with
respect to consumption in the aggregate and across cities, which allows us to interpret the retail
employment response as a consumption response. To convert the elasticity we estimate into an
MPCH, we divide by the housing-consumption ratio, which averaged 2.17 from 1985 to 2016. This
yields an MPCH of 3.3 cents on the dollar. For the reasons discussed above, this estimate reflects
both the partial equilibrium and local general equilibrium response of consumption to housing. To
isolate the partial equilibrium effect, we divide it by an estimate of the local fiscal multiplier. Naka-
mura and Steinsson (2014) estimate the local fiscal multiplier to be approximately 1.5. Dividing
our housing wealth effect estimate by the local fiscal multiplier yields a partial equilibrium MPCH
of 2.2 cents on the dollar.
   Our approach of combining several reduced-form estimates to identify a structural parameter
is an application of the general method of simultaneous equations identification. The identification
challenge is that multiple structural systems can give rise to the same reduced form estimates.


                                                   2
For example, the cross-regional housing wealth effect may be large because the partial equilibrium
effect of house prices on consumption is large or because local general equilibrium effects are large.
Identification requires making restrictions on the system. In our example, the restrictions are ex-
clusion restrictions: for example, shocks to government spending do not directly affect consumption
demand (they effect consumption through income). The key point in our argument is that allowing
for more sources of exogenous variation (government spending shocks) helps identify the system
even though it enlarges the system. We discuss how the identification problem and solution are
closely related to structural VAR methods. A general lesson is that researchers that use regional
variation can benefit from approaching their estimates as components of a system of simultaneous
equations. In this context, shocks to government purchases are particularly useful in identifying
local general equilibrium effects because the direct effect of the shock on demand is known. We
discuss how this simultaneous equations approach is valuable in many situations where the object
of interest is the direct effect of a change in demand whether it arises from housing wealth effects,
credit supply shocks, foreign demand, or other sources.
   We present several refinements of the basic idea of dividing by the local fiscal multiplier. The
most important refinement from a quantitative perspective is to allow for the fact that an increase
in house prices stimulates local construction activity. This is a separate channel from the standard
consumption multiplier because the initial partial equilibrium increase in demand is not consump-
tion but residential investment. We derive a simple formula for isolating the partial equilibrium
effect of house prices on consumption in the presence of effects on local construction activity. To
evaluate this formula, we need an estimate of the response of construction activity to house prices.
We present such an estimate using an analogous research design to that used in Guren et al. (2020).
The refined formula yields an estimate of the partial-equilibrium housing wealth elasticity of 0.040
or a partial-equilibrium MPCH of 1.8 cents on the dollar.
   A second important refinement is to allow for dynamics. In a dynamic context, there is no single
fiscal multiplier. Rather there is an entire impulse response of output to a fiscal shock. For the
dynamic case, we develop a matrix version of the simple formula that applies in the static case. For
example, the dynamic version of our formula involves the inverse of a matrix with the (i, j ) element
giving the effect of a fiscal shock at date j on output at date i (a matrix version of dividing by the
local fiscal multiplier). Using simulations, we explore how well our static formula performs when
the data are generated by a dynamic model. We show that under some conditions it holds almost
exactly. In the richest dynamic structural model we consider, our simple static formula accounts


                                                  3
for the bulk of the needed adjustment, but somewhat underestimates it.
       In our analysis we address Davidoff's (2016) critique of the use of heterogeneous supply
constraints--such as those captured by the Saiz (2010) housing supply elasticity estimates--as
instruments for home prices. Davidoff points out that if housing markets experience a common
demand shock but move along different supply curves, then prices and quantities should be nega-
tively correlated: the most constrained cities should see the largest housing price responses but the
smallest housing quantity responses. However, Davidoff shows that there is a positive relationship
between housing price growth and the growth of housing units. Our construction employment
estimates confirm Davidoff's critique applies at business cycle frequencies.2
       We show that a model that allows for differences between short-run and long-run housing supply
elasticities can address Davidoff's critique. We consider a version of our dynamic model in which
short-run housing supply elasticities are low in all cities, but housing supply elasticities are more
heterogeneous in the long run. This distinction reflects both the time it takes to plan and develop
new housing units (which makes short-run elasticities low in all cities) and differences in constraints
on land supply that are not binding in the short run but may bind in the long run as in Nathanson
and Zwick (2018). Home prices, like other asset prices, are forward-looking in nature and, as a
result, are primarily determined by the long-run elasticity of housing supply even in the short run.
The short-run construction response, on the other hand, reflects the short-run constraints faced by
housing developers. Consider two cities that have the same short-run supply elasticity but differ
in the long-run supply elasticity. A common shock to expected future housing demand will move
prices differently across the two cities due to expectations about future housing supply responses.
Furthermore, expectations about larger future capital gains (or smaller future capital losses) will
imply that the shock results in a larger change in current housing demand in the city with a less
elastic long-run housing supply curve. In terms of construction, both cities move along the same
short-run housing supply curve, but by different amounts. The upward-sloping short-run supply
curve yields a positive correlation between prices and quantities even though the changes in prices
are generated primarily by a common demand shock moving the cities along different (long-run)
supply curves.
       The idea of dividing cross-regional estimates of housing wealth effects by estimates of the local
   2
   Davidoff (2016) shows that the change in housing units from 1980-2010 was negatively correlated with Saiz's
housing supply elasticity across cities. The long-horizon quantity response is less worrisome than the business cycle
quantity response because differential demand trends across cities can be absorbed by city-level fixed effects in a
panel specification (Guren et al., 2020).




                                                         4
fiscal multiplier to arrive at an estimate of the partial equilibrium effect of changes in house prices on
consumption implicitly assumes that existing evidence on the local fiscal multiplier is stronger than
for the partial equilibrium effect of house prices on consumption. However, if the reverse is true,
our method is just as useful. In this case, one can use our method to infer the size of the local fiscal
multiplier from the combination of cross-regional estimates of housing wealth effects and estimates
of the partial equilibrium effect of house prices on consumption. More generally, in the context of
housing wealth effects, our method implies that cross-regional estimates can provide information
about some combination of the local fiscal multiplier and the strength of partial equilibrium effects.
       The key idea we explore in this paper is that the general equilibrium adjustment to a change in
private consumption is equivalent to the general equilibrium adjustment to a government spending
shock. This demand equivalence idea is also explored in several contemporaneous papers. In the
context of a two-period model of the stock market wealth effect, Chodorow-Reich, Nenov, and
Simsek (2019) derive a demand equivalence result that links the direct spending response to the
change in the local wage bill. Wolf (2019a) lays out conditions under which demand equivalence
holds exactly for the impulse responses of a dynamic model and Wolf (2019b) applies those results to
cross-region comparisons and local general equilibrium. In our analysis, the relationship between
impulse responses is expressed in terms of the matrix relationship described above.3 Applying
this result directly is challenging because it requires that the researcher observe the full dynamic
response to the shock of interest and a fiscal spending shock that has the same dynamics as the (as
yet unknown) partial equilibrium response of interest. However, we show that the simpler static
adjustment works fairly well across several alternative specifications of a fully dynamic model. As
each of these papers considers a different application, taken together, they demonstrate that the
demand equivalence logic that is common among them is useful in a variety of contexts.4
       Interpreting cross-regional estimates is tricky because of general equilibrium effects. On the
one hand, these estimates include local general equilibrium effects. The focus of this paper is
getting from the cross-regional estimates to partial equilibrium effects by removing local general
equilibrium effects. On the other hand, cross-regional estimates difference out national general
   3
      Wolf describes his results in terms of addition and subtraction of impulse response functions. To understand
the connection, a simplified version of our result is CP E = F -1 E , where F is the matrix in which the (i, j ) element
gives the response of output at horizon i to a change in government spending at horizon j and the column vector
E is the measured housing wealth effect impulse response. Wolf expresses his result as CP E + (F - I )CP E = E
where (F - I )CP E is the private consumption response to the fiscal shock that has the same dynamic profile as the
partial-equilibrium housing wealth effect.
    4
      Groundwork for these papers was provided by Auclert and Rognlie (2020) who show that the general equilibrium
effects of a shock to consumption can be separated into a partial equilibrium path of consumption and a general
equilibrium multiplier matrix that does not depend on the shock that perturbs consumption.


                                                           5
equilibrium effects. This implies that cross-regional estimates do not directly answer questions
about aggregate effects (e.g., what is the aggregate effect of fiscal stimulus, the China shock, or the
2000s rise and fall of house prices). A rapidly growing recent literature has used multi-region general
equilibrium models to assess what cross-regional estimates imply about these macro questions (e.g.,
Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; Beraja, Hurst, and Ospina, 2019; Herreno, 2020). One way to do
this type of analysis is to use the cross-regional estimate to distinguish among competing general
equilibrium models and then see what the favored general equilibrium model implies about the
macroeconomic question of interest (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018).
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the challenge the paper seeks to address.
Section 3 presents adjustments of cross-sectional estimates of the housing wealth effect for local
general equilibrium effects in simple static environments. Section 4 explains that our adjustment of
the housing wealth effect is an application of estimating one equation in a system of simultaneous
equations. Section 5 provides a fully structural, multi-region macro model of the housing wealth
effect on consumption. Section 6 derives the matrix adjustment for local general equilibrium effects
in the dynamic model presented in Section 5. Section 7 discusses the importance of distinguish-
ing between the short-run and long-run housing supply elasticity. Section 8 conducts a Monte
Carlo analysis of the fully structural model to evaluate the accuracy and robustness of the simple
adjustment used in Section 3. Section 9 concludes.


2    Interpreting Cross-Regional Regressions

To address the issue of how to interpret cross-regional regression coefficients, it is useful to consider
a concrete example. The example we focus on is the estimation of the housing wealth effect. A
relatively standard estimating equation for a regional estimate of the housing wealth effect is


                                     ci,t = i + t +  pi,t + i,t ,                                       (1)


where i indexes cities, t indexes time, ci,t is the first difference of log consumption in city i, pi,t
is the first difference of log house prices in the city, i is a city fixed effect, t is a time fixed effect,
and i,t captures unmodeled influences. The coefficient of interest is  , which gives the elasticity of
local consumption with respect to local house prices.
    To identify the causal effect of local house prices on local consumption, researchers must confront
the twin challenges of reverse causation and measurement error. A common approach to overcoming

                                                     6
these challenges is premised on the view that house prices deferentially respond to aggregate housing
demand shocks across cities due to differences in housing supply elasticities. This approach is, for
example, used by Mian et al. (2013), Mian and Sufi (2014) and Guren et al. (2020). Let's suppose
we have used such a shift-share approach to form a causal estimate of  . The question we ask is
how should we interpret this estimate?
   Let's suppose for simplicity that the consumption function of households in the regional
economies under consideration is a linear function of household income yi,t , house prices pi,t , interest
rates, Rt , and the source of aggregate variation that drives house prices, call it t :


                                ci,t = Cy yi,t + Cp pi,t + CR Rt + C t ,                              (2)


where Cy , Cp , CR , and C are the coefficients in this linearized consumption function. Later in the
paper we will describe an example of a model where such an equation arises, although in a dynamic
model consumption will depend not only on current income and prices but also future income and
prices. In this consumption function, the coefficient Cp has a straightforward interpretation as the
amount consumption changes when house prices rise holding incomes and other prices fixed. In
other words, Cp summarizes a partial equilibrium experiment.
   Let's now suppose that regression equation (1) is estimated on data generated by equation (2).
In this case, what is the interpretation of the coefficient  ? First, the variation in consumption
coming from CR Rt + C t and any other aggregate factors that may enter the consumption
function is common across cities and will be absorbed by the time fixed effect t . Notice that this
means that the direct effect of the shock on consumption and any national general equilibrium
effects that are mediated by national prices will not be captured by the coefficient  .
   What about effects that the shock my have on local income yi,t ? To the extent that yi,t
is correlated with pi,t , our estimate of  in equation (1) will not only reflect the partial equilib-
rium housing wealth effect, Cp , but also the response of consumption to changes in local income.
Unfortunately, there is a compelling reason to expect yi,t and pi,t to be correlated even when
a sophisticated identification strategy is employed. The partial equilibrium housing wealth effect
Cp pi,t will itself raise demand for locally produced goods and thereby bring about an increase in
local incomes. This implies that  will reflect not just the partial equilibrium effect Cp , but also
local general equilibrium effects induced by the initial partial equilibrium effect.
   An alternative, more direct, approach to estimating the partial equilibrium effect of house prices



                                                    7
on consumption is to regress an individual-level consumption measure on changes in house prices and
a control for individual level income by OLS (e.g., Campbell and Cocco, 2007) or instrumenting for
changes in house prices (e.g., Aladangady, 2017). It is important to note, however, that these studies
use city-level house price variation. Without the individual level income control, the coefficient
on house prices in this type of regression will therefore include local general equilibrium effects.
Furthermore, as Campbell and Cocco (2007) and Aladangady (2017) stress, there are several reasons
why including individual level income as a control is unlikely to purge the regression coefficient on
changes in house prices of the local general equilibrium effects. First, individual level income is
likely measured with error. If so, changes in house prices may be a useful proxy for changes in
income and the resulting omitted variable bias will include some component of the local general
equilibrium effect. Second, changes in overall individual-level income are likely to have different
statistical properties (e.g. less persistent) than changes in income induced by changes in house
prices. This means that the MPC out of these different sources of income are likely different, which
implies that controlling for individual level income would not accurately capture the local general
equilibrium effects of house price changes. Third, there are likely other local general equilibrium
channels that would not be controlled for by including individual level income such as changes in
the local price level.
    This logic applies more generally outside the context of housing wealth effects. While there are
some situations where individual-level variation allows the direct estimation of a partial equilibrium
effect, in many situations the most convincing identification strategies rely on regional variation.
In other situations all variation is by definition regional. In these cases, one must remove the local
general equilibrium effects to obtain an estimate of the partial equilibrium effect.


3    A Simple Adjustment for Local General Equilibrium Effects

In this section we derive a simple adjustment of cross-sectional regression estimates of the housing
wealth effect for local general equilibrium effects. The idea is that researchers that have constructed
estimates of the housing wealth effect using cross-sectional regressions at the metropolitan or state
level, can use this adjustment to recover a rough estimate of what their regression results imply
about the partial equilibrium effect of house prices on consumption. The simple formulas we derive
in this section are based on several approximations and simplifying assumptions. In sections 5 and 6,
we then present a fully specified multi-region general equilibrium model and an exact adjustment



                                                  8
formula for this model. Later in the paper we show that the simple adjustment derived in this
section is very close to the exact adjustment in certain cases and reasonably close in others.


3.1   The Fiscal Multiplier as a Measure of Local GE Effects

Our central idea is that estimates of the local fiscal multiplier can be used to gauge the strength
of local general equilibrium effects. We start by illustrating this in a very simple static case.
The economy consists of two equally-sized regions: "home" and "foreign." Each region has three
markets: a goods market, a housing market, and a labor market. In the home region, the two
relative prices are the real wage w and the price of housing p, both denominated in goods. Suppose
goods are produced with labor according to the production function Y = N, where Y is goods
produced and N is labor supply. Labor supply is given by a function N (w, p, T ) that depends on
the wage, the price of housing, and taxes T . Household demand for goods is given by C (w, p, T ). In
addition to this private consumption demand, goods are used for public consumption in amount G,
where G is exogenous. We assume that taxes are set at the national level and satisfy a government
budget constraint. It is important to our argument that both regions face the same taxes.
   In this simplest case, we ignore trade across regions and across time (these features will be added
in sections 3.3 and 5, respectively). The aggregate resource constraint is then Y = C (w, p, T ) + G.
While this resource constraint is very standard, it embeds the important assumption that an increase
in demand from private consumption requires the exact same supply response as an increase in
demand from the government. For housing, we specify an excess demand function H (w, p, T, s),
where s is an exogenous shock. Since we only use data on the price of housing and not on the
quantity of housing, we do not need to specify housing supply and demand separately.
   Given these assumptions, the equilibrium level of wages and house prices in this home region is
given by the solution to the following two equations:


                                    C (w, p, T ) + G = N (w, p, T )                               (3)

                                      H (w, p, T, s) = 0                                          (4)


taking G and T as given.
   The foreign region mirrors the home region with relative prices denoted w and p . These prices




                                                  9
satisfy equations:


                                  C (w , p , T ) + G = N (w , p , T )                               (5)

                                    H (w , p , T, s ) = 0.                                          (6)


There are two important assumptions here. First, note that these are the same functions C , N , and
H as in the home region but with different arguments. Second, in the foreign region the government
spending differs from the home region, but the taxes do not.
   We make two additional simplifying assumptions. First, there are no wealth effects on labor
supply, Np = 0. This assumption implies that changes in housing wealth are not supply shocks in
addition to being demand shocks. We view this assumption as being a reasonable approximation to
reality in the short run. Second, we assume that house prices are independent of income, Hw = 0.
This assumption is less likely to hold in reality. We relax it in section 3.4. It is, however, helpful
to make this assumption in this first pass to simplify the exposition.
   Suppose we observe an instrumental variables (IV) estimate of the housing wealth effect based
                                                 ^ /dp
on regional variation. In our notation, this is dY         ^ /ds)/(dp
                                                     ^ = (dY        ^/ds), where s is the shock
                               ^ /dp
(instrument) used to estimate dY                                                  ^ = Y - Y .
                                   ^ and a hat denotes a cross-region difference: Y
The trouble is that this IV estimate is the total derivative of consumption with respect to house
prices, not the partial derivative Cp . The total derivative includes local general equilibrium effects;
for instance, the initial shock may raise wages and lead to an increase in local consumption, which
will further raise wages and increase local consumption, and so on. To get from the IV estimate to
the partial equilibrium effect of house prices on consumption Cp , we need to adjust for these local
general equilibrium effects.
   To this end, take the total derivatives of (3) and (5) with respect to G and take the difference
across regions of the resulting expressions to arrive at

                                         dw
                                          ^      dp
                                                  ^          dw
                                                              ^
                                    Cw      + Cp    + 1 = Nw    .                                   (7)
                                         dG      dG          dG

                                                      ^ = 0 as both regions face the same taxes.
Note that the effect of taxes does not appear because T
This lines up well with the empirical estimates, which include a constant term or time fixed effects
and are therefore estimated off of cross-region differences that omit factors that affect all regions
equally. Taking total derivatives of (4) and (6) with respect to G and rearrarnging yields dp
                                                                                            ^/dG = 0.



                                                  10
Then equation (7) implies dw/dG
                           ^    = 1/(Nw - Cw ).
      Taking total derivatives of equations (3)-(6) with respect to s, and performing similar manip-
ulations yields the response of prices to s. In summary, we have the following matrix of the price
response to the two shocks:
                                                                                    
                            dw
                             ^   dw
                                  ^                                     Hs
                            dG   ds                           1        -H   Cp
                                       = [Nw - Cw ]-1                     p         .                      (8)
                            dp
                             ^   dp
                                  ^                               Hs
                            dG   ds                           0   Hp   (Cw - Nw )

                                                                                ^ to the two shocks:5
We similarly differentiate the resource constraint. This yields the response of Y

                                          ^
                                         dY      dw
                                                  ^      dp^
                                            = Cw    + Cp     +1                                            (9)
                                         dG      dG      dG
                                          ^
                                         dY      dw
                                                  ^      dp
                                                          ^
                                            = Cw    + Cp                                                  (10)
                                         ds      ds      ds

Combining equations (8) and (10) yields

                                          dY^       Hs   Nw
                                              = -Cp
                                          ds        Hp Nw - Cw
                                           dp
                                            ^    Hs
                                              =-
                                           ds    Hp

which in turn yields the regional IV estimate of the housing wealth effect

                                       ^
                                      dY    ^ /ds
                                           dY
                                         =        = (1 - CY )-1 Cp ,                                      (11)
                                      dp
                                       ^   dp
                                            ^/ds

where CY  Cw /Nw is the marginal propensity to consume out of income. From this we see that
the regional IV estimate of the housing wealth effect is equal to the partial equilibrium response of
consumption to house prices Cp multiplied by a local general equilibrium feedback factor (1 - CY )-1 .
      Notice also that equations (8) and (9) imply that the local fiscal multiplier is equal to

                                    ^
                                   dY       Cw
                                      =1+         = (1 - CY )-1 .                                         (12)
                                   dG     Nw - Cw

The local fiscal multiplier is, thus, exactly equal to the local general equilibrium factor in equation
(11). Intuitively, an increase in home prices of one unit spurs an extra Cp of spending, which
  5
    Here we use the demand side of the economy to form the quantity responses (equations (9) and (10)). As we
are analyzing equilibrium changes in quantities we can use either the demand response or supply response to the
equilibrium prices and arrive at the same answer.



                                                      11
then triggers local adjustments in wages with accompanying consumption effects. These same local
adjustments occur when the initial spending is due to a government spending shock.
       An important feature of government spending shocks is that their size is known: the dollar
amount of the government spending is observed (or the dollar amount that is explained by whatever
instrument one is using to identify exogenous variation in government spending). This is why the
"direct effect" in equation (12) is equal to 1 as opposed to some unknown scaling factor. This
feature makes the local fiscal multiplier estimates particularly useful as measures of local general
equilibrium effects.
       Combining these last two equations, we get that

                                                          dY^ /dp
                                                                ^
                                                   Cp =           .                                               (13)
                                                           ^ /dG
                                                          dY

In other words, the partial equilibrium effect of house prices on consumption, Cp , is equal to the
                                                        ^ /dp
cross-region IV estimate of the housing wealth effect, dY   ^, divided by the local fiscal multiplier,
 ^ /dG. An estimate of the local fiscal multiplier can therefore be used to convert a cross-region
dY
IV estimate of the housing wealth effect into an estimate of the partial equilibrium effect of house
prices on consumption.
       In Guren et al. (2020) we estimate a marginal propensity to consume out of housing wealth
(MPCH) of 3.3 cents on the dollar. This estimate corresponds to the total effect captured by
 ^ /dp
dY   ^. Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) estimate a local fiscal multiplier of about 1.5.6 Equation
(13) then implies that the partial equilibrium MPCH is 2.2 cents on the dollar.


3.2      Residential Investment

A potentially important channel that we abstract from above is the response of residential invest-
ment to changes in house prices: an increase in house prices may induce an increase in residential
investment which then induces local general equilibrium effects. We now augment the simple model
above to allow for this channel. In this case, the equilibrium level of wages and house prices in the
   6
     Nakamura and Steinsson find larger multipliers in regional data than in state data. As the analysis of the housing
wealth effect is undertaken at the city (CBSA) level, it may be appropriate to use a fiscal multiplier somewhat below
1.5.




                                                          12
home region are given by the solution to the following two equations:


                                C (w, p, T ) + I (p, T ) + G = N (w, T )                         (14)

                                                 H (p, T, s) = 0.                                (15)


Relative to the previous example, we have added demand for local goods coming from residential
investment I (p). We maintain the "one good" setup in which output produced with labor can
be converted into consumption, government purchases, and residential investment. This implies
that an increase in residential investment leads to a supply response and a general equilibrium
response on wages and incomes that unfolds in the same way as changes in demand coming from
private or public consumption. We will have to account for this response in order to recover the
partial equilibrium response of consumption to home prices. In addition, we assume that residential
investment is independent of income conditional on house prices, Iw = 0.
   The foreign region again mirrors the home region. Manipulation of the equilibrium conditions
and resource constraints similar to the approach in section 3.1 shows the regional IV estimate of
the housing wealth effect for this case is

                                ^
                               dY    ^ /ds
                                    dY
                                  =        = (1 - CY )-1 (Cp + Ip ) .                            (16)
                               dp
                                ^   dp
                                     ^/ds

The difference versus section 3.1 is that there are two partial equilibrium effects: one for consump-
tion and another for residential housing.
   The addition of residential investment does not affect the regional fiscal multiplier (since we
have assumed that Iw = 0). The regional fiscal multiplier (1 - CY )-1 can therefore again be used
to adjust for local general equilibrium effects. This yields

                                                 dY^ /dp
                                                       ^
                                          Cp =           - Ip .
                                                  ^ /dG
                                                 dY

                    ^ p
Since Iw = 0, Ip = dI/d ^. We must, however, also take account of the fact the increase in residential
                           ^ /dp
investment contributes to dY                                  ^ /dp
                               ^. In this case, we have that dY        ^ p
                                                                  ^ = dC/d      ^ p
                                                                           ^ + dI/d ^. Using these
expressions, we can rewrite the above equation as

                                           ^ p
                                          dC/d      ^ p
                                               ^ + dI/d ^
                                   Cp =                      ^ p
                                                          - dI/d ^.                              (17)
                                               ^
                                             dY /dG



                                                   13
            Table 1: Elasticity of Construction and Real Estate Employment to Home Prices
                               Sample Period                                    1990-2017
                               OLS                                               0.470***
                                                                                  (0.025)
                               Sensitivity Instrument                            0.362***
                                                                                  (0.053)
                               Saiz Instrument                                   0.500***
                                                                                  (0.102)
       Notes: The specification is the same as the specification used for Table 1 in Guren et al. (2020) except that
       the dependent variable is construction and real estate employment rather than retail employment. "OLS"
       uses no instrument. "Sensitivity Instrument" uses the sensitivity instrument described in Guren et al.
       (2020). Saiz uses an instrument that interacts Saiz's elasticity with the national change in house prices. All
       three approaches use the same control variables: two-digit industry shares with date-specific coefficients,
       the cyclical sensitivity control described in Guren et al. (2020), and the analogously constructed controls
       for differential city exposure to interest rates and the Gilchirst-Zakrajsek excess bond premium along with
       CBSA and division-time fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the time and CBSA level.
       *** indicates statistical significance at the 0.1% level.


       In this case, we need a regional estimate of the response of residential investment to a change in
house prices in addition to the regional housing wealth effect and fiscal multiplier estimates. We use
changes in construction and real estate employment as a proxy for residential investment. Using
a quarterly panel of CBSA-level employment and home prices covering 1990-2017, we estimate an
analogous specification to the housing wealth effect estimate we present in column 2 of Table 1 of
Guren et al. (2020). Results are reported in Table 1 and we will focus on our preferred "sensitivity"
instrument. Our estimated elasticity is 0.362 (with a standard error of 0.053). To convert this to
a simple derivative, we must divide by the ratio of housing wealth to residential investment H/I
                                                                     ^ p
which we estimate to be 28.2.7 This yields 0.013 as our estimate of dI/d ^. Plugging in this estimate
along with our estimates of the housing wealth effect and fiscal multiplier into equation (17) yields
a partial equilibrium MPCH estimate of 1.8 cents on the dollar.


3.3       Demand Leakage Due to Trade

The analysis above ignores the fact that the data used to estimate the regional housing wealth
effect comes from regional economies that are open to trade with other regions. This implies that
some of the extra demand induced by higher house prices "leaks out" to other regions. Let  be
the expenditure share on local goods. Households display home bias when  > 1/2. Here, again,
   7
    We construct this estimate as (H/C )(C/I ). Between 1985 and 2016, the average ratio of H/C was 2.17, where
H is measured as the market value of owner-occupied real estate from the Flow of Funds and C is measured as total
personal consumption expenditures less PCE on housing services and utilities from the National Income and Product
Accounts. Over this same period, I/C was 0.077, where I is residential investment from the National Income and
Product Accounts.



                                                            14
we maintain the "one good" assumption, which in this case implies that the real exchange rate
between the regions is fixed and equal to one. We relax this assumption in section 5. Building on
(14)-(15), we have the following system:


                [C (w, p, T ) + I (p, T )] + (1 - ) [C (w , p , T ) + I (p , T )] + G = N (w, T ),

            (1 - ) [C (w, p, T ) + I (p, T )] +  [C (w , p , T ) + I (p , T )] + G = N (w , T ),

                                                                         H (p, s, T ) = 0,

                                                                       H (p , s , T ) = 0.


   In this case, it is important to distinguish between local expenditures and local output. We
define E = C (w, p, T ) + I (p, T ) to be home expenditures. Regional IV estimates of the housing
wealth effect measure the response of expenditures to house prices, not the response of output to
house prices. With this definition of local expenditures, we can use similar manipulations of the
equilibrium conditions and resource constraints as in sections 3.1 and 3.2 to derive the regional IV
estimate of the housing wealth effect:

                                   ^
                                  dE    ^
                                       dE/ds
                                     =       = (1 - CY )-1 (Cp + Ip ) ,                              (18)
                                  dp
                                   ^   dp
                                        ^/ds

and the local fiscal multiplier:
                                              ^
                                             dY
                                                = (1 - CY )-1 ,                                      (19)
                                             dG
                                                                                 ^ p
where   2 - 1. Once again, we see that the cross-regional housing wealth effect dE/d ^ is equal
to a partial equilibrium effect (Cp + Ip ) multiplied by a local general equilibrium effect which is
                                              ^ /dG.
exactly equal to the local fiscal multiplier dY
   The strength of the local general equilibrium effect is tempered by the degree of openness of
each regional economy. Trade linkages attenuate the differences in activity across regions because
some of the extra spending in the home region spills over onto the foreign region. In our simple
model, this is captured by the factor  in the denominator on the right-hand side of equation (19).
This factor runs from zero to one depending on the degree of home bias of demand. In a more
complex model with movements in the relative prices of home and foreign goods, the elasticity of
substitution between home and foreign goods would also play a role in determining the size of this
attenuation.
                                                          ^ p
   Combining the last two equations, using the fact that dE/d      ^ p
                                                              ^ = dC/d      ^ p
                                                                       ^ + dI/d ^, the fact that


                                                       15
      ^ p
Ip = dI/d ^, and rearranging yields

                                             ^ p
                                            dC/d      ^ p
                                                 ^ + dI/d ^
                                     Cp =                      ^ p
                                                            - dI/d ^.                              (20)
                                                 ^
                                               dY /dG

which is no different from equation (17). In other words, the attenuation due to openness has no
impact on our analysis since it only shows up in the size of the local general equilibrium effect, which
we measure in the data. There is, however, some subtlety to this outcome. The housing wealth effect
is measured in terms of an expenditure response while the fiscal multiplier is measured in terms
of a production response and normally one would think that production is more attenuated than
expenditure. However, in specifying the model we assumed that the government buys a purely local
good not a mix of home and foreign goods. So, the production response to a government spending
shock is no more attenuated than the expenditure response to home prices.


3.4       Income Effects on Housing

We now allow for an income effect on the price of housing. In this case, the housing market
equilibrium conditions become


                                               H (w, p, s, T ) = 0,

                                            H (w , p , s , T ) = 0,


where housing demand now responds to wages. The goods market equilibrium conditions are the
same as in section 3.3. We can again use similar manipulations of the equilibrium conditions and
resource constraints as in earlier sections to derive the regional IV estimate of the housing wealth
effect:
                                ^
                               dE    ^
                                    dE/ds
                                  =       = (1 - CY )-1 (Cp + Ip ) ,                               (21)
                               dp
                                ^   dp
                                     ^/ds

and the local fiscal multiplier:

                                    ^                                   -1
                                   dY                      Cp + Ip Hw
                                      =   1 - CY +                           .                     (22)
                                   dG                        Nw Hp

Derivations of these equations--which encompass all the derivations in this section as special cases--
are presented in Appendix A.
    Notice that the housing wealth effect is the same in this case as in section 3.3--equation (21) is


                                                      16
the same as equation (18). However, the local fiscal multiplier is different--equation (22) is different
from equation (19). This means that the addition of income effects on house prices breaks the exact
equivalence between the local fiscal multiplier and the local general equilibrium effects induced by a
change in house prices. The reason for this is that part of the response to the government spending
shock comes through home prices and the housing wealth effect, but we would like to isolate only
the part of the fiscal multiplier that relates to wage adjustments.
       To this end, suppose we observe an estimate of the response of house prices to income dp  ^ .8
                                                                                              ^/dY
Some further manipulation of the equilibrium conditions yields

                                                                                -1
                             ^ p
                            dC/d      ^ p
                                 ^ + dI/d ^                    ^
                                                              dC    ^
                                                                   dI     dp
                                                                           ^
                       Cp =                 1-                   +                      ^ p
                                                                                     - dI/d ^.                   (23)
                               dY^ /dG                        dp
                                                               ^   dp
                                                                    ^      ^
                                                                          dY

This expression--which we derive in Appendix A--differs from equation (20) by the term in the
large bracket. This term represents the adjustment to the local fiscal multiplier estimate that is
needed to focus on the part of general equilibrium effect that come from change in wages.
       We need two extra pieces of data to be able to evaluate equation (23). First, we need an
estimate of  = 2 - 1. We use Nakamura and Steinsson's (2014) estimate of  = 0.69, which
implies  = 0.38.9 Second, we need an estimate of the response of house prices to income dp  ^.
                                                                                         ^/dY
Lamont and Stein (1999) provide a set of short-run estimates of the income elasticity of house
prices, which imply that it is less than 0.8 and more likely near 0.3. We use 0.3 as our estimate,
but our conclusions are little changed by using 0.8. This estimate must be divided by the ratio of
housing wealth to total expenditures of 2.02 to yield a value of 0.149 for the derivative dp  ^ in
                                                                                           ^/dY
equation (23).
       Together, these numbers imply that the term inside the large bracket in equation (23) is 0.998.
In other words, allowing for income effects on housing implies that the simple idea of dividing the
housing wealth effect by the local fiscal multiplier is off by only a minuscule amount. Taking this
effect into account does not affect the implied partial equilibrium MPCH to the precision we are
reporting.
   8
     Think of this as an IV estimate. For example, in the current model dp  ^ can be estimated as a ratio of responses
                                                                         ^/dY
to exogenous variation in government spending: (dp   ^/dG)/(dY ^ /dG).
   9
     Nakamura and Steinsson estimate the local fiscal multiplier based on state-level data, while GMNS estimate the
housing wealth effect on consumption at the CBSA level. Incorporating trade linkages into our analysis is accounting
for the fact that the local fiscal multiplier is attenuated by trade linkages so it makes sense to use a value of 
consistent with the geographic unit used to estimate the fiscal multiplier.




                                                         17
4    Identification in a System of Equations

The arguments we made in the previous section may seem special. In fact, they are applications of
a general method for identification that is used pervasively in economics: simultaneous equations
estimation. To see this and to see how cross-regional estimates can be used in other settings to
identify partial equilibrium responses, it is useful to recast what we have done as an application of
the general method of identification when variables are determined by a system of equations. In
doing this, we will see that our approach to identifying partial equilibrium responses from cross-
regional estimates is mathematically closely related to identification of structural VARs (another
prominent example of simultaneous equations identification in macroeconomics).
    Using this simultaneous equations perspective, it is easy to verify whether one has the necessary
sources of variation to identify the partial equilibrium effect of interest. We will see formally that
the partial equilibrium housing wealth effect is not identified by cross-regional housing wealth effect
estimates alone, but is identified with the help of cross-regional responses to government spending
shocks.
    To keep things as simple as possible, we will focus on the example from Section 3.1. Appendix
B shows that the same argument applies for the more complicated system considered in Section
3.4. Appendix B furthermore provides other examples of systems of equations--one involving local
credit supply shocks and another involving foreign demand shocks--where government spending
shocks are again useful to identify the direct (partial equilibrium) effect of the shock.
    Consider equations (3) - (6) from Section 3.1. Linearizing these equations and using Y = N (w)
and its inverse w = N -1 (Y ), we can write this as a system of three equations


                                          ^ = Cp p
                                          C             ^
                                                 ^ + CY Y
                                          ^ =C
                                          Y  ^+G
                                               ^

                                           0 = Hp p
                                                  ^ + Hs s
                                                         ^,


                                                                        ^, Y
where CY = Cw /Nw as before. This system has three endogenous variables C  ^ , and p
                                                                                   ^ and two
                    ^ and s
exogenous variables G                                ^ and s
                          ^. The exogenous variables G     ^ are the "structural shocks" affecting
this system.




                                                  18
   We can rewrite this system as


                                                   X  = z ,                                            (24)


                                            ^ Y
where X and z are row vectors given by X = (C, ^,p           ^ s
                                                 ^) and z = (G, ^).  and  are matrices of
coefficients. Let's now post-multiply the system by -1 to obtain the reduced form representation
of the system:


                                                 X = z -1 .                                            (25)


Our goal is to estimate Cp (an element of ). However, what we estimate using the reduced form
            ^ to s
response of C    ^ is an element of -1 , which is influenced by other aspects of the system such
                   ^ to Y
as the response of C    ^.

   Formally, the identification challenge is that multiple structural systems (24) can give rise to
the same reduced form (25). We can see this by post-multiplying (24) by an arbitrary 3 × 3 matrix
F . This yields X (F ) = z (F ). The reduced form of this system is


                                     X = z (F ) (F )-1 = z -1 .


The F and F -1 cancel out implying that this alternative structural system yields the same reduced
form system. For example, the same reduced form response of C to s can arise if Cp is small and
CY is large or vice versa.
   To identify the system, we need to place restrictions on the system (on  and ) such that there
is no scope to transform the system with an F without violating one or more of the restrictions.
To be more precise, we need restrictions so that the only allowable F is the identity matrix.
   Note the analogy to structural VARs. A structural VAR is A(L)Yt = ut (with A(0) = I ) and
Rut =    t,   where ut are the reduced form errors and         t   are the structural errors. Equation (25)
in our application is analogous to Rut =          t   in the structural VAR setting. In structural VARs,
identification involves placing restrictions on R, just as in our setting identification involves placing
restrictions on  and . However, there are some differences. In structural VARs, the typical
assumption is that    t   is not observed but has the same dimension as ut (same number of shocks as
variables). Researchers place restrictions on R (and use the variance-covariance matrix of ut ) to
identify the remainder of R (and      t ).   In our case, the structural shocks z are observed, but z may


                                                        19
have a smaller dimension than X . We are interested in identifying an element of  but can only
observe elements of -1 . Our case is more analogous to identification of structural VARs with
observed external instruments.
   As our interest is in identifying the partial equilibrium housing wealth effect, we will focus on
whether the coefficients in the first equation of our system--the linearized consumption function--
are identified. This is less demanding than identifying the whole system because we can allow for
transformations of the system that change the other equations as long as they do not change the
first equation. In other words, we need only be sure that the first column of any transformation F
is the first column of the identity matrix.
   In general, identification of (parts of) a system of equations requires a certain number of re-
strictions. Intuitively, the number of observed facts must equal the number of unknown parameters
of interest. In the simultaneous equations literature, this is known as the "order condition" (see,
e.g., Wooldridge, 2010, section 9.2.2). In addition, the restrictions must result in a system that
has certain rank. Intuitively, the facts must each provide information about the system that is
independent of any linear combination of the other facts. This is known as the "rank condition."
Finally, identification requires a normalization.
   We begin by discussing the order condition for our case. As our system contains three en-
dogenous variables, we need two restrictions on the system to satisfy the order condition. In our
example, these restrictions are that neither G nor s appears directly in the consumption function.
These restrictions are similar to the exclusion condition in an instrumental variables regression.
Without excluding G from the consumption function we would not be able to tell if a large fiscal
multiplier reflects a large CY or a large direct effect of G on C . But to understand the local general
equilibrium amplification of the housing wealth effect we specifically want to know CY . Notice that
              ^ from the system we would have only one restriction and we would not be able to
if we dropped G
satisfy the order condition for identification of Cp without making a direct assumption about CY .
   We now turn to the rank condition. Our restrictions can be represented by the matrices
                                                                     
                                        0 0 0                  1 0
                              R =                        R           ,
                                        0 0 0                  0 1




                                                    20
such that


                                        (R  + R ) e1 = 0,                                      (26)
                                              R


where e1  (1, 0, 0) selects the first column of R.
   Now suppose we transform the system by post-multiplying it by F . As we want the first columns
of  and  to be identified, we want to make sure that only an F with the first column e1 can
satisfy the restrictions on the system. In this case, F does not transform the first column of  and
, which house the coefficients of the first equation in the system. To satisfy the restrictions on
the system, F must satisfy


                              (R F + R F ) e1 = RF e1 = Rf1 = 0,                               (27)


where f1  F e1 is the first column of F .
   Our goal is that F does not transform the first equation in the system so its first column is the
first column of the identity matrix, i.e. f1 = e1 . So the question is what must be true of R such
that f1 can only satisfy (27) if f1 = e1 ? To answer that, we want to make sure that R maps any
vector other than e1 to a non-zero vector. This requires that all of the columns of R other than
the first one are linearly independent. Or equivalently, the rank of R must be one less than the
number of equations, which means two in our case. This is the rank condition. It is easily verified
for our system.
   The final requirement for identification is a normalization. The rank condition only requires
that f1 = e1 up to a scalar multiple and so a normalization is needed to pin down this scalar. In
                                                                          ^ = Cp p
our system, the first equation has a natural normalization: when we write C             ^ we
                                                                                 ^ + CY Y
                                     ^ is 1. Together, these conditions--the rank condition with a
have imposed that the coefficient on C
normalization--are necessary and sufficient for identification (Wooldridge, 2010, Thm. 9.2).
   Clearly if there are fewer than two restrictions, the rank of R cannot be two because R has
fewer than two rows. (This is the order condition.) Suppose that G did not appear in the second
equation and was therefore absent from the system altogether. In this case, we would only have one
restriction to place on  and  and the order condition would fail. Introducing a second exogenous
source of variation (G) is therefore crucial for identification in our application.
   One potentially useful piece of prior knowledge we have about G is that the coefficient on G



                                                  21
in the resource constraint is 1 (i.e., we know the direct demand effect of the G shocks). However,
the argument above does not make use of this information. Suppose we introduce an unknown
parameter YG such that the second equation becomes


                                          ^ =C
                                          Y  ^ + YG G.
                                                    ^


Even though we do not know YG we can still identify Cp by the argument above. The reason is
                                                                          ^ /dG
that in our reduced form we are implicitly assuming that we observe both dY   ^ and dC/d
                                                                                     ^ G ^.

Differentiating the resource constraint gives

                                           ^
                                          dY    ^
                                               dC
                                             =    + YG .
                                           ^
                                          dG    ^
                                               dG

                                                                ^ /dG
The parameter YG can then be found from the difference between dY   ^ and dC/d
                                                                           ^ G ^.
                                                                                            ^ G
    However, if we instead assume that we are not able to observe the consumption response dC/d ^
                                                                                         ^ from
directly, then we do need to use the prior knowledge that YG = 1. To see this, eliminate C
                                                                           ^ and p
the system so we have a system of two endogenous variables in two unknowns Y     ^:


                                               ^ = Cp p
                                     (1 - CY ) Y             ^
                                                      ^ + YG G

                                                0 = Hp p
                                                       ^ + Hs s
                                                              ^.


Our goal is still to identify Cp . So, we are interested in identifying the first equation. We can
impose the restriction that s
                            ^ does not appear in the first equation. This suffices for the order and
rank conditions to be satisfied. The knowledge that YG = 1 then provides the crucial normalization
we need to complete the identification. This shows that one aspect of government spending shocks
that can make them more valuable for identification of partial equilibrium responses than other
shocks is the fact that one knows the size of the shock.


5    Dynamic Model

We now present a micro-founded, dynamic model of multiple regions. After presenting the model,
we show how the arguments laid out in sections 3 and 4 can be applied in the context of this model.




                                                 22
5.1    Model Assumptions

Demographics          There are two regions, "home" and "foreign." The population of the entire
economy is 1 with a share n in the home region. All variables are expressed in per capita terms.


Preferences Households maximize:


                                            E0          t u(Ct , Nt , Ht ; t ),
                                                 t=0


where the arguments are consumption, labor supply, units of housing Ht chosen at date t and held
to date t + 1, and t is an aggregate housing demand shock. The period utility function is given
by:
                                                                                  1-
                                               N 1+                        1-
                  u(C, N, H ; ) =           C-                    (H - )               - 1 / (1 -  ) .
                                               1+

Note that consumption and leisure are substitutable in the style of Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Huffman (1988), which eliminates wealth effects on labor supply, an assumption we maintained in
section 3. We model the housing demand shock using a Stone-Geary formulation, but this exact
specification is unimportant. What matters is that there is a shock that changes the marginal rate
of substitution between housing and non-durables.10


Commodities and technology                 Consumption Ct is a Cobb-Douglas bundle of final goods pro-
duced in home and foreign:
                                                                1-
                                       Ct = - (1 - )-(1-) CH,t
                                                           
                                                               CF,t ,

where CF,t is the consumption in home of the good produced in foreign.11 We will use  to denote
                         is the consumption in foreign of the good produced in home. We assume
foreign variables. So, CH,t

                                                                                  (1- )
                                   
                                  Ct =  - (1 -  )-(1- ) CF,t CH,t                         .


The parameters  > n and  > 1 - n capture the degree of home-bias in demand for goods. The
                                                                        1-
price index for the consumption bundle in the home region is Pt = PH,t PF,t , where PH,t and PF,t
  10
      In addition to changing the marginal rate of substitution between housing and non-durables, a shock to t also
affects the marginal utility of consumption as the extra demand for housing is not fully satisfied in equilibrium. This
can lead to a strong consumption response to t in the aggregate time series, but it equally affects both regions and
therefore does not influence our cross-sectional analysis.
   11
      Including the term - (1 - )-(1-) in the definition of the bundle simplifies the expression for the price index.



                                                             23
are the prices of the the final goods produced in home and foreign, respectively.
   Each region produces a final good using a continuum of intermediate inputs. The production
of the final good satisfies:

                                                                           
                                                 1              -1         -1
                                     Yt =            yt (z )         dz         .
                                             0


Each intermediate good is produced linearly with labor according to yt (z ) = Nt (z ).


Housing supply        The supply of housing satisfies:

                                                        
                                    Ht = (1 -  )Ht-1 + It Mt1- .                                (28)


Here we assume that the construction of new residential housing units requires two inputs: res-
idential investment It and construction permits Mt , which are sold by the federal government.
The construction permits are a tractable way to represent a variety of factors that limit housing
supply including zoning regulations and limits to new land supply. The elasticity of supply of the
construction permits may differ across regions giving rise to different housing supply elasticities.
Residential investment requires a mix of local and imported inputs analogous to the mix used for
consumption:
                                                            1-
                                   It = - (1 - )-(1-) IH,t
                                                       
                                                           IF,t .


Markets        The two regions share the same money, which serves as the numeraire. Final goods
markets are competitive and completely integrated across regions. The prices of intermediate good
firms are sticky. These firms receive an opportunity to change their price each period with 1 - 
as in Calvo (1983). The labor markets are local to each region and competitive with real wages
denoted wt . Units of housing trade at relative price pt . Households trade a nominal bond that
pays interest it between t and t + 1. Let Pt Bt be the nominal value of bond holdings in the home
region at the end of period t. We consider two cases for asset markets. In the "incomplete markets"
economy, there is only trade in risk-free nominal bonds. In the "complete markets" economy, the
regions also trade state-contingent assets in quantities At at prices t,t+1 . In the complete markets
economy, the bond is redundant, but it can still be priced and this price will enter our monetary
policy rule.
   Intermediate goods firms produce profits, which are rebated to the households in the region.


                                                       24
We use Dt to denote the real profits received. We impose a portfolio holding cost in the style of
Schmitt-Groh´                                                                       2 . This
            e and Uribe (2003) whereby holding bond position Bt incurs a flow cost Bt
portfolio cost implies that steady state wealth holdings in each region are determinate. This can
be viewed as a crude approximation to precautionary savings motives that decline with wealth.


Government       The government purchases goods, sells construction permits, and sets monetary
policy. Let Gt and Gt be per capita spending in home and foreign, respectively. The government

buys local goods in each region. The exogenous process for Gt is:


                                               ¯ + G Gt-1 +
                                  Gt = (1 - G )G                  G,t .                            (29)


Gt is independent of Gt , but follows the same process.

   The government's monetary policy may be described by a rule for the nominal interest rate:

                            n 1-n
            1 + it =  -1 +  t t                     ¯ + (1 - n) log Y  /Y
                                  - 1 + y n log Yt /Y                t
                                                                        ¯                  ,       (30)


where policy responds to the population-weighted averages of inflation and output.
   The government sells construction permits according to the rule:


                                                  ¯ p .
                                             Mt = M                                                (31)
                                                     t



The parameter  is the elasticity of construction permits granted with respect to the price of
housing. This parameter is meant to reflect some combination of the stringency of zoning regulations
and the availability of suitable vacant land. The government sets the relative price of a permit, qt ,
equal to its marginal product in construction of new housing units. It is fairly standard to model
housing supply as combining a flow of new land or permits with residential investment. We assume
that the supply of permits is price elastic while the literature typically assumes it is constant (Davis
and Heathcote, 2005; Favilukis et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2017). Later we will allow the regions
to differ in their permit supply elasticities, i.e.  =   , in the spirit of identification schemes that
follow Saiz (2010).
   The government imposes lump sum taxes in nominal amounts Pt Tt and Pt Tt . The national




                                                  25
government budget constraint is:

                                  
               nPH,t Gt + (1 - n)PF,t G                                              
                                       t = nPt Tt + (1 - n)Pt Tt + nPt qt + (1 - n)Pt qt .



We assume that the government taxes each region equally (per capita) in nominal terms.


Market-clearing          The market for home goods clears if:

                                  -1                                               -
                           PH,t                     1-n                     PH,t
                Yt =                   (Ct + It ) +     (1 -  )                           
                                                                                        (Ct    
                                                                                            + It ) + Gt ,           (32)
                           PF,t                      n                      PF,t

where PH,t /PF,t is the real exchange rate. This expression involves local and home expenditure
on the bundles of home and foreign produced goods. The cost-minimizing bundle depends on the
degree of home bias and the real exchange rate. Similarly, the market for foreign goods clears if:

                                                                                   1-
                        n                 PH,t                            PH,t
                Yt   =     (1 - )                      (Ct + It ) +                       
                                                                                        (Ct    
                                                                                            + It ) + Gt.            (33)
                       1-n                PF,t                            PF,t

Bond market clearing requires:

                                                             
                                               nBt + (1 - n)Bt = 0.


Decision problems.            Under incomplete markets and assuming certainty equivalence12 so that
the real return on bonds is treated as known Rt  (1 + it )/t+1 , the household maximizes

                                               
                                                     t u (Ct , Nt , Ht ; t ) ,
                                              t=0


subject to the budget constraint:

                                        2
                     pt Ht + Ct + Bt + Bt = Wt Nt + Dt + Rt-1 Bt-1 + pt Ht-1 (1 -  ),


where Rt is the gross real interest rate between t and t + 1.
  12
    This case applies to the steady state, perfect foresight transitions, and first-order accurate solutions to stochastic
economies.




                                                             26
   The intra-temporal optimality conditions of the household's problem imply


                                                 ~ t = xt C
                                                 H        ~t

                                                 Nt = wt .


where

                                    1+
                         ~t  Ct - Nt
                         C
                                   1+
                         ~ t  Ht - t
                         H
                                                                                      -1
                                1-                                       uC,t+1
                          xt                pt - Et pt+1 (1 -  )                           .
                                                                          uC,t

Abstracting from the portfolio holding cost, we have:

                                                                                                    1+
                                                                  -1                  1-           N
                      Rt-1 Bt-1 + pt Ht-1 (1 -  ) +           =t Rt,       Y -        x        -   1+
              ~t = 
              C                                                                                          ,   (34)
                                                            -1
                                                        =t Rt, Xt,


where


                                Rt,  Rt, -1 R -1             > t
                                                            (1-)(1- ) 1/
                                             t         x
                                Xt,   Rt,                                         ,
                                                       xt

and Rt,t = 1. See Appendix C.1 for the derivation.
   Turning to construction, a representative competitive real estate developer maximizes revenue
from new homes less material and permit costs:

                                           
                                   max pt It Mt1- - It - qt Mt .
                                   It ,Mt


The first order condition of this problem with respect to It and equation (31) imply:

                                                                1
                                                   1         + 1-
                                                     ¯p
                                            It =  1- M            
                                                                     ,                                       (35)
                                                        t



so the supply of new housing is:
                                                               
                                       I  Mt1- = (pt ) 1- Mt .



                                                       27
                                                                  t , to solve
    Finally, intermediate goods producers set their reset prices, P

                                                        t
                                                        P
                                 max Et         t t,      - w    y
                                   t
                                   P       =t
                                                        P

where t, is the discount factor between  and t and subject to the demand curve for their variety
           t    -
           P
y  = Y    PH,       . This problem gives rise to a forward-looking inflation response to variations in
the real wage and the real exchange rate (see Appendix D.1).


6    Adjusting for Local GE Effects in the Full Model

We now show how the static relationships derived in Section 3 relate to dynamic relationships in
the context of the dynamic model. We consider a perfect foresight transition lasting T periods.
We assume that the two regions are equally open to trade. Given their unequal sizes, this implies
1 -  =    n
         1-n (1 - ).   We define    +  - 1. Furthermore, to keep the expressions in this section
as simple as possible, we assume that prices are perfectly rigid. This implies that the real exchange
rate is constant at one.
    Taking a cross-region difference of the market clearing conditions--equations (32)-(33)--yields:


                                          ^ = C
                                          Y   ^+I
                                                ^ + G,
                                                    ^                                            (36)


                                                                                             ^, I
      ^ is a column vector of length T that gives values of Yt - Yt for all t  {1, ..., T }. C
where Y                                                                                         ^, and
^ are defined similarly.
G
    Linearizing the consumption function show in equation (34) around a symmetric steady state
and taking a cross-region difference yields:


                                           ^ = Cp p
                                           C             ^,
                                                  ^ + CY Y                                       (37)


where CY is a T × T matrix where the [t, s] element gives the coefficient of the response of Ct to Ys
and the matrix Cp is defined similarly. CY is the intertemporal marginal propensity to consume
matrix highlighted by Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub (2018). Notice that , taxes, and interest rates
do not appear in this expression because these variables are common across regions and drop out
when we take the difference.
    Linearizing the residential investment response--equation (35)--around a symmetric steady


                                                   28
state and taking a cross-region difference yields:


                                               ^ = Ip p
                                               I      ^,                                         (38)


where we abstract (for now) from regional heterogeneity in land supply.
     Combining equations (36), (37), and (38) yields:


                                     ^ = M (Cp + Ip ) p
                                     Y                     ^
                                                      ^ + MG                                     (39)


where M  [I - CY ]-1 . Using equations (37), (38), and (39), the local expenditure is given by:


                                  ^+I
                                  C ^ = M (Cp + Ip ) p       ^
                                                     ^ + CY MG,                                  (40)


where we have used the definition of M to note that I + CY M = M.
     From this last equation, we can calculate the impulse response of expenditures to home prices
as

                                          ^
                                         dE
                                            = M (Cp + Ip ) ,                                     (41)
                                         dp
                                          ^

      ^ C
where E ^+I
          ^ and dE/d
                 ^ p ^ is a T × T matrix in which the (t, s) element gives the response of
expenditure in period t to a change in home prices in period s. This is the dynamic analog to our
                             ^ p
static (scalar) IV estimate dE/d ^ from the setting discussed in section 3.
     Notice that--just as in section 3--the regional impulse response is equal to the partial equilib-
rium response Cp + Ip multiplied by a local general equilibrium feedback factor M. Our next task
is to relate this local general equilibrium feedback factor to observables. To this end, we linearize
housing demand, H (p, Y, T, R, ), and housing supply--equation (28)--and equate them. This
yields:


                            Hp p + HR R + HY Y + HT T + H  = HS
                                                              p p.



Taking a cross-region difference and rearranging yields:


                                              p      ^,
                                              ^ = pY Y                                           (42)




                                                  29
where:
                                                          -1
                                        pY  HS
                                             p - Hp            HY ,

and HY is the response of housing demand to income. Substituting (42) into equation (39) and
rearranging yields:


                                 ^ = [I - M (Cp + Ip ) pY ]-1 MG.
                                 Y                             ^                                       (43)


   From equation (43) the impulse response of output to government spending is:

                                  ^
                                 dY
                                    = [I - M (Cp + Ip ) pY ]-1 M.                                      (44)
                                 dG

             ^ /dG
Here again, dY   ^ is a T × T matrix in which the (t, s) element gives the response of output in

period t to a change in government spending in period s. This is the dynamic equivalent of the
static (scalar) local fiscal multiplier from the setting discussed in section 3.
                                                dp
                                                 ^
   Rearranging (44) and using the fact that      ^   = pY we have that
                                                dY


                                                       ^ dp
                                                      dE  ^      ^
                                                                dY
                                        M=     I -                 .
                                                      dp  ^
                                                       ^ dY     dG

   Plugging this expression for M into equation (41) and rearranging yields

                                          -1                    -1
                                   ^
                                  dY                ^ dp
                                                   dE  ^               ^
                                                                      dE
                             Cp =              I -                       - Ip .                        (45)
                                  dG               dp  ^
                                                    ^ dY              dp
                                                                       ^

This result is a dynamic analog to the main result in Section 3.4 (see equation 23). As we have
                                                           ^ dY
                                                          dE    ^
noted above, in this dynamic setting, the components       ^ , dG ,
                                                          dp          and so on are matrices rather scalars.
If these matrices have important off-diagonal elements, then the logic of our static examples is
complicated by dynamic responses of the economy. On the other hand, if the contemporaneous
responses are large relative to the dynamic responses (i.e. the matrices are close to diagonal), then
the logic of the static economy goes through because in that case equation (45) reduces to the same
scalar relationship as equation (23).




                                                     30
7         Long-Run Heterogeneity in Housing Supply

To provide a convincing assessment of the accuracy of the simple adjustment formula that we
present in section 3, we need a model that can roughly match our empirical estimates for the
observables that enter that adjustment formula: the local housing wealth effect, the local fiscal
multiplier, and the local effect of house prices on construction. Our estimates of the local housing
wealth effect and local effect of house prices on construction rely on an identification strategy
that exploits heterogeneity in housing supply curves across cities interacted with aggregate home
price changes as an instrument. Research using this identification strategy has proxied for city-
level housing supply elasticities with topographic features of the cities (Saiz, 2010) or equilibrium
sensitivity of local house prices to regional house price variation (Guren et al., 2020).
         We can introduce heterogeneity in housing supply elasticities into the model we presented in
section 5 and assess whether this model can match our empirical estimates. When we do this, we
find that the response of residential investment to home prices is far from our empirical estimates.
In fact, this response is negative in the model: when we calibrate the model to have  and  
equal to the 10th and 90th percentiles, respectively, of the elasticities estimated by Saiz (2010),
the model implies an elasticity of residential investment to home prices of -12. In contrast, the
empirical estimates we present in section 3 are positive, ranging from 0.36 to 0.50.
         The left panel of Figure 1 illustrates the economics behind this counterfactual prediction of
the model. The panel plots housing supply curves for two cities with different supply elasticities.
In response to a common demand shock, the less elastic city (represented by line S ) has a larger
price response but a smaller quantity response.13 Davidoff (2016) has critiqued estimates of the
housing wealth effect based on the identification strategy described above on the grounds that
quantity growth has been larger for inelastic cities than elastic cities. Our finding that construction
employment responds positively to changes in home prices is another piece of evidence on quantities
that is at odds with the simple view of heterogeneous housing supply curves discussed above.
         However, it is relatively simple to remedy this empirical failing of our model by allowing for
differences between short-run and long-run housing supply elasticities. Suppose, in particular, that
housing supply is inelastic in all cities in the short run, but becomes more elastic in the long run
in one of the cities. The two panels of Figure 1 illustrate this with the right panel depicting the
short run and the left panel the long run. The equilibrium price of housing is forward looking as
    13
    Appendix E describes this negative relationship between quantities and prices in econometric terms and shows
that our adjustment formula from section 3 remains valid with heterogeneous housing supply curves.



                                                      31
                   Long Run                                              Short Run
 Price                                                 Price



                             S
                D

                                   S
           D




                                 Quantity                                              Quantity

                    Figure 1: Long run and short run housing supply curves.


current housing demand depends on expectations of all future capital gains on housing. As a result,
the equilibrium housing price is largely determined by long-run forces in the housing market. On
the other hand, the incentives to construct and sell new homes depend on the current availability
of inputs to construction and the current price of houses. Therefore the construction response
depends much more on short-run forces in the housing market. The short-run equilibrium in the
housing market reflects different endogenous changes in housing demand across regions reflecting
the different expected capital gains going forward. Short-run housing demand will increase more
in the region in which a larger capital gain is expected and this moves that region further up the
common short-run supply curve. This logic generates a positive response of construction to home
prices even though regional home price fluctuations reflect differences in (long-run) housing supply
elasticities.
    We use a regime-switching formulation to model short-run and long-run differences. We assume
that the economy is currently in the short-run and is expected to switch to the long-run regime
with 2% probability each period after which it will remain in the long-run regime. In the short-run,
the supply of land available for construction is fixed in both regions ( =   = 0). In the long-run,
the supply of land responds to home prices, but differentially in the two regions ( <   ). When we
simulate the economy we assume that the economy is always in the short-run regime and the long-
run never materializes. Construction in both regions reflects movements along the same short-run
supply curve while home prices are differentially affected by aggregate changes in housing demand
that move expectations along the heterogeneous long-run housing supply curves.



                                                32
8    Monte Carlo Analysis

We are now ready to use the dynamic model developed in sections 5 and 7 to assess the accuracy of
the simple adjustment for local general equilibrium effects that we derived in section 3--equation
(23). We will do this by presenting results from a series of Monte Carlo simulations of different
versions of the dynamic model. Recall that discrepancies between the appropriate size of the ad-
justment in our full model and the simple adjustment formula arise from the non-diagonal elements
in equation (45).
    We will work with equation (23) rewritten in terms of elasticities:

                              log C                e                          ^
                                                                      ¯ d log I
                                                                      I
                                    =     ^            ¯
                                                                    - ¯                         (46)
                              log p      dY          C
                                                 - e Y           ^
                                                           d log p            ^
                                                                      C d log p
                                         dG (1       ¯           ^)
                                                           d log Y


where
                                                 ^
                                           d log C   ¯ d log I
                                                     I       ^
                                      e            + ¯
                                           d log p
                                                 ^   C d log p
                                                             ^
                  ^ = log X - log X  .
and we define log X
    The left-hand side of equation (46) is the partial equilibrium response of consumption to changes
in house prices. In a dynamic setting, this depends not only on current house prices but also the
entire future excepted path of house prices. In our model, we compute the partial equilibrium
effect using the analytical consumption function, equation (34), and the exact dynamics of home
prices implied by the model. Specifically, we first simulate the general equilibrium model. Then for
each period of this simulation, we feed the resulting current house price and expected future path
for house prices into the household's analytical consumption function and calculate the household's
consumption (holding everything other than the path for house prices constant). This yields a series
for consumption in the home and foreign region. Finally, we regress the cross-region difference
in consumption on the simulated cross-region difference in house prices and take the regression
coefficient from this regression as the partial equilibrium response of consumption to house prices.
See Appendix C for additional details.
    To calculate the right-hand side of equation (46) in our model, we perform two simulations of
the model. First, we simulate the model with only aggregate housing demand shocks. The output
                                                  ^ log p
from this simulation allows us to calculate d log C/d               ^ log p
                                                        ^ and d log I/d   ^. We do this simply by
running an OLS regression of the change in log C and log I , respectively, on the change in log p in
the model and including time fixed effects. By limiting the shocks to aggregate housing demand


                                                   33
shocks in this simulation, we are estimating using the same variation that we isolate with our
sensitivity instrument in Guren et al. (2020). Next, we simulate the model with only region-specific
                                                                                     ^ /dG
government purchases shocks. The output from this simulation allows us to calculate dY   ^ and

d log p/d log Y in a similar fashion. Conceptually, when we calculate d log p       ^ from the output
                                                                            ^/d log Y
of this simulation, we are implicitly using government purchases as an instrument for changes in
                       ¯ Y
local output. Finally, C/ ¯ and I/
                                ¯C ¯ are steady state ratios and    +  - 1 is a measure of

home bias all of which we assume are known to the analyst.


8.1   Model calibration

We calibrate the model as follows. A time period is a quarter. We set the population share of
the home region to be 2% with the interpretation that the home region is a city and the foreign
region is the rest of the country. We set the home-bias parameter  = 0.4 based on the share of
shipments in the Commodity Flow Survey that go to the same metro area. We set the elasticity of
substitution between varieties to be  = 6.
                                                                 ¯ , so that the steady state
   We normalize the steady state supply of construction permits, M
relative price of a unit of housing is one. We set the depreciation rate on housing to 3% annually.
We target a 4.4% share of residential investment to GDP, which is the average ratio over the period
1970-2019. This implies that the residential investment share in the construction of new houses
(i.e., one minus the land share) is  = 0.38. The home and foreign regions differ in their land
(construction permit) supply elasticities,  . We set them to match the 10th and 90th percentiles
of the elasticity estimates from Saiz (2010), which are 1.05 and 4.39. The Saiz estimates reflect the
response of housing units, which we interpret as the change in Ht . The (long-run) price elasticity
of housing supply in the model is /(1 - ) +  . Therefore we set  = 0.45 and   = 3.78.
   Turning to preferences, we set the subjective discount factor  = 0.99, and we set  = 0.58 to
target a 25% expenditure share on housing, which is the average housing expenditure in the CEX
in 2018. We set the labor supply elasticity to  = 1 and the coefficient of risk aversion to  = 2.
We set a steady state G/Y ratio of 20% and we use standard interest rate rule parameters  = 1.5
and y = 0.125.
   Regional government purchases follow independent AR(1) processes with quarterly persistence
of 0.95. The housing demand shock follows an AR(1) with the same persistence. We set the scale
of the portfolio holding cost to  = 10-4 . We set the quarterly Calvo adjustment probability to
11% in order to target the point estimate of 0.030 of the inflation response to local government


                                                 34
spending shocks reported by Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). We consider the robustness of our
results to our parameter choices in Section 8.6.


8.2   Complete markets

As a starting point, we consider a complete-markets version of our model. In this version, the
consumption response to home prices is a function of the current user cost only. We also start with
a specification in which prices are fully rigid ( = 1), houses are produced entirely from land with
no material inputs ( = 0), and the land supply elasticities are fixed at their long-run values. The
partial equilibrium housing wealth effect is particularly simple to compute in this case. Equating
the marginal utility of consumption between regions yields:

                                                                     (1-)( -1)
                           L1+  
                      Ct -   t
                            1+          pt - Et [t+1 pt+1 (1 -  )]      

                                    =                                            ,             (47)
                       -
                      Ct
                           L
                            1+
                             t
                               1+
                                        p             
                                         t - Et t+1 pt+1 (1 -  )
                                


where t+1 is the stochastic discount factor for payoffs at t + 1. The region with a higher user cost
will consume more non-durables and less housing. With mean-reverting home price dynamics, a
higher price of housing is associated with a larger user cost, which induces a positive relationship
between non-durable consumption and home prices.
   Results for this version of our model are shown in the first column of Table 2. The first four
rows of this table report the components of the right-hand side of equation (46). We describe above
how these are calculated from the monte carlo simulation. The first row reports that the measured
                             ^ log p
housing wealth effect (d log C/d   ^) in this version of the model is 0.022. The second row reports
                                   ^ /dG) is 1.477. The third row reports the construction response
that the local fiscal multiplier (dY
       ^ log p
(d log I/d   ^), which in this version of the model we have assumed to be zero. Finally, the fourth
row reports the income elasticity of house prices (d log p       ^ ) is small with complete markets
                                                         ^/d log Y
(-0.004).
   Using equation (46), we can combine these four responses from the model to calculate the
partial equilibrium housing wealth effect implied by our simple formula. The fifth row in the table
reports that for the complete markets model this turns out to be 0.015. Row (6) then reports
the actual partial equilibrium housing wealth effect for this version of the model. This turns out
to also be 0.015. In other words, in this version of the model, our simple adjustment formula is
very accurate. Since there is no construction response and the income elasticity of house prices is
small, our formula boils down to dividing the measured housing wealth effect by the local fiscal

                                                   35
                   Table 2: Monte Carlo Analysis of Housing Wealth Elasticity

                                                             (i)     (ii)   (iii)    (iv)
                   Complete Markets
                   Rigid Prices
                   Construction
                   Long-Run Housing Supply Het.
             (1)   Measured Housing Wealth Effect          0.022    0.121   0.151   0.144
             (2)   Local Fiscal Multiplier                 1.477    1.499   1.451   1.465
             (3)   Construction Response                    0.000   0.000   0.000   1.613
             (4)   Income Elasticity of Home Prices        -0.004   0.032   0.151   0.167
             (5)   Implied P.E. Housing Wealth Effect       0.015   0.081   0.104   0.072
             (6)   Actual P.E. Housing Wealth Effect       0.015    0.063   0.078   0.041
             (7)   Relative Error                          0.000    0.306   0.368   0.295



multiplier. Finally, row (7) reports the magnitude of the error associated with the implied housing
wealth effect relative to the error associated with the measured housing wealth effect defined as
|Row 5 - Row 6|/|Row 1 - Row 6|.


8.3   Incomplete Markets

The second column of Table 2 reports results for a version of our model with incomplete markets
but maintains the assumption that prices are rigid and that no resources are used in constructing
houses. With incomplete markets the determination of the consumption response to home prices
is more complicated as it is affected by expectations of future incomes and user costs (see equation
34). In this case, the off-diagonal elements of of the matrices in equation (45) become more
important and it need not be the case that these dynamic relationships can be summarized by
simple regressions. We find that the measured housing wealth effect is 0.121. Using equation (46)
to adjust for local general equilibrium effects yields an implied partial equilibrium housing wealth
effect of 0.081. However, the actual partial equilibrium housing wealth effect is a bit lower at 0.063.
In this case, the adjustment implied by our formula goes in the right direction, but does not go far
enough. Here the relative error is about 1/3 as larger after applying our formula.




                                                  36
8.4   Incorporating Price Responses

The assumption of rigid prices implies that both regions face the same real interest rate. When
prices respond differentially in the two regions, real interest rates differ across regions. Suppose, the
home region experiences a larger increase in activity. It will then also experience a larger increase
in inflation, which reduces the real interest rate and further stimulates demand in the home region.
On the other hand, the differential price response changes the real exchange rate, which reduces
the demand for goods from the home region and increases the demand for goods from the foreign
region. These differential price responses affect the fiscal multiplier, so in principle, adjusting the
measured housing wealth effect by the fiscal multiplier may fully account for these effects. On the
other hand, the price responses further complicate the dynamics of the responses in ways that may
not be fully captured by our approach.
   The third column in Table 2 allows for some degree of price flexibility. Specifically, we set
the quarterly Calvo adjustment probability to 11% in order to target the response of inflation to
local government spending shocks of 0.030 reported by Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). In this
case, we find that the measured housing wealth effect rises to 0.151. The local fiscal multiplier is
reduced due to the expenditure switching effect. The combination of these two changes raises the
implied housing wealth effect to 0.104. Even though real interest rates do not change in the partial
equilibrium calculation, the partial equilibrium housing wealth effect depends on the particular
dynamics of home prices that we feed into the calculation and the home price dynamics change
as a result of price adjustments. As a result, the actual partial equilibrium housing wealth effect
is somewhat larger; in this case rising to 0.078. Again, our simple adjustment formula somewhat
underestimates the needed adjustment. The relative error is 0.368 in this case.


8.5   Adding Construction

The fourth column of Table 2 presents results for a version of the model in which we allow for
resources to be used in the construction of housing, i.e., we set  equal to its calibrated value of
 = 0.38. To generate a positive response of residential investment to changes in house prices, we
also introduce the regime-switching dynamics for  and   described in Section 7. This version
of the model yields a construction response of 1.613, which is somewhat higher than the value we
estimate in the data (0.363). If we instead assume that the housing supply elasticities  and  
differ in the short run, the model generates a construction response of -12. The short-run-long-run



                                                   37
             Table 3: Monte Carlo Analysis of Housing Wealth Elasticity: Robustness

                                                        (i)       (ii)        (iii)    (iv)
                                                   G = 0.9      = 0.9         = 0.75   1
                                                                              = 0.7
          Measured Housing Wealth Effect               0.144    0.167         0.341    0.262
          Local Fiscal Multiplier                      1.449    1.465         2.318    1.466
          Construction Response                        1.613    1.613         1.613    1.613
          Income Elasticity of Home Prices             0.082    0.167         0.208    0.165
          Implied P.E. Housing Wealth Effect           0.073    0.088         0.104    0.154
          Actual P.E. Housing Wealth Effect            0.041    0.041         0.074    0.110
          Relative Error                               0.305    0.372         0.111    0.287



distinction reverses the sign of the construction response even though the heterogeneous response
of home prices still reflects differences in supply curves across regions.
   The measured housing wealth effect in this case is 0.144. Taking account of the construction
response and using the local fiscal multiplier to adjust for local general equilibrium effect yields an
implied housing wealth effect of 0.072. The actual partial equilibrium housing wealth effect is 0.041.
As in the previous two cases, our simple adjustment somewhat understates the needed adjustment.
The relative error is 0.295 in this case.


8.6   Robustness

Table 3 reports results for several variants of the model specification in Column (iv) of Table
2. We focus our robustness analysis on this model specification because it is the richest one in
Table 2 and the one that comes closest to the magnitudes of the measured housing wealth effect
and construction response. Each column in Table 3 reports results for a version of the model
in which we vary one (or two) parameter and leave the remaining parameters at their baseline
values. Column (i) reduces the quarterly persistence of the government spending shocks from its
baseline value of 0.95 to 0.90. This change has little effect on our results. Column (ii) reduces the
persistence of the aggregate housing demand shock from the baseline of 0.95 to 0.90. This change
slightly raises the measured housing wealth effect and implied partial equilibrium housing wealth
effects, while leaving the actual housing wealth effect virtually unchanged. Overall, Columns (i)
and (ii) are reassuring that the exact details of the dynamics of the changes in home prices and
changes in government spending are not crucial to the performance of our adjustment.


                                                  38
   Column (iii) of Table 3 considers a case with more price flexibility and less openness. Making
prices more flexible leads to a smaller fiscal multiplier due to expenditure switching after a gov-
ernment purchases shock while making the economies less open raises the fiscal multiplier. The
combination of parameters considered here is close to those used by Nakamura and Steinsson (2014).
In this case, we see a large increase in the measured and actual housing wealth effect and fiscal
multiplier relative to our baseline. Our simple adjustment still yields an implied housing wealth
effect much closer to the true partial equilibrium effect with the relative error now falling to about
1/9 on account of the larger role of the fiscal multiplier.
   Column (iv) considers a case where   1. In our baseline model with  = 2, housing demand
shocks (changes in t ) raise the marginal utility of consumption due to the interaction in the utility
function between consumption and housing. This leads to a strong direct response of consumption
to  shocks. As  is an aggregate shock, this force affects both regions equally and is differenced
out in the cross-section, but it implies a very strong response of aggregate consumption to  in
the time series. This does not occur in the case with   1 as the utility function becomes
additively separable between consumption and housing and the time-series housing wealth effect
is more comparable in magnitude to the cross-sectional housing wealth effect. Despite the very
different behavior of aggregate consumption with   1, the cross-sectional results are similar to
our baseline.


8.7   Summary

The analysis we present in this section shows that the simple static formula we derive in section 3
to adjust estimates of housing wealth effects for local general equilibrium effects tends to somewhat
underestimate the needed adjustment. In our richest specification, Column (iv) of Table 2, the
adjustment yields an estimate of the housing wealth effect that has an error that is 1/3 as large as
that associated with the measured housing wealth effect. More fully accounting for the dynamics of
the responses to house prices as in the matrix relationships discussed in Section 6 may yield a more
accurate estimate of the partial equilibrium effect. However, the much simpler approach of using
out static formula seems to account for the bulk of the needed adjustment (roughly two thirds).




                                                  39
9    Conclusion

Cross-regional empirical estimates have become part of the macroeconomist's toolkit, but the ap-
propriate interpretation of these estimates can be difficult as they often blend together partial-
equilibrium responses with local general equilibrium effects. We argue that researchers can benefit
from approaching cross-regional estimates as part of a system of simultaneous equations that also
integrates other sources of evidence on the magnitude of local general equilibrium effects, such as
evidence on the magnitude of fiscal multipliers.
    This approach allows researchers to decompose the effects they estimate into the components
arising front the direct partial equilibrium effect and those arising from local general equilibrium ef-
fects. We apply this methodology to analyzing regional estimates of housing wealth effects and show
that an important part of the estimated regional effects likely arise from local general equilibrium
effects. Gauging the relative importance of the partial and local general equilibrium components
of these effects is crucial to developing appropriate microfoundations for the housing wealth effect.
    In our analysis of housing we also address a recent critique by Davidof (2016), who points
out that if housing markets experience a common demand shock but move along different supply
curves, then prices and quantities should be negatively correlated. The relationship in the data is
the opposite. We show, however, that a model that allows for differences between short-run and
long-run housing supply elasticities can address Davidoff's critique. In such a model, expectations
about future capital gains imply that the common aggregate shock results in a larger change in
current housing demand in the city with a less elastic long-run housing supply curve.




                                                   40
A      Derivation of Key Equations in Section 3

Here we derive the key equations in section 3.4. The derivation of the corresponding equations in
earlier subsections of section 3 are special cases of this derivation. To get the results in section 3.3,
set Hw = 0. To get the results in section 3.2, set  = 1. Finally, to get the results in section 3.1,
set Ip = 0.
    We start by taking derivatives of the first two equations in section 3.3 with respect to G--these
equations represent the goods market equilibrium conditions in section 3.4 as well as section 3.3.
This yields

              dp      dw                    dp            dw              dT          dw
 (Cp + Ip )      + Cw    + (1 - )(Cp + Ip )    + (1 - )Cw    + (CT + IT )    + 1 = Nw    ,
              dG      dG                    dG            dG              dG          dG

                       dp            dw              dp      dw              dT      dw
    (1 - )(Cp + Ip )      + (1 - )Cw    + (Cp + Ip )    + Cw    + (CT + IT )    = Nw    .
                       dG            dG              dG      dG              dG      dG

Subtracting the second of these equations from the first and rearranging, we get

                                               dw
                                                ^              dp
                                                                ^
                                (Nw - Cw )        - (Cp + Ip )    = 1,                              (48)
                                               dG              dG

                                                                              ^ = p - p .
where  = 2 - 1 and and hatted variables denote cross-region differences, e.g. p
    Next, we take derivatives of the first two equations in section 3.4 with respect to G. This yields

                                         dw      dp      dT
                                    Hw      + Hp    + HT    = 0,
                                         dG      dG      dG

                                         dw      dp      dT
                                   Hw       + Hp    + Ht    = 0.
                                         dG      dG      dG

Subtracting the second of these equations from the first yields

                                               dw
                                                ^      dp
                                                        ^
                                          Hw      + Hp    = 0.                                      (49)
                                               dG      dG

    Similarly, we now take derivatives of the goods market and housing market equilibrium condi-
tions with respect to s and then take cross-region differences to arrive at

                                                dw
                                                 ^              dp
                                                                 ^
                                (Nw - Cw )         - (Cp + Ip )    = 0,                             (50)
                                                ds              ds

                                              dw
                                               ^      dp
                                                       ^
                                         Hw      = Hp    = -Hs .                                    (51)
                                              ds      ds

                                                    41
   We can now solve equations (48)-(51) for the relative response of house prices and wages to the
two exogenous shocks:
                                                                              
                           dw
                            ^    dw
                                  ^                                    Hs
                           dG    ds              1    -(Cp +      Ip ) H p
                                      =M                                      ,               (52)
                           dp
                            ^    dp
                                  ^
                           dG    ds            -H
                                                Hp
                                                  w
                                                      - (Nw -        Hs
                                                                Cw ) H p



where
                                                                     -1
                                                             Hw
                                M=    Nw - Cw + (Cp + Ip )                .
                                                             Hp

   Define total home expenditures as E = C (w, p, T ) + I (p, T ) + G. The derivative of total home
expenditures with respect to s is

                                dE             dp    dw      dT
                                   = (Cp + Ip ) + Cw    + CT    .
                                ds             ds    ds      ds

Taking the difference between this equation and the foreign version of this equation yields

                                       ^
                                      dE             dp
                                                      ^    dw
                                                            ^
                                         = (Cp + Ip ) + Cw    .
                                      ds             ds    ds

Using equation (52) we then get that

                                       ^
                                      dE                   Hs
                                         = -(Cp + Ip )Nw M
                                      ds                   Hp

and
                                       ^
                                      dE    ^
                                           dE/ds    Cp + Ip
                                         =       =          ,                                 (53)
                                      dp
                                       ^   dp
                                            ^/ds   1 - CY

where, again, CY  Cw /Nw . Next, we differentiate home output and foreign output with respect
to G and take the difference to get

                                 ^
                                dY              dp
                                                 ^      dw
                                                         ^
                                   = (Cp + Ip )    + Cw    + 1.
                                dG              dG      dG

Using equation (52) we then get that
                                             ^
                                            dY
                                               = Nw M.                                        (54)
                                            dG




                                                 42
    Taking the ratio of equations (53) and (54) yields

                                                              C +I
                                                              p Hw
                              ^ p
                             dE/d ^              1 - CY +  pNw Hp
                                    = (Cp + Ip )                   .
                              ^ /dp
                             dY   ^                   1 - CY

Manipulation of this equation yields

                               ^ p
                              dE/d ^                    ^ p
                                                       dE/d ^ dp
                                                               ^
                                     = (Cp + Ip ) 1 -            ,
                               ^
                              dY /dp
                                   ^                    ^
                                                       dY /dp
                                                            ^ dG

which can be manipulated further to yield equation (23) in the main text.


B     Additional Examples of Identification in Systems of Equations

This appendix presents three example systems of equations and demonstrates that in each of them
the government spending shock is needed to identify the coefficient of interest.


B.1    Example from Section 3.4

We start by showing that the argument regarding identification in section 4 applies to the richer
setting considered in section 3.4.
    Linearize the equations of the model and take the difference across regions to yield:


                                       ^ = Cp p
                                       C             ^
                                              ^ + CY Y
                                       ^ = Ip p
                                       I      ^
                                       ^ = C
                                       Y   ^+I
                                             ^ +G
                                                ^

                                              ^ + Hp p
                                       0 = HY Y      ^ + Hs s
                                                            ^


where we have substituted out for wages using w       ^ and defined CY = Cw N -1 and HY =
                                                   -1 Y
                                              ^ = Nw                         w
                                                             ^ I,
    -1 as in section 4. There are four endogenous variables (C,
Hw Nw                                                           ^Y^,p
                                                                    ^) and two exogenous variables




                                                  43
 ^ s
(G,                                  ^ I,
    ^). We will write the system as (C, ^Y^,p     ^ s
                                            ^) = (G, ^), where the coefficient matrices are

                                                  
                          -1     0            0
                                                                                         
                    0           -1          0                         0 0 -1        0
                                              
                  =                                         =                            .
                                        -1 HY                                      -Hs
                                              
                    CY           0                                    0 0   0
                                              
                    Cp          Ip       0 Hp

The restrictions on the first equation are:
                                                                                
                                        0 1 0 0                          0 0
                                                                         
                            R =  0 0 0 0                        R =  1 0 
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                 0 0 0 0                             0 1

such that (R  + R )e1 = 0. The three restrictions are exclusion restrictions that exclude I ,
G, and s, respectively, from appearing directly in the consumption function. To check the rank
condition, form R = R  + R :
                                                                      
                                              0 -1               0
                                                                      
                                     R= 0                  -1         ,
                                                                      
                                                  0              0
                                                                      
                                        0         0        0    -Hs

which has rank 3 provided that Hs = 0 so the rank condition is satisfied. The first equation has
a natural normalization as the coefficient on C is -1. If we drop G from the system, we lose one
restriction and the order condition fails.


B.2    Local Credit Supply Example

The spirit of this example is that credit markets for investment spending are (partially) segmented
across space perhaps due to banking relationships. The credit supply shock could represent a
shock to the banks serving a given region that affects the supply of credit to the region leading
to a change in local interest rates. We first argue that fiscal shocks are needed to identify the
investment demand curve and then we will solve for the coefficients from the investment demand
curve as a function of the reduced form estimates. Here we focus on a single regional economy and
the variables can be interpreted as deviations from national averages that are absorbed by time
fixed effects.


                                                      44
   The system is:


                                            Y =C +I +G

                                             I = Ir r + Iy Y

                                            C = Cy Y

                                             b = bI I

                                             b = bs s + br r


where the endogenous variables are (Y, I, C, b, r) corresponding to output, investment, consumption,
credit quantity, and interest rates. The exogenous variables are (s, G) corresponding to a credit
supply shifter and government purchases. In order, the equations are the resource constraint, an
investment demand curve, a consumption function, credit demand, and credit supply.
   The consumption and investment equations are both identified in that they satisfy the rank
condition and have a natural normalization. Without the shock to G, the investment demand
curve is not identified as the order condition fails: there are three excluded variables and five
endogenous variables. Intuitively, the problem is that the reduced form shows that investment
reacts after a shock to s, but one does not know if Ir is small and IY is large or vice versa. The
fiscal shocks provide information about the magnitude of Iy .
   With the reduced form estimates in hand, one can solve for Ir as follows. Define the following
IV estimates:

                              dY                   -bi Ir + br
                                    =
                              dG     bi Cy Ir - bi Ir - br Cy - br Iy + br
                              dr     dr/dG               bi Iy
                                               =-
                              dY     dY /dG          bi Ir - br
                              dC     dC/dG
                                               = Cy
                              dY     dY /dG
                               dI    dI/ds       Ir (Cy - 1)
                                              =                 .
                               dr    dr/ds      Cy + Iy - 1

The reduced forms are expressions involving structural parameters given by (ratios of) the appro-




                                                   45
priate elements of -1 . Manipulating these expressions yields:

                                     dI
                                   Ir = /M
                                     dr
                                     dY      dr dI   dC
                                   M      1-       -                      .                         (55)
                                     dG      dY dr dY

Here M is our "adjusted" fiscal multiplier as we need to adjust the fiscal multiplier in a similar
                                                              dI
manner to what we did in section 3.4. The IV regression       dr   measures how much investment responds
to a given change in local interest rates. When we measure the local fiscal multiplier we capture
the channels operating through Iy , Cy , and the effect on local interest rates as credit demand rises.
We need to remove the effect on interest rates just as we removed the effect of fiscal shocks on home
prices in section 3.4. We also need to adjust for the role of consumption in the fiscal multiplier.
Specifically, we are interested in how a unit movement in investment is amplified. The direct effect,
first round, second round, and so on are given by:


                       Output response        1 , I y + Cy ,        (Iy + Cy )2 ,   ···
                       Investment response 1,          Iy ,        Iy (Cy + Iy ) , · · ·

The investment response is therefore 1 + Iy /(1 - Cy - Iy ) = M . It is then straightforward to solve
for Iy . Rearranging M yields

                                                              dC
                                    Iy = (M - 1) 1 -                /M.
                                                              dY

B.3    Foreign Demand Example

Consider the system:


                                          Y = C + G + Xs s

                                          C = CY Y


where there are two endogenous variables Y and C and two exogenous variables G and s where
s is an instrument for foreign demand. Xs is an unknown coefficient that gives the direct output
effect of a change in s. For example, s could be China exposure, but we don't know how China
exposure translates to a change in local demand because there may be more or less scope for local
production to transition to other goods for which demand is still strong after the China shock. The


                                                  46
goal is to estimate Xs . Substitute the second equation into the first:


                                         Y = M G + M Xs s,


where M  1/(1 - CY ). In the absence of the fiscal shock, we only identify the product M Xs . With
the fiscal shock we can determine M . One way to relate this to the discussion of identification in
section 4 is to write the equation with the coefficient of interest on s:


                                     (CY - 1)Y + G + Xs s = 0


and note that without G we lack a normalization.


C     Partial equilibrium housing wealth effect

C.1     Household's problem and consumption function

The household maximizes
                                         
                                                t u (Ct , Nt , Ht ) ,
                                         t=0

where Ct , Nt , Ht refer to consumption, labor supply and housing, respectively. The budget con-
straint is:
                    pt Ht + Ct + Bt = Wt Nt + Dt + Rt-1 Bt-1 + pt Ht-1 (1 -  ),

where Rt is the gross real interest rate between t and t +1 and we have abstracted from the portfolio
holding cost. The first order conditions are:


                                   uC,t = t

                                   uH,t = t pt - t+1 pt+1 (1 -  )

                                     t = Rt t+1

                                   uN,t = -t Wt




                                                     47
Combining we have:


                                       uC,t = Rt uC,t+1
                                       uH,t         -1
                                            = pt - Rt  pt+1 (1 -  )
                                       uC,t
                                       uN,t
                                     -      = Wt .
                                       uC,t

Using the period utility function and rearranging yields:

                                                      1/
                                                 Wt
                                  Nt =
                                                 
                                                        1+
                                  ~t  Ct -  Nt
                                  C
                                            1+
                                  ~ t  Ht - t
                                  H
                                        1-          -1                          -1
                                   xt         pt - Rt  pt+1 (1 -  )
                                           
                                  ~ t = xt C
                                  H        ~t
                                                 (1-)(1- )   ~ -
                                 uC,t = xt                   C t

                                                                (1-)(1- ) 1/
                                ~t+1 = Rt             xt+1                      ~t
                                C                                               C
                                                       xt
                                  ~t = X0,t C
                                  C         ~0 ,


where:

                                         t                         (1-)(1- ) 1/
                                                             xs
                               X0,t =            Rs-1
                                                            xs-1
                                        s=1
                                                             (1-)(1- ) 1/
                                             t        xt
                               X0,t =  R0,t                                 .
                                                      x0

Now using the present value budget constraint:

                   
                         -1
                        R0 ,t [pt (Ht - (1 -  )Ht-1 ) + Ct - Wt Nt - Dt ] = R-1 B-1 ,
                  t=0




                                                           48
substituting in for Ct and Ht and rearranging gives:

                                                                                   1+
                              ~ -1 + R-1 B-1 +              -1                    Nt          -
                    p0 (1 -  )H                       t=0 R0,t Wt Nt   + Dt -     1+    - t 1
                                                                                            xt
          ~0 = 
          C                                                                                         .        (56)
                                                            -1
                                                       t=0 R0,t X0,t


C.2    Complete markets

To derive equation (47) we use steps that are similar to the incomplete markets case in section C.1.
The date-0 budget constraint is:


               t (st )0,t (st ) Ct (st ) + pt (st )Ht (st ) - pt (st )Ht-1 (st-1 )(1 -  ) = initial wealth
      t=0 st


where st is a history up to date t and 0,t (st ) is the date-0 price for the Arrow-Debreu security
that pays off in that history. The FOCs for Ct and Ht are


                           ~  (1- )-1   ~ (1-)(1-) = 0,t
                           C t          Ht

                          ~   (1- )   ~ (1-)(1-)-1 = 0,t [pt - Et [qt+1 pt+1 (1 -  )]]
                    (1 - )C t         Ht



where  is the multiplier of the budget constraint, qt+1  0,t+1 /0,t and we are using the notation
~ and H
C     ~ introduced in section C.1. Combining these yields


                                 ~ t = 1 -  [pt - Et [qt+1 pt+1 (1 -  )]]-1 C
                                 H                                          ~t
                                         

and substituting into the FOC for C yields

                                                                      (1-)(1- )
                              1-
                    ~ -
                    Ct           [pt - Et [qt+1 pt+1 (1 -  )]]-1                  = 0,t .
                               

Assuming equal initial wealth, the two regions will have the same Lagrange multiplier on the date-0
budget constraint so the right-hand side of the above equation will be the same in the home region
and foreign region. Equating the left-hand sides and rearranging yields equation (47).


C.3    Computing the partial equilibrium housing wealth effect

We now explain how we compute the partial equilibrium consumption response to a change in home
prices. The complication comes from the fact that consumption at t depends on expectations of all



                                                      49
future home prices. As the details of the expectations matter, we want to make sure we are using
the same expected path for home prices in this calculation as the one that arises in the simulation
of the full GE model. In this subsection we describe how we do that using the VAR representation
of the GE economy denoted by the state vector of the economy Xt and matrices P and Q such that
Xt = PXt-1 + Q t .
    As we are focusing on partial equilibrium fluctuations in home prices, the sum in the numerator
of (56) is constant. The sum in the denominator depends on all future home prices. To a first
order approximation around a steady state with R = 1, this sum can be written as:

                                         (1-)(1- ) 1/
                                                                                                          (1-)(1- )
                                                                 
                     -1      t      xt                                     -t        Rp0 - p1 (1 -  )        
                    R0 ,t    R0,t                            =         R
                                    x0                                              Rpt - pt+1 (1 -  )
              t=0                                                t=0
                                                                                    
          (1 - )(1 -  )      R        R                      1-                           ¯ -t pt - 1 -  pt+1
                                                      p0 -      p1              -         R                       .       (57)
                        (R - 1 +  )¯
                                   p R-1                      R                                       R
                                                                                    t=0


To compute this recursively, note that E [Xt ] = P t X0 . Moreover, using I as a column vector that
gives the linear mapping from Xt to pt we have:

                                                             
                                                -t
                                     E         R pt = E          R-t IXt
                                         t=0               t=0
                                                            
                                                      =I         R-t P t X0
                                                           t=0
                                                                                -1
                                                      = I I - R-1 P                  X0 .


Using this, equation (57) becomes:

    (1 - )(1 -  )      R          R                       1-                                  -1         1-
                               I                     I-      P          - I - R-1 P                I-       P         X0 . (58)
                  (R - 1 +  )¯
                             p   R-1                       R                                              R

    This approach can be applied to the regime switching model by expanding the state vector so
that
                                                                     
                                                                Xt
                                                     ~0 = 
                                                     X               
                                                                 0




                                                           50
and the state transition matrix is
                                                                          
                                           (1 -  )Pshort          0
                                    ~=
                                    P                                     ,
                                                 Plong        Plong

where  is the regime-switching probability, Pshort is the state transition matrix when staying in
the short-run regime and Plong is the state transition matrix in the long-run regime. One would
also set
                                        ~=
                                        I          Ishort Ilong       .

    In calculating the partial equilibrium housing wealth effect, we simulate the general equilibrium
model in response to aggregate housing demand shocks and at each date in the simulation we record
Xt , Ht-1 , Bt-1 and pt . We then plug these values into (56) with the denominator computed by (58).
This gives us a time-series of "partial equilibrium" consumption for each region to go along with
the time series of home prices. We then regress the difference in log consumption across regions on
the difference in log home prices. Notice that the partial equilibrium consumption series will vary
over time with the bond positions the two regions have inherited from the past. In the absence of a
portfolio holding cost, these bond positions are non-stationary and the partial equilibrium housing
wealth effect becomes unstable.


D     Additional Derivations

D.1    Intermediate Good's Price-Setting

Substituting the demand curve into the objective function yields
                                                                                             
                                                              1-                         -
                                                PH,     t
                                                        P                         t
                                                                                  P
                    max Et         t t, Y                             - w                    
                      t
                      P       =t
                                                 P     PH,                       PH,


and the first order condition is

                                                                          PH,        
                                                          t
                            t
                            P                 Et       =t  t, Y w         PH,t
                                =                                                 -1 .
                           PH,t   -1                   t    PH,           PH,
                                           Et       =t  t, Y P            PH,t


                          PH,
Observe that the ratio     P    in the denominator can be re-expressed using the price index for the
                                                        PH,       PH,       1-
                                     1-
domestic consumption bundle P = PH, PF, as               P    =   PF,            .


                                                       51
    Turning to inflation dynamics, define H,t  PH,t /PH,t-1 , define F,t analogously and define
t  Pt /Pt-1 as the inflation rate of the price index associated with the domestic consumption
bundle (CPI). These inflation rates are determined according to

                                                                      1/(-1)
                                                                 1-
                                                 1-        P
                               H,t = -1 -                             
                                                          PH,t
                                               1-
                                         PH,t PF,t            1-
                                 t =            1-
                                                        = H,t F,t
                                       PH,t -1 PF,t-1


and analogous equations for the foreign region.


E     Supply Curve Heterogeneity and the Estimated Investment Re-
      sponse to Home Prices

Figure 1 shows a negative relationship between home prices and residential investment. This
appendix describes this relationship in econometric terms. The appendix then shows that applying
our adjustment formula from Section 3 still yields the correct partial-equilibrium housing wealth
effect despite the complications from heterogeneity in housing supply curves.
    An estimate of the housing wealth effect might regress the change in consumption on the
change in home prices and a constant or time fixed effect. In this discussion, we will work with the
equations of the full model, but we will assume that the dynamic relationships between variables are
dominated by the static relationships so the matrices CY and Cp are (approximately) diagonal.14
    The regression specification is easier to describe in terms of demeaned variables rather than
cross-region differences. Using similar steps as in the previous subsection yields:


                                     ¯ =  Cr - C
                                Yr - Y         ¯ + Ir - I
                                                        ¯ + Gr - G,
                                                                 ¯


                                   ¯ is population-weighted average income across regions. As
where Yr is income in region r and Y
above    +  - 1. Using the linearized consumption function and the equation above we can
write:


                           ¯ = MCp (pr - p
                      Cr - C                           ¯ + CY Gr - G
                                         ¯) + CY  Ir - I           ¯ .                                   (59)
  14
     A diagonal CY implies M is diagonal. Ip is already diagonal as residential investment only depends on the
current home price (see equation 35).


                                                     52
In the model, residential investment is increasing in home prices, but with a different slope in each
region due to heterogeneous housing supply elasticities. We can write:


                                  ¯ = Ir,p pr - Ip p
                             Ir - I                ¯ = Ip (pr - p
                                                                ¯) + (Ir,p - Ip )pr ,


where Ir,p is the slope of the residential investment response to home prices in region r and Ip is
                ¯ = Ip p
defined so that I      ¯. Equation (59) can then be written as:


    Cr = (MCp + CY Ip ) (pr - p                                  ¯ +
                              ¯) + CY  (Ir,p - Ip ) pr + CY Gr - G                              ¯
                                                                                                C            .   (60)
           coef. of interest                                  error                      time fixed effect

Changes in aggregate variables (i, , T ) affect all regions equally and are absorbed by the time fixed
effect. The response of residential investment to home prices can be written:


                   Ir =          ¯
                                 Ip                 ¯) + Ir,p - ¯
                                              (pr - p           Ir,p pr +            ¯
                                                                                     I          .                (61)
                          coef. of interest                   error         time fixed effect

Equations (60) and (61) show a potential source of bias in the housing wealth effect regression: To
the extent that cities differ in their housing supply elasticities they will differ in the response of
residential investment to home prices and cities with larger price changes will have smaller elastic-
ities of residential investment. The treatment effects are heterogeneous and the treatment (price
changes) are negatively correlated with the treatment effect (cities with less responsive residential
investment have larger price changes). Therefore the estimated average treatment effect is not the
population average effect.15 This bias affects both the measured housing wealth effect and the
construction regressions.
    A benefit of the adjustment we put forward here is that the bias in the two regressions cancels
out when we compute the partial equilibrium housing wealth effect. To see this, when we estimate
equation (60) we obtain a coefficient of interest of (see Appendix E.1):

                                                    E    C -
                                                         r   ¯ C pr,t p
                                                                      ~r,t
                                      C = 
                                          ¯C +                 2
                                                                           ,
                                                           E p
                                                             ~r,t

      C  M (C + C I ), p
where r      p   Y r,p ~r,t  pr,t - p
                                    ¯t , and  is the estimated value of  . When we estimate
  15
     IV strategies that use supply constraints as instruments for home prices will not overcome this bias because the
price variation they isolate is still correlated with the treatment effects.




                                                         53
(61) we obtain:

                                               E   I -
                                                   r   ¯ I pr,t p
                                                                ~r,t
                                  I = 
                                      ¯I +                           ,
                                                       ~2
                                                     E p r,t


      I  I . Crucially, note that the regional variation in  C comes only from I
where r   r,p                                               r                   r,p so we have
C -
r  ¯ C = MCY  r
              I -¯I .
      To put the pieces together, we form dE/dp  M (Cp + Ip ) by summing the coefficients of
interest in in (60) and (61).16 This gives:

                               
                              dE              E         I -
                                                        r   ¯ I pr,t p
                                                                     ~r,t
                                 =¯C + ¯I + M                 2
                                                                          .
                              dp                          E p
                                                            ~r,t

Now applying our adjustment:

                         
                        dE
                  p =   dp
                  C       - I
                       M
                                   I - ¯ I pr,t p                        I - ¯ I pr,t p
                       ¯C + ¯I   r
                                 E              ~r,t       E             r            ~r,t
                     =         +         2
                                                     -¯I -                     2
                         M           E p
                                       ~r,t                                E p
                                                                             ~r,t
                       M Cp + CY ¯
                                 Ir,p + ¯Ir,p ¯
                     =                       - Ir,p
                               M
                     = Cp ,


where ¯
      Ir,p is the average Ir,p over r. In the second line the bias to the housing wealth effect on
expenditure cancels with the bias in the residential investment response. Underlying this result is
the fact that the heterogeneity in treatment effects in the two regressions has the same underlying
source (the heterogeneity in housing supply curves). When we remove the estimated residential
investment response from the estimated housing wealth effect we end up removing the bias.


E.1      Bias in Estimating Equations (60) and (61)

Consider the data generating process:


                                        yr,t = ft + r pr,t + r,t ,


where t indexes time and r regions. Note that each region has its own r . However, when we
estimate the housing wealth effect we estimate a single  . We do not recover the average  across
 16
      Recall M = 1 + CY M.


                                                   54
regions if, say, regions with larger  's tend to have smaller fluctuations in home prices pr,t , which is
the implication of regions with more elastic housing supply having residential investment respond
more to home prices but home prices fluctuate less.
                                                             ~r,t = yr,t - y
   We estimate with demeaned variables to eliminate ft . Let y             ¯t . We then have:


                             ~r,t = r pr,t - p
                             y               ¯t+~r,t

                             y
                             ~r,t = ¯ pr,t - ¯ Jr,t + r pr,t -  ¯t - covt + 
                                                               ¯p           ~r,t

                             y
                             ~r,t =  ~r,t + (r - 
                                    ¯p           ¯ ) pr,t - covt + ~r,t ,


where covt = Er [(r - ¯ ) (pr,t - p
                                  ¯t )].
   We regress y
              ~r,t = ^p
                      ~r,t + r,t . The least squares moment condition is


                                           E [~     yr,t - 
                                              pr,t (~      ^p
                                                            ~r,t )] = 0.


Substituting in:


                         E [~      -
                            pr,t ((¯    ~r,t + (r - 
                                     ^) p           ¯ ) pr,t - covt + ~r,t )] = 0

                           -
                          (¯      ~2
                             ^) E p r,t + E [(r -          ~r,t - covt p
                                                  ¯ ) pr,t p           ~r,t ] = 0.


Note that covt has no variation over r and p
                                           ~r,t has no time-series variation. So we end up with:

                                                   E [(r - ¯ ) pr,t p
                                                                    ~r,t ]
                                      ^=¯+                                 .
                                                        E p~2
                                                            r,t




                                                        55
References
Aladangady, A. (2017): "Housing Wealth and Consumption: Evidence from Geographically-
 Linked Microdata," American Economic Review, 107, 3415­3446.

Auclert, A. and M. Rognlie (2020): "Inequality and Aggregate Demand," Working Paper,
 Stanford University.

Auclert, A., M. Rognlie, and L. Straub (2018): "The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross,"
 Working paper.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): "The China Syndrome: Local Labor
 Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103,
 2121­2168.

Beraja, M., E. Hurst, and J. Ospina (2019): "The Aggregate Implications of Regional Business
 Cycles," Econometrica, 87, 1789­1833.

Calvo, G. A. (1983): "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework," Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 12, 383­398.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. F. Cocco (2007): "How Do House Prices Affect Consumption?" Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 54, 591­621.

Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014): "The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-
 Level Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis," Quartery Journal of Economics, 129, 1­59.

------ (2019): "Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Multipliers:         What Have We Learned?"
  American Economic Journal: Policy, 11, 1­34.

Chodorow-Reich, G., P. T. Nenov, and A. Simsek (2019): "Stock Market Wealth and
 the Real Economy: A Local Labor Market Approach," National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper.

Davidoff, T. (2016): "Supply Constraints Are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home Prices
 Because They Are Correlated With Many Demand Factors," Critical Finance Review, 5, 177­206.

Davis, M. A. and J. Heathcote (2005): "Housing and the business cycle," International
 Economic Review, 46, 751­784.

Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2017): "The macroeconomic ef-
  fects of housing wealth, housing finance, and limited risk sharing in general equilibrium," Journal
  of Political Economy, 125, 140­223.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): "Investment, capacity utiliza-
 tion, and the real business cycle," The American Economic Review, 402­417.

Guren, A. M., A. McKay, E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2020): "Housing Wealth Effects:
 The Long View," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Herreno, J. (2020): "The Aggregate Effects of Bank Lending Cuts," Working Paper, Columbia
 University.


                                                 56
Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. L. Violante (2017): "The housing boom and bust: Model
 meets evidence," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lamont, O. and J. Stein (1999): "Leverage and House-Price Dynamics in US Cities," RAND
  Journal of Economics, 30, 498­514.

Martin, P. and T. Philippon (2017): "Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage and the Great
 Recession in the Eurozone," American Economic Review, 107, 1904­1937.

Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013): "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the
 Economic Slump," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1687­1726.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2014):         "What Explains the 2007­2009 Drop in Employment?"
 Econometrica, 82, 2197­2223.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014): "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence From
 US Regions," American Economic Review, 104, 753­92.

------ (2018): "Identification in Macroeconomics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32, 59­86.

Nathanson, C. G. and E. Zwick (2018): "Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence of
 Supply-Side Speculation in the Housing Market," The Journal of Finance, 73, 2587­2633.

Saiz, A. (2010): "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125, 1253­1296.

Schmitt-Grohe   ´, S. and M. Uribe (2003): "Closing Small Open Economy Models," Journal of
  international Economics, 61, 163­185.

Wolf, C. (2019a): "The Missing Intercept: A Demand Equivalence Approach," Princeton Uni-
 versity Working Paper.

------ (2019b): "The Missing Intercept in Cross-Regional Regressions," Princeton University
  Working Paper.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2010): Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data, MIT press.




                                              57
