                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN HOUSING

                                        Edward Kung

                                     Working Paper 26886
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26886


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




Prepared for the NBER Growth Conference "Beyond 140 Characters: The Role of Innovation and
Entrepreneurship in Economic Growth". I thank the conference organizers Mike Andrews,
Ronnie Chatterjie, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, as well as participants at the "Beyond 140
Characters" pre-conference workshop for their helpful comments. All errors are my own. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Edward Kung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Housing
Edward Kung
NBER Working Paper No. 26886
March 2020
JEL No. O30,R31

                                          ABSTRACT

In this chapter, I discuss innovation and entrepreneurship in residential real estate and
construction (housing). Based on R&D spending and patent statistics, housing does not appear to
be a very innovative sector. But in the last two decades, there has been a significant increase in
the amount of investment going to real estate technology companies. I discuss the companies and
technologies which have drawn the most attention from investors. I then review the literature on
two major innovation trends in housing: the growth of the internet as a tool for housing search,
and the development of home-sharing platforms which allow homeowners to use their homes as
short-term rentals. These innovations have likely increased the efficiency of housing markets,
leading to higher quality matches between buyers and sellers, and more efficient utilization of
space. However, the effects are hard to measure due to the difficulty of separating quality
changes from price changes. In comparison to residential real estate, there appears to have been
less recent innovation in residential construction. In many areas, residential construction is
artificially constrained by local land use policies, and estimates from the literature suggest that
relaxing these constraints could increase economic growth significantly. Finally, I discuss anti-
competitive practices in real estate which may hinder entrepreneurship and the adoption of new
innovations, and I discuss how innovation and entrepreneurship in other sectors may affect the
housing market.


Edward Kung
Department of Economics
David Nazarian College of Business and Economics
California State University, Northridge
Northridge, CA 91330
edward.kung@gmail.com
1       Introduction
In this chapter I discuss innovation and entrepreneurship in housing as it relates to
economic growth and productivity. There are two main issues that I seek to address
in this chapter: 1) What is the impact of innovation and entrepreneurship as a driver
of productivity and growth in housing, and 2) What are the factors that facilitate
or hinder innovation and entrepreneurship in housing. Since housing is such a large
and important part of the economy, the answers to these questions have important
implications for the impact of innovation and entrepreneurship on overall economic
growth and well-being.


2       Overview of the Housing Sector
Housing is a large and growing sector of the economy. From 1980 to 2018, personal
consumption expenditures on housing rose from 8.6% to 10.8% of GDP. Of the major
household spending categories shown in Figure 1, only healthcare grew at a higher
rate over the same period.
    Because housing is durable, most of the economic activity in housing is related
to the leasing, sale, and management of existing housing stock (i.e. the real estate
industry). A relatively smaller share of the economic activity is related to the actual
production of new housing (i.e. the construction industry). Figure 2 shows the size
of the real estate, construction, and a few other industries in terms of gross output
as percentage of GDP, as measured by the BEA. In 2018, gross output from housing
rents was $2.2 trillion, gross output from "other real estate" was $1.4 trillion, and
gross output from residential construction was $681 billion.1
    An important measurement issue that arises in housing is how to value the eco-
nomic output of owner-occupied housing. A standard thought experiment illustrates
the problem: suppose Annie and Betty own and live in identical houses next door
to each other. Because each owns her own house, no rental payments are made, and
no value of housing services is recorded. Now, suppose they switch houses without
    1
     Gross output from housing rents includes both the imputed rents of owner-occupiers and the
rents paid by tenants. Gross output from "other real estate" includes all other activities related
to residential real estate, including the activities of real estate brokers, appraisers, and property
managers. "Other real estate" also includes all commercial real estate activities and rents. The
BEA's Industry Economic Accounts do not separate commercial real estate activity from residential
real estate activity.

                                                 2
Figure 1: Personal Consumption Expenditures on Selected Goods and Services as
Percent of GDP, 1980-2018
        16




                                                                                         Health
        14
 Percent of GDP
             12




                                                                                         Housing
  10




                                                                                         Food & Beverage
        8




                                                                                         Transportation
        6




                    1980          1990          2000                 2010                 2020


Source: BEA National Income and Product Accounts. Transportation includes vehicles, parts, gasoline, and trans-
portation services.




              Figure 2: Gross Output of Selected Industries as Percent of GDP, 1997-2018
        15




                                                                                    Finance and Insurance




                                                                                    Housing
               10
 Percent of GDP




                                                                                    Other Real Estate
        5




                                                                                    Other Construction
                                                                                    Residential Construction
        0




                    1995   2000          2005          2010            2015             2020


Source: BEA Industry Economic Accounts.




                                                       3
changing ownership. Instead, Annie pays Betty $1,000 in monthly rent and Betty
pays Annie $1,000 in monthly rent. Annie and Betty are each no better or worse off,
but economic output appears to have increased by $2,000 a month. Conceptually,
economic output should not depend on whether Annie and Betty chose to live in
their own homes, or chose to rent from each other, and so national income accoun-
tants have developed methods for estimating what is known as the imputed rent of
owner-occupied housing (BEA, 2019). Roughly speaking, the imputed rent can be
thought of as the rent that the owner-occupier would have to pay to rent a house of
similar quality and characteristics. Imputed rents of owner-occupied housing form a
large share of the measured economic output in housing. In 2018, imputed rents from
owner-occupied housing were $1.6 trillion, while rents from tenant-occupied housing
were $611 billion.
    Although the National Income and Product Accounts measure a high level of
economic output in housing, most of it does not come from firms. Table 1 shows
industry statistics from the 2017 Economic Census for selected housing-related sub-
sectors. Despite housing's relative importance in terms of total economic output,
residential real estate is comparatively small in terms of firm revenue and employ-
ment. The discrepancy arises because most real estate rental payments are either
imputed (for owner-occupiers) or paid to individuals not classified as firms.2 More-
over, both residential real estate and construction are loosely concentrated industries
at the national level, with the average firm earning $2 million or less in annual rev-
enues. The disconnect between total economic output and firm revenues suggests
that the social returns to innovation in housing may exceed private returns. I return
to this thought later in the chapter.
    Finally, it is important to note that housing consists of both structure and land--
and related to land, location--hence the old real estate adage, "Location, location,
location." Innovations that affect the ability to produce structures on land and inno-
vations that affect the ability to derive more value out of the same size or location of

   2
      The BEA estimates economic output in housing using all rental payments regardless of who the
recipient is (including imputed rents for owner-occupiers). Thus, rental payments made to individual
landlords or to firms not primarily engaged in the real estate business would be counted in gross
output (BEA, 2009). In contrast, the Economic Census only measures the revenue received by real
estate firms and establishments. Individual landlords will typically not be counted as firms in the
Economic Census because the Economic Census counts non-employer firms based on business income
tax filings, which does not include individuals' real estate rental income reported on 1040 Schedule
E (Census, 2019).

                                                 4
                         Table 1: Statistics for Selected Industries, 2017

                                                       Number of        Number of         Total Revenue   Number of
 NAICS     Industry Description
                                                         Firms        Establishments          ($bil)      Employees

 531       Real Estate                                      283,734          350,536              477.2     1,687,621
 53111     Lessors of residential dwellings                  52,243           71,552              120.2       361,997
 53121     Offices of real estate agents and brokers        106,548          121,901              113.7       333,854
 531311    Residential property managers                     35,668           49,420               45.3       449,176
 2361      Construction of residential buildings            170,510          171,901              342.1      690,798

Source: Economic Census. Real estate includes both residential and non-residential real estate. Construction of
residential buildings does not include subcontractors (NAICS 2332) due to lack of data.



land both will affect economic growth and productivity in housing.
    Structures and land have very different supply-side characteristics. The supply of
structures is affected by the labor market for construction workers, materials costs,
and topography. The amount of buildable land in desirable locations, however, is in
fixed supply. In theory, the availability of buildable land does not by itself put any
hard constraint on the quantity of housing if housing could be built as densely as
desired, but in reality most cities and neighborhoods in the U.S. place restrictions on
the density of residential construction. Figure 3, which is a reproduction of Figure
19.1 in Gyourko and Molloy (2015), shows that growth in house prices has vastly
outpaced the growth in the labor and material costs of construction--which has been
flat--suggesting that most of the growth in house prices comes from growth in the
price of land as opposed to structures, some of which may be caused by regulations.
Thus, local land use policy is an important factor when discussing productivity and
growth in housing, and it may be that innovations to policy would be more marginally
productive than technological innovations in the housing industry. I return to this
thought later in the chapter.
    The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In section 3, I discuss the existing
data on innovation, entrepreneurship, and productivity in residential real estate and
construction, and compare to other sectors. Based on R&D spending and patenting
statistics, direct innovation inputs and outputs in real estate and construction are
shown to be miniscule. However, the amount of venture capital investment in real
estate technology companies is growing rapidly, especially from 2013 to 2019. The
major waves of innovation in residential real estate from 2000 to 2019 are: 1) the
growth of online portals for housing search, 2) the growth of home-sharing platforms


                                                        5
             Figure 3: Real Construction Costs and House Prices, 1980-2013




Notes: This is a reproduction of Figure 19.1 from Gyourko and Molloy (2015). Construction costs are the cost,
including labor at union wage rates, of an economy-quality home from RSMeans deflated by the consumer price
index. House prices are the repeat-sales index published by CoreLogic deflated by the price index for personal
consumption expenditures, excluding housing services.



that allow homeowners to use their homes as short-term rentals, 3) the growing use
of property management software, and 4) the growth of companies using technology
to compete directly with residential brokers. The best available statistics on labor
productivity show that labor productivity has been roughly flat in single-family res-
idential construction, but growing recently in multi-family residential construction.
Labor productivity in real estate has been growing, and this appears to be mostly ex-
plained by a deepening of software and IT capital, as well as deepening in purchased
services. The productivity statistics should be interpreted with caution, however, due
to measurement issues which I discuss in the chapter.
    In section 4, I review the literature on how the internet has affected housing search.
In theoretical models, the growing use of internet in housing search has been modeled
as either a decline in search costs or an increase in matching efficiency. The main
theoretical prediction of a lowered search cost or increased match efficiency is that
buyers and sellers will search more intensely, resulting in a higher number of visited
homes and higher average transaction price due to higher surplus between buyer and

                                                        6
seller. Empirical evidence is limited by the difficulty of isolating variation in internet
use, but the existing evidence appears to consistently show that internet use by either
the buyer or the seller results in higher prices, but not necessarily shorter search
durations. If the main effect of increased search efficiency is higher match quality,
but not necessarily shorter search durations or higher rates of sale, then the effect of
internet search on the productivity of housing may be hard to measure because it is
difficult to separate quality from price. The number of homes sold per hour worked
in the real estate brokerage industry has not changed much over the past 30 years,
and realtor commissions have not been driven down significantly by the growth of
internet search, though this may also be due to anticompetitive practices, which I
discuss further in section 6.
     In section 5, I review the literature on how the growth of home-sharing platforms
like Airbnb has affected the housing market. Home-sharing is one of the largest
targets for venture capital investment in residential real estate over the last 10 years.
Home-sharing platforms make it easier for homes that are traditionally supplied in
the residential housing market to instead be supplied to the short-term rental market
(or travel accommodations market). For homeowners, this increases the option value
of spare capacity in housing, which should raise the price of housing. Furthermore,
if some homeowners switch from supplying the residential market to the short-term
rental market, then rental rates in the residential market will increase further. The
empirical literature suggests that, in the short-run at least, home-sharing platforms
have indeed caused reallocation from the long-term rental market to the short-term
rental market, along with a corresponding increase in rental rates and house prices.
It is still unclear what the long-run effects of home-sharing will be. There could be
an increase in the quantity of residential housing and a decrease in the quantity of
hotel rooms, and there could be growth in the number of housing units built with
spare capacity in mind, such as with attached dwelling units or Pied-à-terres.
     In section 6, I discuss the future outlook of innovation and entrepreneurship in
housing, as well as our study of it. I discuss measurement issues in housing and how
better measurement can help us to better understand the full impact of recent tech-
nological innovations. I discuss anti-competitive practices in the real estate brokerage
industry, and how that may be hindering entrepreneurship and the adoption of new
innovations. I discuss how land use regulations may be hindering economic growth--
not just in housing but in the economy as a whole. I discuss how innovations in other


                                            7
sectors can affect housing through their effect on locational preferences, amenities,
and transportation costs. And I briefly discuss how housing can influence innovation
and entrepreneurship in other sectors. Section 7 concludes.


3       Key Trends and Cross-Sectoral Metrics
3.1     Innovation Inputs and Outputs
Traditionally, residential real estate and construction are considered low-innovation
industries. Writing for Forbes, David Snider and Matt Harris write that "up until a
few years ago there were only a handful of significant U.S. real estate tech success
stories" (Snider and Harris, 2018). They attributed the lack of high tech success
in real estate to difficulties in creating "meaningful client value" and "competitive
barriers" in a space that is defined by "real and physical experiences," as well as to
landlords and developers who are "reticient to make significant investments." There
is likely much truth to this, as the real estate and construction industries are loosely
concentrated and dominated by very small firms (Table 1), indicating perhaps a lack
of economies of scale that would make significant investments worthwhile.
     Data on actual innovation inputs and outputs seem to confirm this sentiment.
Figure 4 shows R&D spending as a percent of revenue for selected industries in 2016.
R&D spending in the real estate, rental, and listing industries (NAICS 531-532, the
lowest industrial level reported in the BRDIS) is less than a tenth of one percent,
compared to 3.4 percent for the manufacturing sector and 13.5 percent for research-
intensive industries like pharmaceuticals. R&D spending is not reported for the con-
struction industry, but it totals less than $930 million, which is again less than a third
of one percent of construction industry revenues, and probably much smaller.3 Data
on mesaured innovation output, such as patents, is similarly miniscule. In 2016, the
BRDIS reports that companies in the real estate, rental and leasing industry (NAICS
53) filed for only 87 patents in total, and the number of patents issued was smaller
than the disclosure threshold.


    3
     The BRDIS reports that total R&D spending for non-manufacturing industries (including con-
struction) was $119,690 million, and for the reported sub-industries (not including construction)
the total R&D spending was $118,760 million, so R&D spending in construction was at most $930
million.

                                               8
                     Figure 4: R&D Spending for Selected Industries, 2016

                 Pharmaceuticals and Medicines (3254)                                                           13.48

               Computer and Electronic Products (334)                                                10.70

  Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services (518)                                       8.43

                  Aerospace Products and Parts (3364)                        4.31

                               All Manufacturing (31-33)                  3.39

    Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services (54)          1.21

                            Finance and Insurance (52)        0.17

            Real Estate, Rental, and Leasing (531-532) 0.08

                                                            0                  5                  10                 15
                                                            R&D as Percent of Net Sales, Receipts, or Operating Revenues


Source: R&D spending is from the NSF Business R&D and Innovation Survey. Manufacturing revenue is from the
Quarterly Financial Reports, non-manufacturing revenue is from the Service Annual Survey.



3.2      Entrepreneurship
The data on measured innovation inputs and outputs paints a picture of low in-
novation in the housing sector. However, this belies a general sense that the real
estate business is being transformed by technology. Everyone is familiar, for exam-
ple, with how internet marketing of homes through websites like Zillow and Redfin
have transformed the way people buy and sell homes. According to a recent report
by the National Association of Realtors, 48% of real estate firms cited keeping up
with technological change as one of the biggest challenges they currently face (NAR,
2018).
    Data on venture capital funding shows that there is indeed growing investor inter-
est in real estate technology. Figure 5 shows the amount of venture capital funding
for real estate and construction related companies, as reported by CrunchBase, a data
vendor specializing in tracking startups and innovative companies. I focus on both
residential and commercial real estate and construction because the innovations and
technologies driving both sectors appear to be similar, and because it is difficult to
accurately distinguish between residential and commercial in the CrunchBase data.
The data show that $900 million in venture capital was raised by real estate and con-
struction related companies in 2000, but by November 2019 this number had grown


                                                               9
Figure 5: Venture Capital Funding of Real Estate and Construction Related Compa-
nies, Jan 2000 - Nov 2019




                                                                                                         10
      8




                                                                                                         8
      6




                                                                                                         6
  $ Billions




                                                                                                          Percent
      4




                                                                                                         4
      2




                                                                                                         2
      0




                                                                                                         0
               2000             2005                   2010                   2015                2020

                             VC Funding                               excl. Airbnb and WeWork
                             Percent of Total VC Funding


Source: CrunchBase. Only companies headquartered in the U.S. are included. Real estate and construction related
companies are companies that CrunchBase has identified with at least one of the following category tags: "Real
Estate", "Commercial Real Estate", "Property Management", "Property Development", "Home Improvement", "Home
Renovation". Short-term vacation rental companies like Airbnb were also included.



to $5.8 billion. This growth is not an artifact of a shift in the total amount of venture
capital funding in all sectors, nor does it reflect spurious growth in the amount of
data that CrunchBase collects: Figure 5 shows that venture capital in real estate and
construction is growing at a rapid rate even when measured as a percentage of all
venture capital funding reported in CrunchBase. Moreover, this growth is not driven
by just a handful of superstar companies. WeWork and Airbnb are the two largest
fundraisers through this time period, but even if they are excluded from the data, the
amount of venture capital funding for real estate and construction related companies
still increased markedly after 2013, and is steadily growing.
     It is instructive to look at which of these companies received the most venture
capital funding over the last two decades. Figure 6 shows a selection of major ven-
ture capital fundraisers for each half-decade starting from 2000. The first wave of
innovation occurred in the early 2000s with the movement towards the online mar-
keting of homes via web portals. Interestingly, the initial wave of web portals were


                                                       10
not necessarily the most successful ones in capturing the market. The second wave
of online portals, including Zillow and Trulia, now command a larger share of real es-
tate searches, and Zillow is the market leader in residential real estate today. Besides
online portals, the 2000s also saw investments in developers of property management
software, which suggests capital deepening in the real estate industry, as well as the
beginnings of the nascent home-sharing industry with HomeAway.
    By the first half of the 2010s, the online portal business appears to have matured,
with fewer online portals raising significant amounts of venture investment. Zillow
filed for IPO in 2011 and acquired Trulia in 2015, solidifying its position as the market
leader in residential real estate portals. Instead, the early 2010s saw the emergence of
a number of new businesses harnessing technology to directly compete with traditional
firms in related markets. Airbnb, a vacation rental platform that allows homeowners
to rent rooms or their entire house to vacationers, is one of the most highly valued
startups in the world and competes directly with the hotel industry. Houzz is an
online platform for interior design and home improvement where people can share
design ideas and match with contractors. RedFin and Compass bill themselves as
technology driven brokerages, believing that technology will give them a competitive
advantage against more traditional brokers. Cityscape Residential is a multifamily
residential property developer and is the only company on this list which does not
appear to be explicitly technology driven. Its inclusion may highlight a potential
trend in multifamily housing development, which I return to discuss later.
    The late 2010s saw the emergence of a new type of technology-driven real estate
business: the i-Buyer. i-Buyers are companies that want to cut out the middle-man
in housing transactions and simplify the home-selling process. They use machine
learning to estimate the market value of a home, make offers to sellers so that sellers
can circumvent the long and complicated selling process and avoid paying realtor fees,
and then flip the house for a profit. They also collect fees like realtors, but they believe
that sellers are willing to pay the fee for the convenience. i-Buyers have attracted
significant investor interest, to the tune of over $1.7 billion in venture capital over
the last 3 years. It is still too early to tell what effects this will have on the housing
market.




                                            11
Figure 6: Major Fundraisers Among Housing Related Companies, Jan 2000- Nov 2019
        HomeGain.com                  HomeAway                        Airbnb                       Airbnb




         $53M raised                  $477M raised                 $794M raised                 $2.6B raised
         Online Portal               Vacation Rental              Vacation Rental              Vacation Rental

           RealPage                      Zillow                       Houzz                       Compass




         $52M raised                  $87M raised                  $214M raised                 $1.5B raised
     Property Management              Online Portal                Home Design                   Brokerage
           Software

           Rent.com                      Trulia                       Redfin                     Opendoor




         $47M raised                  $33M raised                  $178M raised                 $1.3B raised
         Online Portal                Online Portal                 Brokerage                      iBuyer

          Homes.com                      Redfin                Cityscape Residential               Vacasa




         $39M raised                  $32M raised                  $82M raised                  $527M raised
         Online Portal                 Brokerage               Multifamily Developer           Vacation Rental

           ZipRealty                    Appfolio                     Compass                       Knock




         $35M raised                  $30M raised                  $73M raised                  $448M raised
          Brokerage               Property Management               Brokerage                      iBuyer
                                        Software

         2000-2004                    2005-2009                    2010-2014                     2015-2019
       $1,299M Raised               $1,349M Raised               $3,492M Raised               $23,755M Raised

Source: Crunchbase. The companies are not exactly the top 5 largest fundraisers in each half-decade, but all are in
the top 10. The companies were chosen to be representative of innovative trends in housing.




                                                        12
3.3     Labor Productivity
The growth of online portals, property management software, and technology-driven
brokerages suggests that technological capital and service inputs are becoming in-
creasingly important for the real estate industry. Has this translated to an increase
in labor productivity?
    Unfortunately, measuring productivity in construction and real estate is a chal-
lenging task. The Bureau of Labor Statistics has only recently begun to produce offi-
cial estimates of labor productivity in the residential construction industry (Sveikauskas,
Rowe, and Mildenberger, 2018) and still does not produce any official estimates of
productivity in the residential real estate industry. One of the main difficulties is
that buildings vary widely in their quality and characteristics, making it difficult to
construct reliable output price deflators. Another difficulty, especially as it pertains
to real estate, is accounting for the depreciation of structures, as well as the treatment
of owner-occupied housing and non-firm entities that receive rental payments, as dis-
cussed earlier. Nevertheless, it is instructive to look at trends in labor productivity
with the measures that are available.

3.3.1    Labor Productivity in Residential Construction

In 2018, the BLS began publishing official estimates of gross output-based labor
productivity separately for residential and non-residential construction. The advance
is attributed to improved producer price indexes for the separate construction sub-
industries, also published by the BLS.4 Figure 7 reports these estimates separately
for the single-family residential construction industry and the multi-family residential
construction industry. Labor productivity in the manufacturing sector is also shown
for comparison. Labor productivity in single-family construction has been roughly
flat for the last two decades, consistent with the evidence in Gyourko and Molloy
(2015) (Figure 3) that the real construction cost of single family housing has not
changed much. Labor productivity in multi-family construction is a much different
story, with productivity gains that track more closely with the manufacturing sector,
especially within the last 15 years. Because data on capital expenditures for multi-

   4
     The new producer price indexes are not based on the sale prices of actual buildings. Instead,
the BLS establishes a building with standardized features and collects cost information from many
builders. The cost data is then supplemented with information on profit margins beyond these costs.
See Sveikauskas, Rowe, and Mildenberger (2018) for a further discussion.

                                                13
                                              Figure 7: Labor Productivity in Residential Construction, 1987-2016
                                   300



                                                                                                             Multi-Family
 Labor Productivity Index (1987=100)
                                   250




                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                   200
                                   150




                                                                                                             Single-Family
                                   100
                                   50
                                   0




                                           1987       1992       1997       2002       2007       2012       2017


Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Office of Productivity and Technology.



family construction is not readily available, it is not immediately clear whether these
gains are due to increases in total factor productivity or capital deepening. Another
issue is that these measures do not reflect subcontractor hours. Sveikauskas, Rowe,
and Mildenberger (2018) showed that accounting for subcontractor hours significantly
reduces the gains in multifamily labor productivity, though the overall trend is still
that multifamily labor productivity is growing at a much faster rate than single-family
labor productivity.

3.3.2                                         Labor Productivity in Real Estate

Currently, neither the BLS nor the BEA publish official estimates of labor produc-
tivity in the residential real estate industry. The BEA does publish an estimate of
labor productivity in real estate as a whole (NAICS 531), through its Integrated
Industry-Level Production Account (KLEMS Account).5 The KLEMS data must be
interpreted with caution, however, because of the discrepancy in how gross output is
measured and how inputs are measured. In the KLEMS account, gross output in real
estate includes all rental payments made, including to firms not primarily classified as
real estate and to non-firm landlords. The imputed rents of owner-occupiers are also

                                       5
    Available at https://www.bea.gov/data/special-topics/integrated-industry-level-production-
account-klems. "KLEMS" stands for capital, labor, energy, materials, services.

                                                                              14
Figure 8: Labor Productivity and Capital and Service Intensity in Real Estate, 1998-
2017




                                                                                                         1000
                 140




                                                                                                            Software & IT Intesity (1998=100)
                                                                                                         800
                 130
  Index (1998=100)




                                                                                                         600
                 120




                                                                                                         400
                 110




                                                                                                         200
                 100




                                                                                                         0
                       1998    2003                         2008                 2013                2018

                              Labor Productivity                   Other Capital Intensity
                              Purchased Service Intensity          Software & IT Capital Intensity


Source: BEA-BLS Integrated Industry-Level Production Accounts. Intensity is the quantity of the input divided by
the quantity of labor.



included. Data on inputs, however, are typically measured from surveys of real estate
firms and establishments (see BEA, 2009). Thus, there is a difference in the entities
from which gross output is measured and from which inputs are measured. It is likely
that a significant amount of both labor and capital input goes unmeasured in real
estate, such as the amount of time individual landlords and owner-occupiers spend
managing their properties, and the equipment, software, and services they employ to
help them.
    Nevertheless, I present in Figure 8 labor productivity estimates as reported in
the BEA's KLEMS accounts. According to BEA KLEMS data, labor productivity in
real estate has been steadily rising since 1998. Over the same period, software and
IT capital intensity rose by over 900 percent. By contrast, other non-software and
non-IT capital intensity did not rise by nearly as much. The intensity of purchased
services also increased, though it exhibits much more cyclicality than the intensity of
software and IT capital.




                                                            15
3.4     Summary
I now summarize the information presented in this section on sectoral trends and
metrics.

1. Real estate and construction firms perform little resesarch and devel-
opment.

Data from the NSF Business R&D and Innovation Survey shows that real estate and
construction firms spend very little on R&D and produce very few patents. This is
not surprising, and does not imply that real estate and construction firms do not
innovate. Rather, whatever innovation does occur is not reported as R&D on the
BRDIS, or perhaps the R&D is not conducted by real estate firms themselves, but
rather by software and technology companies that service the real estate industry.6

2. There is growing investor interest in real estate technology companies.

Venture capital funding for real estate technology companies has increased rapidly
since the early 2000s. Investment activity in real estate technology companies reveals
the major waves of innovation in real estate. In the early 2000s, the focus was on
online platforms for the digital marketing of homes over the internet, and on soft-
ware companies that built tools for property management. These companies provide
supportive services to traditional firms in real estate, rather than act as direct com-
petitors. The late 2000s to early 2010s saw the growth of more companies harnessing
technology to directly compete with traditional firms in multiple areas, such as Airbnb
competing in the hotel space and RedFin competing in the brokerage space. A new
trend that emerges in the late 2010s is the growth of i-Buyers, companies that aim
to buy homes directly from sellers and then sell them for a profit, thus competing
directly with brokers but also promising to transform the way real estate is bought
and sold.




   6
    For example, Zillow, in its SEC filings, is classified with SIC code 7389: "Business Services, Not
Elsewhere Defined".

                                                 16
3. Software and IT capital has been increasing rapidly in real estate, along
with labor productivity.

Consistent with the growth in real estate technology companies, data from the BEA
KLEMS accounts reveals that software and IT capital intensity has increased very
rapidly in real estate, along with labor productivity. By contrast, the intensity of
other non-software and non-IT capital has not increased nearly as much.

4. Labor productivity growth in single-family construction has been slow,
but may have increased recently for multi-family construction.

The best available data for labor productivity in construction shows that labor pro-
ductivity in single-family residential construction has been mostly flat over the last
three decades. This is consistent with previous findings on the real cost of constructing
single-family homes (Gyourko and Molloy, 2015). On the other hand, labor produc-
tivity in multi-family residential construction appears to have increased markedly over
the past 15 years. It is not immediately clear what is driving the trend in multi-family
construction, and I leave this question to future research.

5. Measurement issues continue to be a problem.

The productivity data need to be interpreted with caution because of measurement
issues. One of the difficulties in measurement is the reliability of price deflators
when buildings vary widely in their quality and characteristics. Another difficulty,
especially as it pertains to real estate, is the discrepancy between how outputs and
inputs are measured. I discuss measurement further in section 6.


4    Internet Search and the Housing Market
One of the major technological trends affecting housing in the past two decades has
been the movement of housing search from a primarily offline activity to the internet.
According to the National Association of Realtors, 44% of home buyers in 2018 began
their search for a home online, 95% used the internet at some point in their search,
and 50% found the home they ultimately purchased online. 100% of home buyers
rated online websites as a useful source of information for the home buying process.
By contrast, in 2001, only 41% of buyers used the internet at some point in their

                                           17
                        Figure 9: Internet Use by Home-Buyers, 1995-2018
       100

                                                                                 Used Internet
       80
       60
 Percent




                                                                                 Found Home on Internet
       40
       20
       0




               1995     2000            2005             2010             2015      2020


Source: National Association of Realtors Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers.



search, and only 8% found their homes online (Figure 9). The three largest housing-
tech IPOs in the last 10 years were RedFin, Zillow, and Trulia, all three of which
offer internet-based search as one of their primary services. Today, prospective home
buyers can search for homes anywhere in the U.S., look at pictures, and take virtual
tours, all from the comfort of their own home and without ever speaking to a real
estate agent.


4.1              Theoretical Effects
How has the internet affected the efficiency of housing search? Has it made search
more efficient, or has old activity simply moved to a new medium? Economic models
of housing search follow models of labor market search developed in Diamond (1982),
Pissarides (1985), and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), in which search is modeled
as a frictional process through which buyers and sellers meet and learn about match
quality.7 There are three major components to housing search models: 1) search
costs--it is costly in terms of time and effort to search, and therefore both buyers
and sellers in a housing search market pay costs for each period in which they are

           7
     See Wheaton (1990), Novy-Marx (2009), Genesove and Han (2012), Ngai and Tenreyro (2014),
Head, Lloyd-Ellis, and Sun (2014), Guren (2018), and Anenberg and Kung (2018) for some examples
of economic housing search models.

                                                        18
searching, 2) match function--the match function is the rate at which buyers and
sellers meet in the market and is typically modeled as a reduced-form object8 , and 3)
match quality distribution--once buyers and sellers meet, they find out the quality
of their match, which is drawn from a distribution. There is heterogeneity in match
quality because some buyers prefer some features of a home more than others. Match
quality is unknown prior to the buyer and seller meeting because there are some
features of the home that are not observed until personally inspected by the buyer.
If the surplus generated by a match between the buyer and seller exceeds the sum of
their reservation values, then the buyer and seller will transact.
    A standard economic model of housing search is described by two equations:

                     rVs = -cs + q ()E [S - y |S  y ] G (y )                               (1)
                                    q ()
                     rVb = -cb +         (1 -  )E [S - y |S  y ] G (y )                    (2)
                                      

Equation (1) describes the value function of a seller searching for a buyer, and equation
(2) describes the value function of a buyer searching for a seller. r is the discount
rate. q () is the match function that describes the instantaneous rate at which sellers
meet buyers. It is assumed to depend on , which is the market-tightness, or the ratio
of buyers to sellers. If the match rate for sellers is q () then the match rate for buyers
is q ()/. y is defined as the sum of reservation values for buyer and seller, and is
equal to y = Vb + Vs . S is a random variable representing the surplus generated from
the match. G(y ) is the survivor function for the distribution of S , and thus G(y ) is
the probability that the match surplus exceeds reservation value y . The rate at which
a seller successfully finds a buyer to transact with is therefore q ()G(y ) and the rate
at which a buyer successfully finds a seller to transact with is q ()G(y )/. The net
surplus generated is S - y , which is split via Nash bargaining, so the sellers get 
share of the net surplus and buyers get 1 -  share. cs and cb are, respectively, the
search costs for the seller and for the buyer.
    The literature has primarily interpreted the effect of the internet as reducing the
cost of searching (declining cs or cb ; Ford, Rutherford, and Yavas, 2005), or increasing
the match rate (increasing q (); Genesove and Han, 2012). The main prediction of
either effect is that equilibrium match quality and reservation value will be higher, and

   8
    There have been attempts to provide microfoundations for the match function. See Petrongolo
and Pissarides (2001).

                                              19
therefore equilibrium transaction prices will be higher. Reservation values increase
because a lower search cost and a higher match rate both increase the expected
returns to rejecting an offer and continuing to search. Thus, y goes up in equilibrium,
resulting in more rejected offers but also higher surplus transactions. The predicted
effect on time-on-market is ambiguous, but the number of offers looked at should
increase on average.


4.2    Empirical Evidence
Empirical evidence on the effect of internet on housing search is limited due to signifi-
cant identification challenges. One early study by Ford, Rutherford, and Yavas (2005)
used data from a North Texas MLS in 1999 to regress price and time-on-market on
an indicator for whether or not the property was listed on the internet in addition to
being on the MLS. They found that homes listed on the internet sold at 1.9 percent
higher price and took 6 days longer to sell. A limitation of their results is that the
decision of whether or not to list on the internet is endogenous, which the paper
only controls for using a Heckman selection equation. While helpful, the Heckman
procedure may not be valid if the observable controls used to predict internet listing
are related to sale price and time-on-market in non-linear ways. Moreover, only 7%
of their sample was not listed on the internet, which further raises endogenous selec-
tion concerns. Nevertheless, this was one of the first attempts to estimate the effect
of the internet on housing search, and it found results consistent with theoretical
predictions.
    On the buyer side, Zumpano, Johnson, and Anderson (2003) use data from the
National Association of Realtors' 2000 Home Buyer and Seller Survey to study the
relationship between buyer internet use and search behavior. They find no effect of
internet use on the total buyer search duration, but found a statistically significant
increase in search intensity, defined as the number of properties visited per week,
which is again consistent with theory. To control for the endogeneity of internet use,
Zumpano, Johnson, and Anderson (2003) also use a Heckman selection equation. An
interesting finding in the selection equation was that out-of-town buyers and first-time
home-buyers were more likely to use the internet.
    Related to these findings are results presented in Genesove and Han (2012). Using
NAR survey data across multiple cities and years, they found that, at the city-year


                                           20
                           Figure 10: Buyer Search Duration and Seller Time on Market, 1987-2018
                      12




                                                                                             Buyers
                      10
 Median Number of Weeks
                      8
                      6
                      4




                                                                                             Sellers
                      2




                           1986     1991     1996      2001        2006        2011   2016


Source: National Association of Realtors Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers.



level, the fraction of buyers who reported finding their home on the internet is posi-
tively associated with buyer time-on-market and on the number of home visits that
buyers conduct, and negatively associated with seller time-on-market. In the aggre-
gate, buyer search durations have indeed been increasing, while seller search durations
have fallen (Figure 10).
     Han and Strange (2014) document a secular increase in the probability of bidding
wars (defined as sale price above list price), from 3.5% of transactions being a bidding
war in 1986, to 10% in 2010. To explore whether the internet may have played a role
in increasing the frequency of bidding wars, they use NAR survey data to regress
whether or not a listing was sold in a bidding war on an indicator for whether the
buyer found the home through the internet. They found that the buyer's use of
the internet is associated with a 4.3% higher probability of a bidding war. As with
Genesove and Han (2012), the focus of Han and Strange (2014) was not specifically
on the internet, and so no further causal analysis was attempted. Still, this finding
is consistent with the possibility that the internet increased the match rate between
buyers and sellers, as bidding wars can only happen when multiple buyers vie for the
same property. Since bidding wars tend to result in higher prices, the finding is also
consistent with the result in Ford, Rutherford, and Yavas (2005) relating internet
listing to higher sale prices.


                                                              21
4.3     Implications for Economic Growth and Productivity
If internet search is increasing equilibrium match quality, then some of the recent
observed house price increases may be due to improvements to match quality rather
than basic supply and demand factors. Assuming that gross output measures should
be adjusted for quality changes, this implies that real growth in the output of housing
may be understated due to quality increases being misattributed to the price deflator.
Standard hedonic methods for estimating constant-quality price deflators in housing
typically only control for the observed physical characteristics of a home, and do not
account for unobserved match quality between the buyer and the house.9
    Is there a limit to the efficiency gains due to reductions in search frictions? After
all, search frictions cannot "fall below zero". The answer is that it depends on how
important learning about match quality is to the search process. If search is primarily
"frictional", meaning that it takes time and effort for buyers and sellers to meet and
transact, then an instantaneous match rate would simply reduce the equilibrium
vacancy rate to zero without a corresponding increase in the expected surplus of any
match.10 The upper bound on the search efficiency gain would simply be the vacancy
rate multiplied by the economic output of occupied homes. Since the current gross
output of housing is $2.2 trillion, and the current home vacancy rate (including both
rental and owner-occupied) is 3.3%, this implies an upper bound on search efficiency
gains of $73 billion.
    If learning about match quality is also important, then the potential efficiency
gains due to more efficient search may be much higher. Let S      ¯ be the upper bound
of the support of the match quality distribution. As q () increases to infinity and
the match rate becomes instantaneous, vacancy rate goes to zero and the expected
surplus on every match approaches S     ¯.9 The efficiency gains will be a combination of
the increase due to fewer vacancies and the increase due to higher match surplus. Since
we do not know how far away current match surpluses are from S        ¯, it is impossible to
say what the maximum efficiency gains from search might be. If the support of S has
no upper bound, then the gains are potentially unlimited, and equilibrium vacancy
rate may be positive in the limit even as matching becomes instantaneous.

   9
      Unobserved differences in match quality could arise due to commute times, heterogeneous pref-
erence for neighborhood amenities, or distance to friends/relatives, among potentially many other
things.
   10
      See Appendix A for a derivation.

                                                22
    The possibility that efficiency gains are showing up in price increases due to higher
quality matches is a broader issue that applies to all search markets, not just hous-
ing. Martellini and Menzio (2018) argue that this may explain why the labor market
has not experienced significant declines in job vacancy and unemployment rates de-
spite known technological improvements in job search. Martellini and Menzio (2018)
showed that if the match quality distribution is Pareto, then unemployment, job va-
cancy, job-finding, and job-loss rates remain constant even as the efficiency of search
grows over time. Improvements in search technology show up in productivity growth.
Applied to the housing market, this suggests that improvements in search technology
will show up in house price growth, and not necessarily in lower vacancy rates or
lower search durations. Accounting for how match quality increases have contributed
the growth in productivity of housing seems like an exciting area for future research.


4.4    Impact on Real Estate Agents and Brokers
How has internet search affected the market structure of the real estate brokerage in-
dustry? Early speculation on the effects of the internet on real estate agents theorized
that the internet would lead to disintermediation by making it easier for buyers and
sellers to market their homes without the help of brokers, and that there would be an
unbundling of services where listing would be untied from other services that brokers
provided (Baen and Guttery, 1997). This was seen as desirable due to a long line
of research documenting inefficiencies in the brokerage industry, centering on a lack
of price competition due to fixed commission rates (Hsieh and Moretti, 2003; Han
and Hong, 2011; Barwick and Pathak, 2015), and incentive misalignment between
broker and seller (Levitt and Syverson, 2008; Hendel, Nevo, and Ortalo-Magné, 2009;
Bernheim and Meer, 2013).
    In the aggregate, it does not appear that growing internet use has led to disinter-
mediation. Data from the National Association of Realtors shows that the use of real
estate agents has actually gone up over the last two decades, and the percentage of
homes sold by the owner without an agent has actually gone down (Figure 11).
    The growing importance of the internet in housing search does not appear to have
affected the productivity of real estate agents either. Although the BLS does not
publish official estimates of labor productivity in the real estate brokerage industry
(NAICS 53121), it does estimate the number of hours worked. This data can be


                                           23
   Figure 11: Real Estate Agent Use by Home-Buyers and Home-Sellers, 2001-2018
       100


                                                                                      Seller used agent
                                                                                      Buyer used agent
       80
       60
 Percent
       40
       20




                                                                                      Seller FSBO
       0




             2001              2006                     2011                   2016


Source: National Association of Realtors Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers.



combined with NAR estimates on the number of existing homes sold each year, and
Census estimates of the number of new homes sold each year, to calculate an index of
the number of homes sold per hour worked.11 Clearly, the number of homes sold may
not be an accurate measure of the quantity of brokerage services being supplied--
for example, the amount of service required to sell a unique, luxury mansion may
be very different from the amount of service required to sell a standardized condo
in a planned community--but this measure can still give us a sense of productivity
trends in the brokerage industry under the assumption that the distribution of services
provided per home has remained relatively stable. Figure 12 shows the result of this
calculation. The number of homes sold and the number of hours worked are highly
cyclical, following the house price cycle closely, with the number of hours worked
lagging a few years behind, but there does not appear to be any long-run trend in
the productivity of real estate agents and brokers, at least by this metric.
    Real estate agent commission rates do appear to be falling slightly. RealTrends
reports that between 2012 and 2017, average commission rates fell 20 basis points
from 5.32 to 5.12.12 Investors have made big bets that technology would disrupt the
real estate brokerage industry, as seen by the big investments in RedFin, a discount
     11
      NAICS 53121 consists of both residential and commercial real estate brokers. NAICS does not
separate real estate brokerage by residential and commercial.
   12
      Source: https://www.realtrends.com/blog/whats-going-on-with-brokerage-profitability/.

                                                        24
Figure 12: New and Existing Homes Sold and Hours Worked in Real Estate Brokerage,
1987-2018       250
                200
 Index (1987=100)




                                                                               Homes Sold
                150




                                                                               Total Hours
                100




                                                                               Homes Sold Per Hour
                50
                0




                      1987   1992   1997   2002        2007   2012      2017


Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Census Bureau, and National Association of Realtors. NAICS
53121: Offices of Real Estate Agents and Brokers.


brokerage that charges listing commission rates of 1 to 1.5 percent, compared to an
average of 2.5 to 3. The advent of i-Buyers promises to disrupt this market further.
However, the overall effect of new technologies on the real estate brokerage industry
may be currently limited by certain anti-competitive behaviors from the incumbents,
which may be limiting the ability for new entrants to gain market share. I discuss
these anti-competitive practices further in Section 6.


5                     "Sharing Economy" and the Housing Market
A second major innovation affecting housing markets is the growth of online platforms
like Airbnb that allow homeowners to "share" space with travelers by renting out a
spare couch, a spare room, or even an entire home when the owner is not present. Since
its founding in 2008, Airbnb has experienced remarkable growth. According to data in
Barron, Kung, and Proserpio (2019), by 2016 over one million listings in the U.S. had
been placed on Airbnb, across more than 700,000 unique hosts. Investors have surely
taken notice, and Airbnb was the second largest venture capital fundraiser among real
estate related companies in the past 20 years (the largest was WeWork). Other home-


                                                  25
sharing and vacation-rental companies like HomeAway and Vacasa have also attracted
significant attention from investors. Although these companies most directly compete
with hotels and bed and breakfasts in the market for travel accommodations, they
also have an impact on the housing market because they draw some of their supply
from residential housing.


5.1     Theoretical Effects
Traditionally, the market for short-term accommodations, which serves travelers, and
the market for residential housing, which serves local residents, have been strongly
segmented. The segmentation arises from the different needs of the consumers in each
market (e.g. short-term demanders may only require a bed and a bathroom, while
long-term demanders may also require a kitchen and living area) as well as differ-
ences in the regulatory environment (e.g. residential tenants are typically afforded
rights and protections not available to short-term visitors). Because of these differ-
ences, the marketplaces for long-term rentals (housing) and for short-term rentals
(accommodations) have historically evolved along separate paths.
    The advent of home-sharing platforms has blurred the segmentation on the supply
side. It is now much easier than in the past for owners of traditionally residential
homes to also supply the short-term rental market.13 What might we expect the
effects to be? First, some owners of residential homes might reallocate from the
long-term rental market to the short-term rental market. By reallocate I mean an
owner who was previously supplying a long-term tenant and now supplies a short-term
renter after the advent of home-sharing. The degree to which this reallocation occurs
depends on a number of factors, including relative prices in the long and short-term
markets, relative costs of maintaining a short-term rental property vs. a long-term
rental property, and the flexibility of keeping a home primarily for short-term use vs.
the stability of having a long-term tenant. The propensity to reallocate also depends
on the owner's intended personal use of the home. Owner-occupiers by definition do
not reallocate from long to short-term rental because they can be considered both the
landlord and the tenant in a long-term rental transaction. However, they may still
participate in the short-term rental market by selling spare capacity such as spare

  13
    See Einav, Farronato, and Levin (2016) for a discussion of the technological innovations that
reduced transactional frictions and gave rise to these new markets.

                                               26
rooms, a spare couch, or the entire home when they are not present.14 Vacation home
owners who participate in the short-term rental market would also not be considered
as reallocating if the vacation home would not have been rented to a long-term tenant
anyway, perhaps due to the restrictiveness of long-term leases. Landlords of residential
renters may therefore be most at risk of reallocating, and this decision depends on
their personal preferences as well as relative prices and costs.
    Since housing and hotel supply are inelastic in the short run, reallocation reduces
the supply of housing units available in the residential market and increases the supply
of rooms available in the short-term rental market. This pushes up rental rates and
house prices in the housing market, and drives down prices in the short-term rental
market.
    In the long run, the supply of housing and of hotels may also be affected. The
quantity of homes that are able to supply both the long and the short-term rental
markets would be expected to increase, and the quantity of hotel rooms that are only
able to supply the short-term market would be expected to decrease. The charac-
teristics of the housing stock may change as well. For example, by increasing the
option value to having spare capacity, home-sharing may cause future homes to be
built with spare capacity in mind. There may be an increase in the supply of homes
with accessory dwelling units that are optimized for delivery to short-term renters
with the main unit simultaneously being occupied by the owner.
    Besides reallocation, the increased option value of spare housing capacity would
also be expected to have direct effects on house prices and rents. The increase will
depend on the degree to which capacity is currently underutilized due to the frictions
that are being resolved by the home-sharing platform. An increase in house prices
and rents due to increased option value from home-sharing represents real growth in
the productivity of housing.
    Finally, home-sharing may entail positive and negative spillovers. On the nega-
tive side, neighbors may complain about noisy and unpleasant guests. Concern over
neighbors has proven to be a salient point in public debates over home-sharing. On
the positive side, home-sharing may help bring in revenue for local businesses, and
may help tourists discover new destinations and experiences that they had previously
not known about.

  14
     On the other hand, if they were previously renting a spare room to a roommate and then decide
to use that room for short-term rental instead, this would constitute a reallocation.

                                               27
5.2    Empirical Evidence
There is a growing body of literature studying the effects of home-sharing on housing
market outcomes. The following papers, Horn and Merante (2017), Barron, Kung,
and Proserpio (2019), and Garcia-López et al. (2019), all find that home-sharing
drives up rental rates and housing costs, using various research designs and data from
various markets. Horn and Merante (2017) examine the effect of Airbnb on rental
rates in the Boston housing market from 2015 to 2016. Barron, Kung, and Proserpio
(2019) study the effect of Airbnb on house prices and rental rates using data from the
entire U.S. from 2011 to 2016. Garcia-López et al. (2019) study the effect of Airbnb
on the Barcelona housing market. Estimates of the effect of a one-standard deviation
increase in the number of Airbnb listings on the percentage increase in rental rates
range from about 0.4 to 0.6 percent.
    Barron, Kung, and Proserpio (2019) present additional evidence on the channels
through which home-sharing affects housing markets. They present direct evidence
for housing supply reallocation, showing that growth in Airbnb listings is causally
associated with a decline in the number of rental housing units, and an increase in
the number of housing units which are classified as vacant for "seasonal or recreational
use" (which is how units held for short-term use would be classified as by the Census).
They also show that the size of the reallocation depends on the share of owner-
occupiers. Zipcodes with a greater share of owner-occupiers experience a smaller
amount of reallocation, and correspondingly smaller effect on house prices and rents,
consistent with the theory that owner-occupiers are less likely to reallocate from the
long-term rental market to the short-term rental market.
    All of the aforementioned studies estimate only short-run effects. To my knowl-
edge, there is not yet any research on the long-run effects of home-sharing on house
prices and the housing supply. This is likely because home-sharing is a relatively new
phenomenon, and is it still too early to look for long-run effects.
    Besides the housing market, a number of papers also study the effect of home-
sharing on other markets. Zervas, Proserpio, and Byers (2017) and Farronato and
Fradkin (2018) study the effects of home-sharing on the hotel market. Zervas, Pros-
erpio, and Byers (2017) shows evidence that Airbnb entry drives down hotel revenue,
and Farronato and Fradkin (2018) show that Airbnb expands the supply of hotel
rooms during times of peak demand, which leads to significant welfare gains for trav-
elers. Alyakoob and Rahman (2018) find a positive relationship between Airbnb entry

                                          28
and restaurant employment. These papers suggest that home-sharing may have wel-
fare implications beyond their effects on the housing market.


6     Future Outlook
6.1    Measurement Issues
In section 2 of this chapter, I noted the discrepancy between gross economic out-
put and firm revenues in residential real estate. In 2017, gross output from housing
rents alone was $2.1 trillion, $1.5 trillion of which was owner-occupied housing. By
comparison, revenue for all real estate firms in 2017 (including both residential and
commercial) was only $477 billion. The discrepancy itself is not concerning, as gross
output and firm revenues are meant to measure different concepts. However, the
discrepancy does suggest that a significant amount of housing services are being sup-
plied by non-firm entities, such as owner-occupiers (who supply themselves), and
individual landlords who are not counted as firms. Because data on labor, capital,
material, energy, and service inputs come from surveys of firms or establishments,
a significant amount of input in real estate may go unmeasured, such as the labor
hours that owner-occupiers and landlords spend managing their properties and the
labor hours that home-buyers and home-sellers spend on the search process. More
accurate measurement of these inputs would help us to better understand the impact
of technological innovations on the efficiency of these activites. Questions on the time
spent and the cost of managing properties or searching for homes could be included
on the American Housing Survey, for example.
     Another measurement issue that arises in housing is how increases in the efficiency
of search should be measured and accounted for. This may be especially salient given
that the last major wave of technological innovation in real estate was the movement
of housing search to the internet. As discussed in section 4, improvements in the
efficiency of search will show up in higher prices and higher match quality, but not
necessarily in a higher rate of transaction or a reduced vacancy rate. Since an increase
in match quality represents growth in the real economic output of housing, attributing
gains in match quality entirely to the price deflator may cause us to understate the
amount of real output growth in housing. Methods to estimate how much of price
gains can be attributed to higher match quality would help us to better understand


                                          29
how improvements to search technology are affecting productivity growth in real
estate.


6.2    Barriers to Innovation and Entrepreneurship
In addition to measurement issues, the relatively small role of firm revenues in the
gross economic output of housing suggests that the potential social returns to innova-
tion may be much higher than the private returns. Aghion et al. (2005) have shown
evidence of an inverted-U relationship between industry concentration and industry
innovation, so low concentration in real estate and construction suggests a possible
reason for why direct innovation by real estate and construction firms is low. It may
also explain why many of the main innovators in real estate technology, including the
initial wave of online portals and software developers, have been primarily upstream
firms that supply the real estate industry with software and services, rather than
direct providers of real estate services.
     Of course, this has not stopped innovative firms from entering into direct compe-
tition with industry incumbents. RedFin, for example, offers particularly low listing
commission rates relative to the rest of the market. Despite this, commission rates
only appear to be falling slightly. RealTrends reports that between 2012 and 2017,
average commission rates fell 20 basis points from 5.32 to 5.12. Thus, despite the pres-
ence of low commission brokers, they do not seem to have gained significant market
share.
     The impact of innovation and entrepreneurship in residential brokerage may be
limited by certain anti-competitive behaviors. In 2005, the National Association of
Realtors was sued by the U.S. Department of Justice over its "virtual office web-
site" (VOW) policy, as internet-based listings websites were known back then. The
VOW policy allowed traditional brokers to discriminate against VOWs by withholding
listings information from them, in violation of standard MLS rules governing data-
sharing between brokers. In 2008, a settlement was reached in which the NAR agreed
to repeal its old VOW policy and replace it with a new one that does not discriminate
against VOWs.
     The new policy applied only to websites operated by actual brokers who partic-
ipate in a local MLS, and not to listing aggregators like Zillow that do not directly
provide brokerage services. Thus, non-broker websites that want to provide listings


                                          30
information still need to purchase listings information directly from brokers, MLS's,
or national listings syndicators. Speaking at a FTC conference on competition in
residential brokerage, industry journalist Brad Inman noted that, "our ability to ag-
gregate a national database of listings is very, very expensive... it only costs $2 million
to license data and normalize it and publish it, [but] $2 million is a lot of money for an
entrepreneur starting out with his or her credit card... [and] the reality is $2 million
will get you in, but how much do the portals currently spend just schmoozing with
MLS executives, not to mention the teams and the maintenance and everything that
goes into it" (Inman, 2018). Thus, the cost of acquiring and maintaining listings data
may still be a significant barrier to entry for firms that want to provide real estate
related services, but not necessarily be brokers themselves.
    In addition to protectiveness over data, real estate brokers may also engage in
another anti-competitive practice known as steering. The DOJ describes steering
as any action taken by a broker or agent to avoid cooperating with a particular
competitor (DOJ, 2007). For example, a buyer's agent may avoid showing a house
listed by a competitor's agent, or by a discount brokerage, despite knowing that the
house would be well suited to the buyer's preferences. Barwick, Pathak, and Wong
(2017) showed evidence of steering using data from Massachusetts from 1988-2011.
They showed that properties listed with lower commissions were less likely to sell, and
that this was best explained by buyers' agents steering away from low commission
properties, rather than by buyer preferences. This kind of behavior may make it
harder for brokers to compete on price, and may explain why realtor commission
rates have not fallen more despite the growing ease of housing search.


6.3    Land Use Regulation
As noted in section 2, land use regulations are an important factor to consider when
thinking about growth and productivity in housing, especially as it pertains to con-
struction and the housing supply. To what degree are restrictive land use regulations
limiting the quantity of housing supply, and what are the implications for economic
growth and productivity? Glaeser and Gyourko (2018) measure the restrictiveness
of land use regulations by comparing the price of new homes to the minimunm prof-
itable construction cost. Their theory was that price should not exceed the minimum
profitable construction cost significantly in a competitive market unless there are


                                            31
barriers to development. They found that restrictive land use regulations are pri-
marily concentrated in certain high-cost metropolitan areas. However, the number
of metropolitan areas for which the price-to-cost ratio exceeds 1.25 is growing, from
6.4 percent in 1985 to 15.9 percent in 2013. Moreover, these metro areas tend to
be innovation hubs like New York City and San Francisco that have experienced the
greatest job and productivity gains over the last three decades.
    Hsieh and Moretti (2019) argued that these artificially restrictive land use regu-
lations deter workers from moving to the most productive locations, and estimated
that this may have reduced GDP by as much as 9 percent in 2009, and reduced GDP
growth by 36 percent from 1964 to 2009. If we roughly estimate the efficiency gains
of housing search as at most 3.3 percent of housing output due to the elimination of
vacancies, plus 1.9 percent of housing output due to increased match quality (Ford,
Rutherford, and Yavas, 2005), this is still less than the potential gain of 9 percent of
total output from more efficient labor allocation if we eliminated restrictive housing
supply regulations.
    Thus, innovations to housing policy may currently be more marginally productive
in driving growth in the housing sector than technological innovations. One such
policy innovation may be to move control of land use policy from the local level to
the state or even federal level, in recognition of the fact that local incumbents often
have an incentive to restrict housing production in order to raise their own asset
value. There are currently efforts underway in California to do this (e.g. California
SB50). It remains to be seen whether such efforts will be successful and what their
impact will be.


6.4    Innovation and Urban Economics
When a house is purchased or leased, part of what is being transacted is the right to
occupy the land that the property sits on. This enables the occupant to live in closer
proximity to their workplace or to other desirable or productive amenities. Innovation
that affects transportation (and thus the demand for proximity) and innovation that
affects local productivity or the value of local amenities therefore also affect the
housing market. It is therefore important to consider the spatial aspect of housing
and how innovations in other sectors may be affecting it.
    A well documented trend is that housing is becoming more expensive nearer to


                                          32
city centers (Couture and Handbury, 2019), and especially so in cities with intensive
knowledge-based industries (Moretti, 2013). While some of this price growth is un-
doubtedly due to restrictive land use regulations, land use regulations change much
less year to year than house prices, and so most of the year to year growth in prices
can be attributed to growing demand to live near city centers.
    Has technological innovation contributed to the growing demand to live near city
centers and in major metropolitan areas? The key question is whether these tech-
nological innovations are complements or substitutes to urban density. The existing
evidence seems to suggest that they are complements. Jaffe, Tratjenberg, and Hen-
derson (1993) showed that patent citations are geographically localized, which means
that geographic concentration might be becoming more important as more of the
economy moves towards knowledge production. Gaspar and Glaeser (1998) showed
that improvements in telecommunication technology, rather than substituting for
face-to-face meetings, actually increased the number of face-to-face interactions, thus
suggesting that information technology complements geographic proximity. Other
papers showing evidence for complementarity between urban density and technol-
ogy include Sinai and Waldfogel (2004), Anenberg and Kung (2015), and Anenberg,
Kuang, and Kung (2019). Anenberg and Kung (2015) and Anenberg, Kuang, and
Kung (2019) focus on how information technology reduces informational uncertainties
that may be especially prevalent in urban areas, such as information on traffic and
parking conditions, and on the quality of local restaurants when there are too many
to learn about by personal experience. Couture and Handbury (2019) also find lim-
ited evidence that technology may have contributed to the growing preference among
young, high income households to locate in more urban areas.
    The literature on how technology interacts with urban density may have lessons
for how we expect near-future technological innovations in transportation to affect
housing markets. Normally, one expect innovations that reduce the cost of trans-
portation to reduce the demand for proximity to jobs and amenities, and thus reduce
the demand for urban living. However, it may be that the most promising current
and forthcoming technologies in transportation, such as self-driving and self-parking
cars, and the wide availability of mapping and routing software, have a larger effect
on reducing the cost of congestion. Anyone who has driven around in a big city knows
how much time finding parking adds to the trip, so the promise of self-driving and
self-parking cars includes the ability to no longer have to do that ourselves. If the


                                          33
upcoming innovations in transportation primarily reduce the cost of congestion in
dense areas, then this would further increase the demand to live in urban areas, and
thus house prices in those areas.


6.5    Housing's Impact on Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Thus far I have focused on how innovation and entrepreneurship affects housing.
Now, I briefly discuss whether housing can affect innovation and entrepreneurship. I
already mentioned the paper by Hsieh and Moretti (2019), which showed the impact of
supply restrictions on aggregate output. This can also translate to reduced innovation
and entrepreneurship, if it leads people to choose not to move to places with the best
potential for innovation and entrepreneurship. House prices themselves can also affect
innovation and entrepreneurship. Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2015) showed that
from 1998 to 2010, small business employment grew faster in areas that experienced
greater house price increases, and that this effect was more pronounced in industries
that need little startup capital, and for which lending based on housing collateral
is relatively more important. Thus, improvements to the ability of homeowners to
borrow against the collateral value of their home may spur greater entrepreneurship.


7     Conclusion
Housing is a large and growing sector of the economy. Economic activity in housing is
comprised of primarily two industries: real estate, which involves the leasing and sale
of existing housing, and construction, which involves the production of new housing.
Both industries are highly competitive and do not appear to invest much in research
and development. However, there is growing entrepreneurial interest in companies
that provide innovative software and business services to the real estate industry, and
in companies that harness technology to directly compete with real estate industry
incumbents. Labor productivity appears to be growing in real estate, along with
growing intensity of software and IT capital, but caution must be used when inter-
preting these results due to measurement issues. Labor productivity in single-family
housing construction apperas to be flat, whereas labor productivity in multi-family
residential construction appears to be growing, especially within the last 15 years.
    Two recent technological innovations highlight some important issues in how we


                                          34
are measuring economic growth in housing. First, the movement of housing search
to the internet has presumably improved the efficiency of how buyers and sellers
find each other. Economic search theory predicts that one of the main effects of an
improvement to search efficiency is higher quality matches, which shows up in higher
transaction prices. If the most important technological innovation in residential real
estate over the past 20 years has its primary effect on increasing match quality, then
this would be difficult to detect by methods that do not account for unobserved match
quality in the price deflator. Similarly, the introduction of home-sharing platforms
may have increased the option value of residential housing, as owners can now use
the property either in the housing market or in the travel accommodations market,
and they can even use it for both, using part of the space for housing and selling part
of the space in the short-term rental market. Increases to the option-value of housing
would again show up primarily in prices, and would again be difficult to detect by
standard economic accounting methods. The analysis suggests that we need improved
methods for measuring output, growth, and productivity in housing if we are to fully
understand how recent innovations have impacted the efficiency of housing markets.
    The future of housing markets is likely to be shaped by three important factors.
First, many economists suspect that stringent land use regulations are responsible
for significant inefficiencies in the level of housing production we currently make. Be-
fore considering how technology can improve efficiency in housing markets, it may
be more useful to consider first how better policy can improve efficiency in housing
markets. Second, researchers have documented a number of anti-competitive behav-
iors in the residential brokerage industry which may limit the impact of innovation
and entrepreneurship in making the housing market more efficient. For the impact
of new technologies and business practices to have their full effect, barriers to entry
and to price competition must be broken down. Finally, new technologies and the
movement of the U.S. towards a knowledge-based economy may be rapidly increasing
the demand to live in denser, more urban, more educated areas. This has implications
for the spatial distribution of housing and house price growth, and further emphasizes
the need to re-examine land use policy, since many of the most stringent policies are
located precisely in the cities that are experiencing the greatest productivity growth.




                                          35
References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino (2015). "House Prices, Col-
   lateral, and Self-Employment". In: Journal of Financial Economics 117, pp. 288­
   306.
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt
   (2005). "Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship". In: Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 120.2, pp. 701­728.
Alyakoob, Mohammed and Mohammad Rahman (2018). The Sharing Economy as
   a Local Economic Engine: The Heterogeneous Impact of Airbnb on Restaurant
   Employment Growth. Working Paper. Purdue University.
Anenberg, Elliot, Chun Kuang, and Edward Kung (2019). Social Learning and Local
   Consumption Amenities: Evidence from Yelp. Working Paper. Federal Reserve
   Board, University of International Business and Economics, and CSU-Northridge.
Anenberg, Elliot and Edward Kung (2015). "Information Technology and Product
   Variety in the City: The Case of Food Trucks". In: Journal of Urban Economics
   90, pp. 60­78.
-- (2018). Interest Rates and Housing Market Dynamics in a Housing Search Model.
   Working Paper. Federal Reserve Board and CSU-Northridge.
Baen, John S. and Randall S. Guttery (1997). "The Coming Downsizing of Real Es-
   tate: Implications of Technology". In: Journal of Real Estate Portfolio Management
   3.1, pp. 1­18.
Barron, Kyle, Edward Kung, and Davide Proserpio (2019). The Effect of Home-
   Sharing on House Prices and Rents: Evidence from Airbnb. Working Paper. USC
   and CSU-Northridge.
Barwick, Panle Jia and Parag A. Pathak (2015). "The Costs of Free Entry: An Em-
   pirical Study of Real Estate Agents in Greater Boston". In: RAND Journal of
   Economics 46.1, pp. 103­145.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Parag A. Pathak, and Maisy Wong (2017). "Conflicts of Interest
   and Steering in Residential Brokerage". In: American Economic Journal: Applied
   Economics 9.3, pp. 191­222.
BEA (2009). Concepts and Methods of the Input-Output Accounts. U.S. Department
   of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




                                         36
BEA (2019). Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income and Product Ac-
   counts. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Bernheim, Douglas and Jonathan Meer (2013). "Do Real Estate Brokers Add Value
   When Listing Services Are Unbundled?" In: Economic Inquiry 51.2, pp. 1166­
   1182.
Census (2019). Nonemployer Statistics Technical Documentation: Methodology. U.S.
   Census Bureau. url: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/nonemployer-
   statistics/technical-documentation/methodology.html.
Couture, Victor and Jessie Handbury (2019). Urban Revival in America. Working
   Paper. UC Berkeley and Wharton.
Diamond, Peter A. (1982). "Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilib-
   rium". In: Review of Economic Studies 49.2, pp. 217­227.
DOJ (2007). Competition in the Real Estate Brokerage Industry. U.S. Department
   of Jusice. url: https://www.justice.gov/atr/competition-real-estate-
   brokerage-industry.
Einav, Liran, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin (Oct. 2016). "Peer-to-Peer Mar-
   kets". In: Annual Review of Economics 8, pp. 615­635.
Farronato, Chiara and Andrey Fradkin (2018). The Welfare Effects of Peer Entry in
   the Accommodation Market: The Case of Airbnb. Working Paper. National Bureau
   of Economic Research.
Ford, James Scott, Ronald C. Rutherford, and Abdullah Yavas (2005). "The Effects
   of the Internet on Marketing Residential Real Estate". In: Journal of Housing
   Economics 14, pp. 92­108.
Garcia-López, Miquel-Àngel, Jordi Jofre-Monseny, Rodrigo Martínez Mazza, and
   Mariona Segú (2019). Do Short-term Rental Platforms Affect Housing Markets?
   Evidence from Airbnb in Barcelona. IEB Working Paper.
Gaspar, Jess and Edward Glaeser (1998). "Information Technology and the Future of
   Cities". In: Journal of Urban Economics 43, pp. 136­156.
Genesove, Davide and Lu Han (2012). "Search and Matching in the Housing Market".
   In: Journal of Urban Economics 72, pp. 31­45.
Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko (2018). "The Economic Implications of Housing
   Supply". In: Journal of Economic Perspectives 32.1, pp. 3­30.
Guren, Adam (2018). "House Price Momentum and Strategic Complementarity". In:
   Journal of Political Economy 126.3, pp. 1172­1218.


                                      37
Gyourko, Joseph and Raven Molloy (2015). "Regulation and Housing Supply". In:
    Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. Ed. by Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon
    Henderson, and William C. Strange. Vol. 5. Handbook of Regional and Urban
    Economics. Elsevier, pp. 1289­1337.
Han, Lu and Seung-Hyun Hong (2011). "Testing Cost Inefficiency Under Free En-
    try in the Real Estate Brokerage Industry". In: Journal of Business & Economic
    Statistics 29.4, pp. 564­578.
Han, Lu and William C. Strange (2014). "Bidding Wars for Houses". In: Real Estate
    Economics 42.1, pp. 1­32.
Head, Allen, Huw Lloyd-Ellis, and Hongfei Sun (2014). "Search, Liquidity, and the
    Dynamics of House Prices and Construction". In: The American Economic Review
    104.4, pp. 1172­1210.
Hendel, Igal, Aviv Nevo, and François Ortalo-Magné (2009). "The Relative Perfor-
    mance of Real Estate Marketing Platforms: MLS versus FSBOMadison.com". In:
    American Economic Review 99.5, pp. 1878­1898.
Horn, Keren and Mark Merante (2017). "Is Home Sharing Driving Up Rents? Evidence
    from Airbnb in Boston". In: Journal of Housing Economics.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti (2003). "Can Free Entry Be Inefficient? Fixed
    Commissions and Social Waste in the Real Estate Industry". In: Journal of Polit-
    ical Economy 111.5, pp. 1076­1122.
-- (2019). "Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation". In: American Economic
    Journal: Macroeconomics 11.2, pp. 1­39.
Inman, Brad (2018). Remarks made at What's New in Residential Real Estate Bro-
    kerage Competition: An FTC-DOJ Workshop, on June 5th, 2018. Transcript avail-
    able at. url: https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/events-calendar/2018/04/
    whats-new-residential-real-estate-brokerage-competition-ftc-doj.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Tratjenberg, and Rebecca Henderson (1993). "Geographic
    Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations". In: Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 108.3, pp. 577­598.
Levitt, Steven D. and Chad Syverson (2008). "Market Distortions When Agents Are
    Better Informed: The Value of Information in Real Estate Transactions". In: Re-
    view of Economics and Statistics 90.4, pp. 599­611.
Martellini, Paulo and Guido Menzio (2018). Declining Search Frictions, Unemploy-
    ment and Growth. Working Paper. University of Pennsylvania and NYU.


                                         38
Moretti, Enrico (2013). The New Geography of Jobs. Mariner Books.
Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides (1994). "Job Creation and Job
   Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment". In: Review of Economic Studies
   61.3, pp. 397­415.
NAR (2018). Real Estate in a Digital Age 2018 Report. National Association of Re-
   altors. url: https://www.nar.realtor/sites/default/files/documents/
   2018-real-estate-in-a-digital-world-12-12-2018.pdf.
Ngai, L. Rachel and Silvana Tenreyro (2014). "Hot and Cold Seasons in the Housing
   Market". In: American Economic Review 104.12, pp. 3991­4026.
Novy-Marx, Robert (2009). "Hot and Cold Markets". In: Real Estate Economics 37.1,
   pp. 1­22.
Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides (2001). "Looking into the Black
   Box: A Survey of the Matching Function". In: Journal of Economic Literature 39,
   pp. 390­431.
Pissarides, Christopher A. (1985). "Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemploy-
   ment, Vacancies, and Real Wages". In: American Economic Review 75.4, pp. 676­
   690.
Sinai, Todd and Joel Waldfogel (2004). "Geography and the Internet: Is the Internet
   a Substitute or a Complement for Cities?" In: Journal of Urban Economics 56,
   pp. 1­24.
Snider, David and Matt Harris (2018). "The Future of Real Estate Tech: How We
   Got Here and What's Next in an Exploding New Ecosystem". In: Forbes.com.
   url: https://www.forbes.com/sites/valleyvoices/2018/02/13/future-
   of-real-estate-tech.
Sveikauskas, Leo, Samuel Rowe, and James D. Mildenberger (2018). "Measuring Pro-
   ductivity Growth in Construction". In: Monthly Labor Review, pp. 1­34.
Wheaton, William C. (1990). "Vacancy, Search, and Prices in a Housing Market
   Matching Model". In: Journal of Political Economy 98.6, pp. 1270­1292.
Zervas, Georgios, Davide Proserpio, and John W. Byers (2017). "The Rise of the
   Sharing Economy: Estimating the Impact of Airbnb on the Hotel Industry". In:
   Journal of Marketing Research 54.5, pp. 687­705.
Zumpano, Leonard V., Ken H. Johnson, and Randy I. Anderson (2003). "Internet
   Use and Real Estate Brokerage Market Intermediation". In: Journal of Housing
   Economics 12.2, pp. 134­150.


                                        39
A      Increasing the Match Rate in Search Models
Instead of q () I let the match rate be Aq () and consider the effect of A  .
Equations (1) and (2) become

                   rVs = -cs + Aq ()E [S - y |S  y ] G (y )                          (3)
                                 Aq ()
                   rVb = -cb +         (1 -  )E [S - y |S  y ] G (y )                (4)
                                   

To isolate the effect of increasing match efficiency without a change in match quality,
I first consider a setting in which all matches give a surplus of S  y , where S is fixed
and not a random variable. The equations become:

                          rVs = -cs + Aq () (S - y )
                                        Aq ()
                          rVb = -cb +         (1 -  )(S - y )
                                          

Combining the two equations gives:

                                                   1-
                     ry = -cs - cb + Aq ()  +         (S - y )
                                                    

                                         ry + cs + cb
                               S-y =
                                        Aq ()  + 1- 
                                                      


Taking the limit as A   means that S - y  0.15 Thus, the reservation value
becomes exactly equal to S , and the match rate becomes instantaneous. There are
therefore no vacancies and every match generates a surplus of S . When A < , y is
less than S , and the difference depends on the search costs and the match rate.
    Now I consider a setting in which the upper bound of the support of the match
                        ¯. Further, for simplicity, assume that G(S
quality distribution is S                                         ¯) > 0 (so there is a
positive probability that S is exactly equal to S ¯). Combining equations (3) and (4)
gives:
                                                    ry + cs + cb
                        E [S - y |S  y ] G(y ) =
                                                 Aq ()  + 1-   
                                                                 


Taking the limit of A   means that E [S - y |S  y ] G(y )  0 in the limit. Thus,

  15                                                         1-
    Note that it doesn't matter what  approaches. Aq ()  +          as A   regardless
of whether  is finite or approaches zero or infinity.

                                           40
y  S  ¯. Since G(S¯) > 0, Aq ()G(y )   as A  , and thus the vacancy rate
approaches zero. If G(y )  0 as y  S ¯, then it may be possible for the vacancy rate
to remain positive as A  , as not all vacancies are immediately filled.




                                        41
