                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GOVERNMENT INCENTIVES FOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                          Josh Lerner

                                      Working Paper 26884
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26884


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




Parts of this essay were adapted from Lerner (2009), Lerner (2013) and Ivashina and Lerner
(2019). I thank Ben Jones and Ralph Lerner for helpful comments, Susan Woodward of Sand Hill
Econometrics for access to data, and Harvard Business School's Division of Research for
financial support. I have received compensation from advising institutional investors in private
capital funds, private capital groups, and governments designing policies relevant to private
capital. All errors and omissions are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Government Incentives for Entrepreneurship
Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 26884
March 2020
JEL No. G18,G24,H81

                                          ABSTRACT

In the dozen years since the Global Financial Crisis, there has been a surge of interest on the part
of governments in promoting entrepreneurial activity, largely by providing financing. This essay
explores these policies, focusing on financial incentives to entrepreneurs and the intermediaries
who fund them. The motivation for these efforts is clear: the well-documented relationships
between economic growth, innovation, entrepreneurship and venture capital. Yet despite good
intentions, many of these public initiatives have ended in disappointment. I argue that these
failures have not simply been a matter of bad luck. Instead, the unfortunate outcomes have
reflected the fundamental structural issues that make it difficult for governments to launch
sustained successful efforts to promote entrepreneurship over sustained periods. I highlight
several critical challenges, and outline two principles that might render these efforts more
effective.


Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
Introduction

In the dozen years since the Global Financial Crisis, there has been a surge of interest on the part
of governments in promoting entrepreneurial activity, largely by providing financing (Bernstein,
Dev, and Lerner, forthcoming). This essay explores these policies, focusing on financial
incentives to entrepreneurs and the intermediaries who fund them. (Other chapters in this volume
discuss related policies to create a general business environment conducive for entrepreneurship
and innovation, such as through the tax code, cluster development, and labor force reforms.)

The motivation for these efforts is clear: the well-documented relationships between economic
growth, innovation, entrepreneurship and venture capital. Yet despite good intentions, many of
these public initiatives have ended in disappointment. To cite a several examples over the past
decade:

    ·   The U.S. Department of Energy's clean energy initiative was created in 2005, but
        remained unfunded until 2009 when it received financing as part of the American
        Recovery and Reinvestment (also known as the Stimulus) Act. 2 The program was to
        provide loan guarantees and direct grants to risky but potentially rewarding energy
        projects that may otherwise be too risky to attract private investment. More than $34
        billion was spent in less than four years, which was almost $2 billion more than the total
        private VC investment in the field. The proposed investments were controversial at the
        time. As one organization protesting the program noted, "DOE has minimal experience
        administering a loan guarantee program, and its one test case ended with taxpayers
        paying a heavy price. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, DOE offered billions in loan
        guarantees for the development of synthetic fuels. Due in large part to poor
        administration and market changes, the federal government was forced to pay billions to
        cover the losses" ("Oppose," 2010). These worries proved prescient. The enormous scale
        of the public investment appears to have crowded out and replaced most private spending
        in this area, as VCs waited on the sideline to see where the public funds would go.
        Moreover, in the wake of extensive industry lobbying, the investment decisions of
        government administrators have led to a number of embarrassing bankruptcies (e.g.,
        Solyndra, A123 Systems, Beacon Power). 3 Rather than being stimulated, cleantech has

2
  See, for instance, Gold (2009), Kao (2013), Kirsner (2009), Mullaney (2009), and Sposito
(2009).
3
  Evaluating the return from these start-up investments is very difficult. As far as I can tell, the
numerous evaluations of these programs by government agencies and academics have not
attempted to compute one. Much of the difficulty stems from the fact that payments were made
under a variety of programs (e.g., the 1705 Loan Guarantee Program and the Advanced
Technology Vehicle Manufacturing Loan Program) and payment to start-ups were funded were
mingled alongside those to established entities like Goldman Sachs and NRG Energy, where the
bankruptcy risk was presumably much lower (though the rationale for public funding may have
been so as well (Lipton and Krauss, 2011)). But given that public funding went to some of the
most spectacular start-up bankruptcies in the sector, and that even independent venture capital
investments in this sector between the beginning of 2008 and the third quarter 2019 have yielded
(according to Sand Hill Econometrics) an annualized loss of -2.6% (before accounting for fees),
                                                 2
       fallen from 14.9% of venture investments in 2009 to 1.5% of capital deployed in the first
       nine months of 2019. 4

   ·   The Saudi government has spent many tens of billions of dollars seeking to promote
       venture capital activity in the Kingdom. 5 These have included a wide variety of
       regulatory reforms (creating, for instance, a second-tier market for entrepreneurial listings
       and facilitating the business registration process), the establishment of venture funds and
       regional hubs (often in conjunction with new universities), and global venture capital
       investments. In the last regard, the most notable was a commitment of $45 billion by the
       Saudi Public Investment Fund--a Saudi sovereign wealth funds whose stated mission is
       to be "the engine behind economic diversity in the KSA" (Kingdom, 2019)--to the
       SoftBank Vision Fund. Yet the level of venture capital in the KSA has remained very
       modest. According to the consulting firm MAGNiTT (2019), only $50 million of venture
       capital was raised in 2018 by Saudi firms and 2019 is on a very similar pace. The 2018
       value represented 0.006% of gross domestic product, a level one-sixtieth of that of Israel
       and akin to that of the lowest nations tracked on this measure by the Organisation for
       Economic Cooperation and Development (e.g., Italy, the Russian Federation, and
       Slovenia) (OECD, 201).

   ·   The Chinese government, after a series of adept moves to promote venture capital over
       two decades, made a major commitment in the middle part of the 2010s to promoting
       venture capital. 6 Under the Government Guidance Fund program, over $231 billion was
       invested in government-sponsored venture funds in 2015 alone, largely by Chinese
       government bodies and state-owned enterprises. By way of context, this amount was
       more than five times the total amount committed to venture funds worldwide by all other
       investors in 2015. The government claimed it had raised $1.8 trillion for these funds by
       the end of 2018. 7 The result appears to have been a massive bubble, followed by a quick
       collapse and slow-down. Between the fourth quarter of 2016 and the fourth quarter of
       2018, fundraising dropped by nearly 90%, a trend that has continued into 2019. As a
       result, Chinese companies has fallen from a peak of 45% of venture capital invested
       worldwide to 15% in the second quarter of 2019 (Rowley, 2019). The prediction at the
       time of Gary Rieschel of Qiming Venture Partners (Shen, 2016) is looking increasingly
       prescient: "They have a fantasy that if they give everyone money they'll create
       entrepreneurs. What it will result in is catastrophic losses for the government."

In this essay, I argue that these failures have not simply been a matter of bad luck: for instance,
the choice by the Obama administration, to target its subsidies to entrepreneurial firms to A123
Systems and Solyndra, rather than the more viable cleantech firms that would have avoided


it is hard to be optimistic about the performance of the investments in entrepreneurial firms as
part of this initiative.
4
  Based on the author's analysis of data from Sand Hill Econometrics.
5
  This paragraph is based on Seoudi and Mahmoud (2016), Sindi (2015), and assorted press
accounts.
6
  This paragraph is based in part on Oster and Chen (2016), Feng (2018), and Yang (2019).
7
  Based on the author's compilation of Preqin data.
                                                  3
bankruptcy. Instead, the unfortunate outcomes have reflected the fundamental structural issues
that make it difficult for governments to launch sustained successful efforts to promote
entrepreneurship over sustained periods. I highlight several critical challenges, and outline two
principles that might render these efforts more effective.

The Motivation

Public bodies have been motivated to undertake these efforts by the perceived relationship
between entrepreneurial activity on the one hand and employment opportunities, innovation, and
economic growth on the other. The reader by this point in the volume should be convinced of
the importance of innovation to entrepreneurship growth. But the role that entrepreneurship in
general and venture capital in particular play in promoting innovation have been much less
thoroughly discussed so far.

Initially, economists generally overlooked the creative power of new firms: they suspected that
the bulk of innovations would stem from large industrialized concerns. For instance, Joseph
Schumpeter (1942), one of the pioneers of the serious study of entrepreneurship, posited that
large firms had an inherent advantage in innovation relative to smaller enterprises.\

These initial beliefs have not stood the test of time. Rather, today they look like the intellectual
by-product of an era that saw large firms and their industrial laboratories (such as IBM and
AT&T) replace the independent inventors who accounted for a large part of innovative activity
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

In today's world, Schumpeter's hypothesis of large-firm superiority does not accord with casual
observation. In numerous industries, such as medical devices, communication technologies,
semiconductors, and software, leadership is in the hands of relatively young firms whose growth
was largely financed by venture capitalists and public equity markets. (Think, for example, of
Boston Scientific, Cisco, Intel, and Microsoft.) Even in industries where established firms have
retained dominant positions, such as finance, small firms have developed an increasing share of
the new ideas, and then licensed or sold them to larger concerns. Large firms are if anything
cutting back their investments in basic science. (See the evidence in Arora, Belenzon, and
Patacconi, 2015.)

This pattern of new ventures playing a key role in stimulating innovation has been especially
pronounced in the past two decades. The two arenas that have seen perhaps the most potentially
revolutionary technological innovation--biotechnology and the Internet--were driven by smaller
entrants. Neither established drug companies nor computer software manufacturers were
pioneers in developing these technologies. Small firms did not invent the key genetic engineering
techniques or Internet protocols. Rather, the enabling technologies were developed with
government funds at academic institutions and research laboratories. It was the small entrants,
however, who first seized upon the commercial opportunities. Even in areas where large firms
have traditionally dominated, such as energy research, start-up firms appear to be playing an
increasing role.




                                                  4
Not only do Schumpeter's arguments fail the test of experience, but systematic studies have
generated little support for his belief in the innovative advantage of large firms. Over the years,
economists have tried repeatedly to measure the relationship between firm size and innovation.
While this literature is substantial, it is remarkably inconclusive. While I will not inflict upon the
reader a detailed review of the hundreds, if not thousands, of papers on this subject, it is worth
highlighting that they give very little support to the claim that large firms are more innovative. 8
Much of this work has related measures of innovative discoveries--for example, R&D
expenditures, patents, or inventions--to firm size. Initial studies were undertaken using the
largest manufacturing firms; more recent works have employed larger samples and detailed data
(e.g., studies employing data on firms' specific lines of business). Despite the improved
methodology of recent studies, the results have remained inconclusive: the studies seem as likely
to find a negative as a positive relationship, and even when a positive relationship between firms'
size and innovation has been found, it has had little economic significance. For instance, one
study concluded that a doubling of firm size increased the ratio of R&D to sales by only 0.2
percent (Cohen, Levin and Mowery, 1987).

Whatever may be the relationship between a firm's size and its innovations, one of the relatively
few things that researchers can agree on is the critical role played by new firms, or entrants, in
many industries. The role of start-ups in emerging industries has been highlighted not just in
many case studies, but also in systematic research. For instance, a study by Acs and Audretsch
(1988) examined which firms developed some of the most important innovations of the twentieth
century. 9 They documented the relative contribution of large and small firms. Small firms
contributed almost half the innovations they examined. But they found that the contribution of
small firms was not central in all industries. It was greatest in immature industries in which
market power was relatively unconcentrated. These findings suggest that entrepreneurs and small
firms play a key role in observing where new technologies can meet customers' needs and
rapidly responding to the,. Whether owing to poor incentives, inefficient internal capital markets,
or other causes, larger firms do not appear to fare well in this regard.

Recent studies have also pointed to the special advantage in innovation enjoyed by young
entrepreneurs backed by venture capital firms. Considerable evidence shows that venture
capitalists play an important role in encouraging innovation. The types of firms that they
finance--whether young start-ups hungry for capital or growing firms that need to restructure--
pose numerous risks and uncertainties that discourage other investors.

Where, then, does this advantage come from? The financing of young firms is a risky business.
A lack of information makes it difficult to assess the potential of these firms, and permits
opportunistic behavior by entrepreneurs after financing is received. To address these information
problems, venture investors employ a variety of mechanisms that seem to be critical in boosting
innovation.

The first of these devices is the screening process that venture capitalists use to select investment
opportunities. This process is typically far more efficient than that used by other funders of


8
    The interested reader can turn to surveys by Azoulay and Lerner (2012) and Cohen (2010).
9
    Similar studies include Aron and Lazear (1990) and Prusa and Schmitz Jr. (1994).
                                                  5
innovation, such as corporate research and development laboratories and government grant-
makers. In addition to the careful interviews and financial analysis, venture capitalists usually
make investments with other investors. One venture firm will originate the deal and look to bring
in other venture capital firms. Involving other firms provides a second opinion on the
opportunity. There is usually no clear-cut evidence that an investment will yield attractive
returns. Having other investors approve the deal limits the likelihood of funding bad deals. The
result of this detailed analysis is, of course, a lot of rejections: only about 0.5 to 1 percent of
business plans are funded (Kaplan and Stromberg, 2004). Inevitably, many good ideas are
rejected as part of the assessment process.

When venture capitalists invest, they hold not common stock, but rather preferred stock (Kaplan
and Stromberg, 2003). The significance of this distinction is that if the company is liquidated or
otherwise returns money to the shareholders, preferred stock is paid before the common stock
that entrepreneurs, as well as other, less privileged investors, hold. Moreover, venture capitalists
add numerous restrictive covenants and provisions to the preferred stock. They may be able, for
instance, to block future financings if they are dissatisfied with the valuation, to replace the
entrepreneur, and to have a set number of representatives on (or even control of) the board of
directors. In this way, if something unexpected happens (which is the rule rather than the
exception with entrepreneurial firms), the venture investor can assert control. These terms vary
with the financing round, with the most onerous terms reserved for the earliest financing rounds.

The staging of investments also improves the efficiency of venture capital funding (Gompers,
1995; Neher, 1999). In large corporations, research and development budgets are typically set at
the beginning of a project, with few interim reviews planned. This contrasts with the venture
capital process: once they make a decision to invest, venture capitalists frequently disburse funds
in stages. The refinancing of these firms, termed "rounds" of financing, is conditional on
achieving certain technical or market milestones. Proceeding in this fashion allows the venture
capitalist to gather more information before providing additional funding, thus helping investors
separate investments that are likely to be successful from those that are likely to fail. Managers
of venture-backed firms have to return repeatedly to their financiers for additional capital, which
allows venture capitalists to monitor that their money is not being squandered on unprofitable
projects. Thus, an innovative idea continues to be funded only if its promoters continue to
execute well.

Finally, venture capitalists provide intensive oversight of the firms they invest in. Survey
evidence (Gompers, et al, forthcoming) suggests that over 25% of venture capitalists interact
multiple times per week and an additional one-third interact once a week. These interactions can
have profound impacts. One intriguing study by Bernstein, Giroux and Townsend (2016)
supports these claims, showing that when an airline adds a direct flight between the city of a
venture capitalist and one of his or her existing portfolio firms (which presumably facilitates
face-to-face interactions), the firm is likely to experience a boost in innovative and financial
performance.

With support from venture capitalists, start-ups can better invest in the research, market
development, marketing, and strategizing they require to attain the scale necessary to go public.
This importance of tis backing can be illustrated in stylized facts, such as that of the ten most

                                                 6
valuable companies in the world in November 2019, fully seven (five U.S. based and two
Chinese) were originally venture backed.

The positive impact of venture capitalist also corroborated in large-sample research. Especially
relevant is the finding of Kortum and Lerner (2000) that even after addressing the concern that
venture capital investments are highly targeted, venture funding does have a strong positive
impact on innovation. The estimated coefficients vary according to the techniques employed, but
on average a dollar of venture capital appears to be three to four times more potent in stimulating
patenting than a dollar of traditional corporate R&D. While venture capital has historically been
small relative to corporate research, it is responsible for a much greater share of U.S. commercial
innovations.

The Challenges

Given the apparently strong relationship between entrepreneurship, innovation and growth, it is
not surprising that governments world-wide have sought to promote new ventures. But as the
examples in the introduction suggest, many public efforts have gone astray.

In particular, in this section, I highlight three aspects of the nature of entrepreneurial ventures
that pose substantial challenges to government policymakers.

The Geographic Dilemma

The first challenge is the tight geographical focus of entrepreneurial businesses. Entrepreneurial
businesses are often clustered geographically (Glaeser, Kerr, and Ponzetto, 2010); venture-
backed businesses even more so (Chen, Gompers, Kovner, and Lerner, 2010). These patterns
characterize such businesses around the world.

The highly skewed distribution of venture capital investment can be illustrated by a tabulation of
Pitchbook data between 2015 and 2017 by Florida and Hathaway (2018). The authors concluded
that the top ten urban areas for venture financing (six in the U.S., two in China, London, and
Bangalore) accounted for 62% of venture disbursements worldwide; while the top 25 urban areas
accounted for 75% of all disbursements.

This disbursement is not accidental, but rather reflects the nature of investment performance. The
Sand Hill Econometrics index of gross (pre-fee) returns from venture capital investments
between 1980 and 2019 highlights a substantial discrepancy between Silicon Valley and other
U.S. regions. Northern California transactions reported an annualized return of 25.6%,
substantially more than other regions such as New England (14.3%), mid-Atlantic (15.4%), and
non-California Pacific states (13.5%). 10 While accurate regional return data is not available
worldwide, undoubtedly this pattern would repeat itself elsewhere.




10
     Based on the author's compilation of Sand Hill Econometrics data.
                                                   7
Yet many efforts to boost high-potential entrepreneurship end up directing far too much funding
to unpromising areas in an effort to "share the wealth." Much of the impact is diluted as funds
that could be very helpful in a core area end up where they are not useful.

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, the largest public venture program in
the United States, provides an illustration of this problem. The effect of a fairness policy was
shown in my work (Lerner, 1999) comparing the performance of program recipients with that of
matching firms: awardees grew considerably faster than companies in the same locations and
industries that did not receive awards. In the ten years after receipt of SBIR funding, the
workforce of the average award recipient in a high-tech region grew by forty-seven, a doubling
in size. The workforces of other awardees--those located in regions not characterized by high-
tech activity--grew by only thirteen employees. Though the recipients of SBIR awards grew
considerably faster than a sample of matched firms, the superior performance, as measured by
growth in employment (as well as sales and other measures), was confined to awardees in areas
that already had private venture activity. Many other examples can be offered from the
Americas, Asia, and Europe, where the pressure for fairness has led to the diversion of
substantial funds for entrepreneurial investments with little chance of success..

Thus, in the name of geographic "diversity," the program funded firms with inferior prospects.
Underneath these patterns lie some intense political pressures and conflicting interests. For one
thing, congressmen and their staffers have pressured program managers to award funding to
companies in their states. As a result, in almost every recent fiscal year, firms in all fifty states
(and indeed every one of the 435 congressional districts) have received at least one SBIR award.
These patterns are far from unique: pressures for "fair" distribution of subsidies (Weingast,
Shepsle, and Johnsen, 1981) often lower the social and private returns from these government
initiatives.

The Timing Dynamic

The final detachment stems from the boom-bust cycles that frequently characterize
entrepreneurial markets. The venture market is extraordinarily uneven, moving from cycles of
feast to famine and back again. In some periods, far too many firms can get access to financing,
while in others, worthy companies languish unfunded.

Funds operating in periods with little competition eventually experience very good returns, a
pattern that may reflect the fact that the funds operating during these years can invest in the most
promising firms at relatively modest valuations. Over time, however, these high returns attract
the interest of institutional investors. What starts as a trickle of fund of funds ends as a torrent.
The competition for deals rises, as does the pricing of these transactions. Ultimately, the
expansion proves to be unsustainable, and returns fall. Then the cycle repeats itself all over
again.

These cycles have led to considerable drama in the venture industry. Each industry downturn
produces melodramatic claims that the venture industry is fundamentally broken, with too many
investors competing for a limited supply of deals. For instance, in the dark days after the
NASDAQ crash of 2000-02, Steve Dow of the venerable firm Sevin Rosen indicated that his

                                                  8
group was unlikely to raise a new fund. "The traditional venture model seems to us to be
broken," he noted. "Too much money had flooded the venture business and too many companies
were being given financing in every conceivable sector" (Helft, 2006), (More typically, the
conclusion of the complaining venture capitalist is that everyone should exit the market except
for the market observer and his best friends.)

This song has been repeated almost verbatim in every market downturn. "Dramatic inflows of
cash weaken the `fragile ecosystem' of the venture capital industry by forcing some to `shovel'
money into deals... The answer is to discourage more money from coming in and to suppress
what [gets invested]," preached the Venture Capital Journal in 1993 (Deger, 1993). The same
periodical bemoaned in 1980 ("Special Report," 1980), "The rate of disbursements from venture
investors to developing businesses continues to be extraordinary... [A] major limiting factor in
expansion will be the availability of qualified venture investment managers. Direct experience is
so critical to venture investment disciplines." (With the benefit of hindsight, the Journal was
exactly wrong in both cases. The typical funds raised in the years of these two articles had a
return of 26.1% and 21.6%, respectively, which remain among the two best vintage years for
venture funds ever.)

Despite all the hype and drama, these boom-and-bust patterns are important and the interest that
these cycles have attracted is justified. It is natural to wonder why pensions and others seem to
put most of their money to work almost inevitably at exactly the wrong time. Why don't venture
groups pull back from investing in market peaks, rather than continuing to dance the dance?
While much remains uncertain about these cycles of boom and bust, several drivers of these
patterns have been documented.

At least some of the deterioration of performance stems from the phenomenon of "money
chasing deals." As more money flows into their funds from institutional and individual
investors, venture capitalists' willingness to pay more for deals increases: a doubling of inflows
into venture funds led to between a 7% and 21% increase in valuation levels for otherwise
identical deals. These results do not reflect improvements in the venture investment
environment: when we look at the ultimate success of venture-backed firms, the success rates do
not differ significantly between investments made during periods of relatively low inflows and
valuations, and those of the boom years. But the findings, while suggesting how these cycles
work, do not explain why they come about.

Part of the decline in venture activity stems from new funds. During hot venture markets, many
inexperienced groups raise capital. In many cases, these funds are raised from inexperienced
investors, who are attracted by the excitement surrounding venture funds or by funds-of-funds,
which target these investors. Often, they cannot get into top-tier funds, and instead reach out to
less-experienced funds, not appreciating the differences across groups.

Part of the deterioration in performance around booms reflects the changes in the venture funds.
Established groups often take advantage of these hot markets to increase their capital under
management aggressively. (This decision is likely to be driven by the typical compensation that
venture funds enjoy, which is largely driven by fees from capital under management. ) As
venture groups grow in size, they tend to increase the capital that each partner is responsible for

                                                 9
and to broaden the range of industries in which they invest. These changes are often associated
with deteriorating performance.

Whatever the precise mechanisms behind these cycles, their impact on innovation is most
worrisome. Skeptical observers of the venture scene frequently argue that these cycles can lead
to the neglect of promising companies. For instance, during the deep venture trough of the
1970s--in 1975, no venture capital funds at all were raised in the U.S.--many companies
seeking to develop pioneering personal computing hardware and software languished unfunded.
Ultimately, these technologies emerged with revolutionary impact in the 1980s, but their
emergence may have been accelerated had the venture market not been in such a deep funk
during the 1970s.

Townsend (2015), in an intriguing analysis of the technology market collapse of 2000-03, looks
at the probability that firms failed to get refinanced through no fault of their own. He looks at
how the probability that firms in sectors unrelated to information technology (IT) during the
collapse period got another financing round, and how this varied with their lead venture firm's
exposure to the Internet sector. He compared non-IT firms whose backers invested heavily in
Internet companies during the years leading up to the peak of the bubble with those whose
backers invested little in the Internet sector during that time. (Based on all observable
characteristics, these firms are otherwise identical.) The unlucky ones with Internet-exposed
backers were far less likely to raise another financing round. The analysis suggests that these
unlucky firms--even though their technologies had nothing to do with the Internet,
telecommunications, or software--experienced a 26% larger drop in the probability that they
would raise additional funding than did those backed by funds without a heavy exposure to the
Internet. If a potential entrepreneur realizes that even if he does everything right, his business
may fail because he was unlucky in choosing a financier, his enthusiasm for the new venture
may fade. He might well conclude that if he is going to be gambling, a trip to Vegas is a less
costly and painful alternative.

It might be thought that this termination of new ventures is not a big deal. After all, the personal
computing technology that may have languished unfunded during the 1970s ultimately saw the
light of day in the next decade. But in addition to the delays inherent in this disruptive process,
there is also the question of its impact on incentives.

Nor is the overfunding of firms during booms necessarily a good thing. While it can stimulate
creativity (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018), it can also lead to wasteful duplication, as
multiple companies pursue the same opportunity, with each follower often being ever more
marginal. Often, the initial market leader's staff is poached by the me-too followers, disrupting
the progress of the firm with the best chance of success. Moreover, once the overfunding
subsides, the firms that still survive struggle to attract funding, as the sector often takes on a
poisonous atmosphere that deters venture investors. Numerous examples of such crazed
duplication can be offered: the recent plethora of social networking companies, the frenzy
surrounding B2B and B2C Internet companies in the late 1990s, or the surge in funding disk-
drive companies in the early 1980s. In each case, a surge of activity was followed by a reaction,
when venture capitalists, suffering from poor returns, recoiled from the industry. As a result,
these periods were incredibly disruptive to all firms within the affected industries.

                                                 10
In many cases, however, political leaders interpret these surges in activity as signals that it is
appropriate to intervene with new subsidies, even as the marginal returns from public money
declines. The public funds can have the effect of adding "fuel to the fire" of an overheated
market. The decision of the Chinese government to "double down" on subsidizing venture
activity after the boom in the first half of the 2010s is a dramatic example.

The Human Dimension

The final disengagement reflects the nature of people who often are associated with the greatest
entrepreneurial success. Government officials may have many valuable talents and play
incredibly important roles; but the skill sets associated with successfully identifying and funding
entrepreneurial businesses are very different from those encountered in their typical daily work.
The ambiguity, complexity, and specialization associated with these ventures makes these tasks
quite challenging.

In many instance, officials may be manifestly inadequate to the task of selecting and managing
entrepreneurial or innovative firms. Many examples can be offered of government leaders who
did not think carefully about realistic market opportunities, the nature of the entrepreneurs and
intermediaries being financed, and how the subsidies they offered would affect behavior.
Whether they were rules that affects the ability of firms to accept outside financing, offshore
routine coding work, or respond to shifts in customer demands, well-intentioned officials can
make rules that prove to be very harmful to those they mean to help.

But beyond public incompetence, much of economists' attention has been focused on a darker
problem that affects these and similar programs: the theory of "regulatory capture." This
hypothesis suggests that entities, whether part of government or industry, will organize to
capture the direct and indirect subsidies that the public sector hands out. 11 Yet public subsidies
are often prone to political capture problems, where well-connected individuals end up with the
bulk of the benefits, and those geared towards entrepreneurial firms are no exception (Akcigit,
Baslandze, and Lotti, 2018). These issues are exacerbated by the fact that the most creative
entrepreneurs are often outsiders: for instance, an extensive literature has documented the
disproportionate representation of immigrants in U.S, entrepreneurship, both in general and
among high-potential enterprises (Kerr and Kerr, 2017; see Fairlie and Lofstrom, 2015 for more
general review).

These capture problems are often exacerbated by opaque and poorly defined processes. While
selecting the most promising new ventures is unlikely to ever be easy, making the process
opaque is unlikely to help. For instance, the Department of Energy had little transparency about
the criteria used to select the awards to cleantech firms discussed in the introduction. Reflecting
this lack of clarity, firms responded by hiring lobbyists to seek awards. For instance, more than
half the cleantech companies in the portfolio of New Enterprise Associates, a large U.S. venture
firm, hired lobbyists to seek to influence the rewards. The emphasis on influence activities was


11
  The articulation of this model in the economics literature is frequently attributed to Olson,
1965; its formal modeling to Peltzman (1976) and Becker (1983).
                                                  11
exacerbated by the huge size of the individual awards: rather than scattering the funds over a
variety of contenders, the Obama administration sought to pick winners. This is a classic
situation where a public program targeted an area that was already interesting to private investors
and actually ended up introducing counter-productive distortions.

The Search for Solutions

How can these seeming disconnects be addressed? In the final part of this essay, I discuss two
potential policy reforms -- independence and reliance on matching funds -- that could address
these disconnects.

The Need for Independence

One way to address the incentive issues described above is for policymakers to emulate central
bankers and to seek to insulate entrepreneurial policy-making from day-to-day political
pressures. A long list of economists have extolled the need to separate monetary policy form
political pressures, lest the temptation to "do the wrong thing" prior to an election be too strong.
Establishing an organization to implement new venture policies where the leadership has the
independence from day-to-day political pressures can similarly lead to longer-term decisions that
can address some of the challenges delineated above. Such a step may also make it easier to
terminate a program when it is no longer needed.

Similar independent governance have been successfully implemented in other investment arenas.
For instance, consider the experience of the Canadian Pension Plan. 12 The Plan was established
in 1966 as a layer of retirement savings sitting between the Old Age Security System (similar to
Social Security in the U.S.) and individual savings. It collected mandated contributions from
employers and workers, and offered benefits that were a set percentage of wages, paid by the
contributions of previous years and the returns from the Plan's investments.

For the first 30 years of the CPP's existence, expenses rose as benefits like inflation-indexing
were added. Funds were invested in non-negotiable Canadian government fixed income bonds
and also loaned to the provinces at sub-market interest rates for projects such as building schools
and roads. These projects may have benefited Canadian society, but not surprisingly did little for
CPP's bottom line. Furthermore, aging population was working against CPP. The government
realized that CPP faced either drastic cuts in benefits or sharp increases in contribution rates.

Similar problems have been shown to beset many U.S. pensions, especially those with heavy
political presentation on their board (Andonov, Hochberg, and Rauh, forthcoming). But unlike
in the United States, where government have almost universally kicked pension problems "down
the road," between 1995 and 1997, the federal and provincial Canadian governments managed to
craft a solution.




12
 This vignette is drawn from Canadian Pension Plan Investment Board (various years),
Hardymon, Leamon, and Lerner (2009), and Lerner, Rhodes-Kropf, and Burbank (2013).
                                                12
The CPP Investment Board was established in 1997 in response to these challenges. One crucial
part of the reforms adopted by the Canadian government was a dramatic restructuring of the
Plan's governance. It adopted a structure that former CEO Mark Wiseman referred to as
"turducken," except instead of a series of stuffed poultry, it featured "a partnership model inside
a Crown corporation inside a pension plan." In order to limit political influence, the CPPIB
governance was set up as a twelve-member board notionally appointed by the federal and
provincial governments, with appointments based entirely on business acumen, not political
connections. The board of directors in turn appointed the CEO, with no right of veto from any
government. The organization's mandate was set as to invest "solely for the benefit of CPP
members" to achieve the best long-term risk-weighted returns for the plan's beneficiaries,
regardless of government policy objectives. To further insulate CPPIB from political influence,
any changes to its charter required approval by an amending process more stringent than that of
the Canadian constitution itself. Small experiments along these lines have been reasonably
successful in the entrepreneurial promotion business, such as the New Zealand Venture
Investment Funds program, 13 and it is my hope that these can be expanded.

Another advantage of independent is more flexibility in setting pay. Setting competitive
compensation is even harder for public institutions in Western democracies, where the media may
be over-eager to engage in sensationalism. The architects of the modern CPPIB created a structure
that allowed the public pension unique freedoms, including the ability to set salaries and bonuses
completely outside the Canadian civil service scale. With multi-million dollar bonuses--as well
as the ability to live in Toronto, work in a congenial setting, and contribute to the betterment of
the nation--CPPIB attracted a high-caliber investment team, many of them Canadians, eager to
move home after a stint on Wall Street.

But implementing this scheme has been challenging. The fund was bitterly criticized for proposing
to pay bonuses totaling $7 million to four top executives for the 2008-09, after the fund had lost
almost 19% of its value during the financial crisis. CPPIB's rationale that the pay packages were
based on long-term performance fell on deaf ears, whether due to its complexity or the political
feeding frenzy. The Board ultimately adjusted its compensation policy downward. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, eventually much of CPPIB's leadership team left for jobs elsewhere. Similar
experience.

A similar cautionary tale emerges from the experience of In-Q-Tel, which was established in 1999
to give the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency greater access to cutting-edge technologies. 14 The
agency's scientific leaders also realized that the most sophisticated technologies were being
developed not within government laboratories, but rather in Silicon Valley start-ups. In-Q-Tel was
designed to address this problem by allowing the government to access some of the key
innovations in these firms. Using a variety of venture-like tools, the organization invested modest
stakes in emerging companies, often in conjunction with independent venture firms.




13
  For a detailed history and analysis of the program, see Lerner, Moore, and Shepherd (2005).
14
  This account is based on Book et al. (2005), Business Executives (2001), and numerous press
accounts.
                                                13
The CIA realized it needed a special kind of team to run In-Q-Tel: individuals who were at once
conversant with the world of high-technology start-ups and with a ponderous, security-conscious
government bureaucracy. To maximize the chance of getting the right people, the CIA set up In-
Q-Tel as an independent, not-for-profit entity, which shielded it from civil service rules that might
discourage many recruits. In order to attract these staff members--and to avoid a revolving door
through which people left as soon as they had the requisite experience--the CIA designed a
compensation scheme quite different from that in typical government jobs. The package included
a flat salary, a bonus based on how well In-Q-Tel met government needs, and an employee
investment program, which took a pre-specified portion of each employee's salary and invested
alongside In-Q-Tel in the young firms in its portfolio.

After a few years of operations, however, the New York Post decided to turn its attention to In-Q-
Tel. 15 Describing it as "an astonishing tale of taxpayer-financed intrigue on capitalism's street of
dreams," journalists homed in on the compensation scheme: one article charged that In-Q-Tel
employees were "speculat[ing] with taxpayer money for their own personal benefit." Needless to
say, there was no discussion of the challenges of recruiting investment staff conversant with
Silicon Valley, or the likelihood that many In-Q-Tel professionals could make far more in the
private sector. This arrangement, the Post intoned, was "almost identical to the so-called `Raptor'
partnerships through which top officials at Enron Corp were able to cash in personally on
investment activities of the very company that employed them." Whether it was the criticism of
the compensation levels--which while attractive by government standards, were far below those
of independent venture capitalists--the distractions associated with frequent congressional
investigations, or the media scrutiny, In-Q-Tel has struggled to hold onto its investment staff,
despite a creative attempt to create attractive incentives.

While independence does not necessarily guarantee effective policy-making, it can increase the
likelihood that decisions avoid political fads, relying instead on rules-based approaches and
experimental evidence. All too often, in the rush to boost entrepreneurship, policymakers make
no provision for the evaluation of programs. In an ideal world, the future of initiatives should be
determined by their success or failure in meeting their goals, rather than considerations such as
the vehemence with which supporters argue for their continuation. Independent governance can
facilitate better decisions.

Turning again for the SBIR program, there are many examples where analysis could be
enormously helpful. A striking study by Howell (2017) suggests while the initial Phase I awards
made up only 20% of total of $2.8 billion of awards in fiscal year 2017 (U.S. Small Business
Administration, 2018)), essentially all the program's positive benefits resulted from those initial
grants. Similarly, both Howell's analysis and my own suggest the troublesome impact of the
companies that have managed to capture a disproportionate number of awards. These "mills"
commercialize far fewer projects than those firms that receive just one (or a handful) SBIR grant.
These "SBIR mills" often have staffs in Washington that focus only on identifying opportunities
for subsidy applications. These problems have proven difficult to eliminate, as "mill" staffers
tend to be active, wily lobbyists.

15
  These quotes are drawn from one of several pieces on In-Q-Tel done by the paper, Byron
(2005).
                                                 14
An added benefit of such efforts has to do with time frames. Democracies worldwide are shaped
by the ebb and flow of election cycles. This inevitably leads to a short-run orientation. And even
leaders in office for life are often anxious to display progress and look for quick fixes. But
building a venture capital industry is a long-run investment, which takes many years until
tangible effects are realized. To cite one example, historians date the birth of the modern U.S.
venture capital industry to 1978, a full twenty years after the enactment of the SBIC program.
This is not a process that can be accomplished overnight.

As a result, an entrepreneurship or venture capital initiative requires a long-run commitment on
the part of public officials. The one certainty is that there will be few immediate returns. If
programs are abandoned after a few months or years, they are highly unlikely to bring any
benefits. There has to be a commitment to be undaunted by initial failures--for example, the low
rate of return that early publicly subsidized investments or funds garner--and instead to fine-
tune programs in the face of early discouragements. An independent governance structure can
limit these distorting effects.

At the same time, there may be times when a program has lived its useful life, and is no longer
needed. One nomination might be the Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) program in
the U.S. which subsidized the formation of venture funds. The U.S. industry is today many
orders of magnitude bigger, and the need for the program much less compelling. And many fo
the firms receiving SBIC funding have been marginal ones who cannot attract private funds. Yet
SBIC have vehemently argued for expanding the program, not terminating it.

Matching Funds

Far too often, decisions about fund allocation are distorted by a lack of understanding of how the
market works or by political rather than economic considerations. By requiring that matching
funds be raised from the private sector, the dangers of uninformed decisions and political
interference can be greatly reduced.

We have already alluded to examples of well-intentioned but uninformed leaders making
boneheaded decisions, as well as political capture leading to unfortunate decisions, such as to
allocate much of the funding to regions where there is little chance of success. Yet another
distortion is when policymakers make decisions based on "buzz," or incomplete information.
One study determined that forty-nine of the fifty U.S. states started major programs to promote
the biotechnology industry, in hopes of creating a cluster of activity (Feldman and Francis,
2003). In fact, only a handful of these states had the base of scientific resources and the
supporting infrastructure (e.g., lawyers versed in biotechnology patent law and financing
practice) to support a successful cluster, so the bulk of these funds were wasted. When these
programs did support a promising firm, in many cases it rapidly moved to a region more
conducive to biotechnology entrepreneurship. 16



16
  See, for instance, the saga of Cleveland's biotechnology initiative as related in Fogarty and
Sinha (1999).
                                                15
The vast majority of efforts by the public sector to target particular industries seem to have been
far less successful. If dozens of Ph.D.s poring for years over econometrics models with
mountains of historical data have been unable to show how to target industries, how can the
typical government leader identify good prospects in a compressed time period and with limited
information?

But there is a way to address this problem at least partially. The most direct way is to insist on
matching funds. If venture funds or entrepreneurial firms need to raise money from outside
sources, organizations that will ultimately not be commercially viable will be kept off the
playing field. In order to ensure that these matching funds send a powerful signal, the matching
should involve a substantial amount of capital (ideally, one-half the funding or more should be
from the private sector). These stipulations can limit the temptation to impose geographic
diversity requirements that direct funds into non-viable areas.

The power of matching funds was clearly demonstrated in what has been considered the gold
standard of public venture capital initiatives. In June 1992, the Israeli government established
Yozma Venture Capital Ltd., a $100 million fund wholly owned by the public sector (for more
details, see Avnimelech, Kenney, and Teubal, 2004, OECD, 2003, Senor and Singer, 2009, and
Trajtenberg, 2002). At the time, there was a single venture fund active in the nation, Athena
Venture Partners. While there were certainly well trained engineers in the nation working on
promising technologies, entrepreneurs (and would-be company founders) were suspicious of
venture investors. This reluctance was based in part on their interactions with the pioneering
venture capitalists in the nation, as well as their general skepticism about selling equity to
unaffiliated parties. Instead, they preferred to rely on bank debt for financing. The only problem,
of course, was that such financing was rarely available for young, risky ventures.

The key goal of Yozma was to bring foreign venture capitalists' investment expertise and
network of contacts to Israel. The need for this assistance was highlighted by the failure of the
nation's earlier efforts to promote high-technology entrepreneurship. One assessment concluded
that fully 60 percent of the entrepreneurs in prior programs had been successful in meeting their
technical goals but nonetheless failed because the entrepreneurs were unable to market their
products or raise capital for further development. Foreign expertise was seen as key to
overcoming this problem.

Accordingly, Yozma actively discouraged Israeli financiers from participating in its programs.
Rather, the focus was on getting foreign venture investors to commit capital for Israeli
entrepreneurs. The government provided matching funds to investors, typically $8 million of a
$20 million fund. The venture fund was given the right to buy back the government stake within
the first five years for the initial value plus a preset interest rate of roughly 5 to 7 percent. Thus,
the design of Yozma meant that the government provided an added incentive to the venture fund
if the investments proved successful. Moreover, learning from the nation's misadventures during
earlier programs to stimulate the venture industry--when cumbersome application procedures
and burdensome reporting requirements discouraged participation--the administration of the
program was deliberately made simple.




                                                  16
The Yozma program delivered beyond the wildest dreams of the founders. Ten groups took
advantage of this offer, mostly from the United States, Western Europe, and Japan. Many of the
original Yozma funds, including Gemini and Walden Ventures, earned spectacular returns and
served as precursors to larger, follow-on funds. Moreover, many of the local partners recruited
by the overseas venture capitalists were able to spin off and establish their own firms, which
global venture capitalists were eager to fund because of their impressive track records. (A
Yozma "alumni club" allows groups to learn from each other's experiences while making these
transitions.) One decade after the program's inception, the ten original Yozma groups were
managing Israeli funds totaling $2.9 billion, and the Israeli venture market had expanded to
include 60 groups managing approximately $10 billion (Erlich, 2007). The magnitude of this
success is also suggested by the fact that the ratio of venture investment to GDP is consistently
higher in Israel than in any other nation.

As powerful an idea as matching funds is, the devil is in the details. In the Government Guidance
Fund initiative in China, the central government imposed matching fund requirements as well. In
a number of the top cities, the government funds were matched with capital from legitimate
investors. In many second- and third-tier cities (where many of the funds were set up), however,
the requirements for matching funds were relaxed. Much of the capital came not from informed
private sector actors, but rather from provincial and state governments eager to boost the local
economy, or else from state-owned enterprises under these officials' control. Thus, the
informative quality of the matching funds was much reduced.

Final Thoughts

Many of the same policies that have driven governments to promote innovation in general have
led to a public policy focus on entrepreneurship. The bulk of these efforts have been well
intentioned. But the substantial challenges associated with the promotion of entrepreneurial
businesses have meant that the success rate is not as great as many policy makers hoped or
expected.

At the same time, the numerous efforts around the globe suggest some guiding principles for
maximizing the success of these funds. In particular, I highlight here two ideas. Rather than
distributing the public funds willy-nilly, a requirement for matching funds can ensure market
validation for the ideas. And placing the body under the aegis of an independent body can help
buffet these long-run initiatives for the ebbs-and-flows of political fashion.




                                                17
References

Zoltan J. Acs and David B. Audretsch, "Innovation in Large and Small Firms: An Empirical
Analysis," American Economic Review 78 (1988), 678­90.

Ufuk Akcigit, Salomé Baslandze, Francesca Lotti, "Connecting to Power: Political Connections,
Innovation, and Firm Dynamics," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no.
25136, 2018.

Aleksandar Andonov, Yael Hochberg and Joshua Rauh, "Political Representation and
Governance: Evidence from the Investment Decisions of Public Pension Funds," Journal of
Finance, forthcoming.

Debra J. Aron and Edward P. Lazear, "The Introduction of New Products," American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 80 (1990), 421­26

Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, and Andrea Patacconi, "Killing the Golden Goose? The Decline
of Science in Corporate R&D, 1980-2007," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper no. 20902, 2015.

Gil Avnimelech, Martin Kenney, and Morris Teubal, "Building Venture Capital Industries:
Understanding the U.S. and Israeli Experiences," BRIE Working Paper no. 160, 2004.

Pierre Azoulay and Josh Lerner, "Technological Innovation and Organizations," in Handbook of
Organizational Economics, Robert Gibbons and John Roberts (editors), Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2012, chapter 14.

Gary S. Becker, "A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (1983), 371­400.

Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner. "New Venture Policy around the World,"
Unpublished working paper, 2020.

Shai Bernstein, Xavier Giroud, and Richard R. Townsend, "The Impact of Venture Capital
Monitoring," Journal of Finance 71 (2016), 1591-1622.

Kevin Book, Felda Hardymon, Ann Leamon, and Josh Lerner, "In-Q-Tel," Harvard Business
School Case no. 9-804-146, 2005.

Business Executives for National Security, Accelerating the Acquisition and Implementation of
New Technologies for Intelligence: The Report of the Independent Panel on the Central
Intelligence Agency In-Q-Tel Venture, Washington, D.C.: BNES, 2001.

Christopher Byron, "Penny Stock Spies," New York Post, April 25, 2005.

Canadian Pension Plan Investment Board, Annual Reports, Toronto, CPPIB, various years.

                                              18
Wesley M. Cohen, "Fifty Years of Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity and Performance," in
Handbook of Economics of Innovation, Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg (editors),
Amsterdam, North Holland Elsevier, 2010,volume 1, pp. 129-213.

Wesley M. Cohen, Richard C. Levin, and David C. Mowery, "Firm Size and R&D Intensity: A
Re-examination," Journal of Industrial Economics 35 (1987), 543­63.

Renee Deger, "Disbursements on the Rise: Sharp Gains Raise Yellow Flag to Some Venture
Capitalists," Venture Capital Journal 33 (December 1993), 29.

Yigdal Erlich, "The Yozma Group--Policy and Success Factors,"
http://www.insme.org/documenti/Yozma_presentation.pdf, 2007.

Michael Ewens, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, "Cost of Experimentation and the
Evolution of Venture Capital," Journal of Financial Economics 128 (2018), 422-442.

Robert W Fairlie and Magnus Lofstrom, "Immigration and Entrepreneurship," in Handbook of
the Economics of International Migration, Barry R. Chiswick and Paul W. Miller (editors),
Amsterdam: North Holland, 2015, pp.877-911.

Maryann P. Feldman and Johanna L. Francis, "Fortune Favors the Prepared Region: The Case of
Entrepreneurship and the Capitol Region Biotechnology Cluster," European Planning Studies 11
(2003), 765­88.

Emily Feng, "China's state-owned venture capital funds battle to make an impact", Financial
Times, December 23, 2018, https://www.ft.com/content/4fa2caaa-f9f0-11e8-af46-2022a0b02a6c.

Richard Florida and Ian Hathaway, The Rise of the Startup City, Washington, Center for
American Entrepreneurship, 2018.

Michael Fogarty and Amit Sinha, "Why Older Industrial Regions Can't Generalize from Route
128 and Silicon Valley: University-Industry Relationships and Regional Innovation Systems," in
Industrializing Knowledge, Lewis M. Branscomb, editor, Cambridge, MIT Press, 1999, pp. 473­
509.

David M. Gold, "Cleantech Stimulus Not Very Stimulating," GreenGold Blog, September 29,
2009, http://www.greengoldblog.com/2009/09/cleantech-stimulus-not-very-stimulating.html.

Paul Gompers, "Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital." Journal
of Finance, 50 (1995), 1461-1490.

Paul Gompers, Will Gornall, Steven Kaplan and Ilya Strebulaev, "How Do Venture Capitalists
Make Decisions?" Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.




                                               19
Felda Hardymon, Ann Leamon, and Josh Lerner, "Canada Pension Plan Investment Board,"
Harvard Business School Case no. 809-073, 2009

Miguel Helft, "A Kink in Venture Capital's Gold Chain," New York Times, October 7, 2006,
https://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/07/business/07venture.html

Sabrina T. Howell, "Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants," American Economic
Review 107 (2017), 1136-64.

Victoria Ivashina and Josh Lerner, Patent Capital: The Challenges and Promises of Long-Term
Investing, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2019

Hilary Kao, "Beyond Solyndra: Examining the Department of Energy's Loan Guarantee
Program," William and Mary Environmental Law and Policy Review 37 (2013) 425-___.

Steven N. Kaplan and Per Stromberg, "Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World: An
Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts." Review of Economic Studies 70 (2013), 281-
315.

Steven N. Kaplan and Per Stromberg, "Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence from
Venture Capitalist Analyses," Journal of Finance 109 (2004), 2173­2206.

Sari P. Kerr and William R. Kerr, "Immigrant Entrepreneurship," in Measuring Entrepreneurial
Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda,
and Antoinette Schoar (editors), Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2017, pp. 187 ­ 249.

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, "Vision 2030," https://vision2030.gov.sa/en/programs/PIF, 2019.

Scott Kirsner, "Does Lobbying Always Pay?" Innovation Economy Blog, August 6, 2009,
http://www.boston.com/business/technology/innoeco/2009/08/does_lobbying_always_pay.html.

Josh Lerner, 1999, "The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run Effects of the SBIR
Program," Journal of Business 72 (1999), 285-318.

Josh Lerner, Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and
Venture Capital Have Failed--and What to Do About It. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2009.

Josh Lerner, The Architecture of Innovation, Boston and London: Harvard Business Press and
Oxford University Press, 2012.

Josh Lerner, David Moore, and Stuart Shepherd, A Study of New Zealand's Venture Capital
Market and Implications for Public Policy: A Report to the Ministry of Research Science and
Technology, Auckland: LECG, 2005.




                                              20
Josh Lerner, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Nathaniel Burbank, "Canada Pension Plan Investment
Board: October 2012," Harvard Business School Case no. 813-103, 2013.

Eric Lipton and Clifford Krauss, "A Gold Rush of Subsidies in Clean Energy Search," New York
Times, November 12, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/12/business/energy-environment/a-
cornucopia-of-help-for-renewable-energy.html?_r=1&nl=todaysheadlines&emc=tha2.

MAGNiTT, Q3 2019 MENA Venture Investment Summary, Dubai, MAGNiTT, 2019.

Tim Mullaney, "Lobbyists Are First Winners in Obama's Clean-Technology Push," Bloomberg
Business News, March 25, 2009,
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601109&sid=aNH.vsK2D.lQ&refer=home.

Darwin V. Neher, "Staged Financing: An Agency Perspective," Review of Economic Studies 66
(1999), 255­274.

Mancur Olson, The Logic of Collective Action, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1965.

"Oppose Wasteful $10 Billion Increase for DOE Nuclear Loan Guarantee Program," Letter from
Taxpayers for Common Sense, December 10, 2010,
http://www.taxpayer.net/search_by_tag.php?action=view&proj_id=4063&tag=loan%20guarante
es&type=Project.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Venture Capital Policy Review:
Israel, STI Working Paper no. 2003/3, Paris, OECD, 2003.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Financing SMEs and Entrepreneurs
2018: An OECD Scoreboard, Paris, OECD, 2019.

Shai Oster and Lulu Yilun Chen, "Inside China's Historic $338 Billion Tech Startup
Experiment," Bloomberg Business News, March 8, 2016,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-08/china-state-backed-venture-funds-tripled-
to-338-billion-in-2015;

Sam Peltzman, "Towards a More General Theory of Regulation," Journal of Law and Economics
19 (1976), 211­40.

Thomas J. Prusa and James A. Schmitz Jr., "Can Companies Maintain Their Initial Innovation
Thrust? A Study of the PC Software Industry," Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (1994),
523­40.

Jason Rowley, "Chinese Startups Net Smallest Share of Global VC Investment in Years",
Crunchbase News, July 18, 2019, https://news.crunchbase.com/news/chinese-startups-net-
smallest-share-of-global-vc-investment-in-years/.




                                              21
Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, New York, Harper & Brothers,
1942.

Iman Seoudi, and Salma Mahmoud, "Public Policy for Venture Capital: A Comparative Study
of Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Egypt," Review of Business & Finance Studies 7, (2016), 19-42.

Dan Senor and Saul Singer, Start-up Nation: The Story of Israel's Economic Miracle, New York,
Twelve, 2009.

Lucinda Shen, "China is the Biggest Venture Capital Firm in the World," Fortune, March 9,
2016, https://fortune.com/2016/03/09/investors-venture-capital-china/.

Hayat Sindi, "Building the Entrepreneurial Ecosystem in Saudi Arabia and the Middle East," in
Social Entrepreneurship in the Middle East, Dima Jamali and Alessandro Lanteri (editors),
London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015, volume 2, pp. 63-88.

Sean Sposito, "A123 Gets $249m in Stimulus Funding," Boston Globe, August 6, 2009, B5,
http://archive.boston.com/business/articles/2009/08/06/a123systems_receives_249m_in_stimulus
_funds/.

"Special Report--Capital Transfusion Renewal," Venture Capital Journal 20 (July 1980), 6-8.

George Stigler, "The Economic Theory of Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics 2 (1971), 3­
21

Richard Townsend, "The Propagation of Financial Shocks: The Case of Venture Capital,"
Management Science 61 (2015), 2782-2802

Manuel Trajtenberg, "Government Support for Commercial R&D: Lessons from the Israeli
Experience," Innovation Policy and the Economy 2 (2002), 79­134.

U.S. Small Business Administration, FY 2017 SBIR/STTR Annual Report, Washington, Small
Business Administration, 2018.

Barry R. Weingast, Kenneth A. Shepsle, and Christopher Johnsen, "The Political Economy of
Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics," Journal of Political
Economy 89 (1981), 642-664.

Jing Yang, "China's Venture Capital Boom Is Over, Leaving Investors High and Dry," Wall
Street Journal, November 15, 2019, https://www.morningstar.com/news/dow-
jones/201911144209/chinas-venture-capital-boom-is-over-leaving-investors-high-and-dry.




                                              22
