                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INFERENCE FOR RANKS WITH APPLICATIONS TO MOBILITY ACROSS NEIGHBORHOODS
              AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT ACROSS COUNTRIES

                                            Magne Mogstad
                                           Joseph P. Romano
                                             Azeem Shaikh
                                            Daniel Wilhelm

                                         Working Paper 26883
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26883


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2020




 The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research. Azeem Shaikh acknowledges support from the National Science
 Foundation (SES-1530661). Daniel Wilhelm acknowledges support from the ESRC Centre for Microdata
 Methods and Practice at IFS (RES-589-28-0001) and the European Research Council (Starting Grant
 No. 852332). We thank Sergei Bazylik and Eyo Herstad for excellent research assistance and the following
 individuals for helpful comments: Raj Chetty, Nathan Hendren, Helmut Küchenhoff, and David Ritzwoller.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Magne Mogstad, Joseph P. Romano, Azeem Shaikh, and Daniel Wilhelm. All rights reserved.
 Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inference for Ranks with Applications to Mobility across Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement
across Countries
Magne Mogstad, Joseph P. Romano, Azeem Shaikh, and Daniel Wilhelm
NBER Working Paper No. 26883
March 2020, Revised May 2020
JEL No. C0,I0,J0

                                                ABSTRACT

It is often desired to rank different populations according to the value of some feature of each population.
For example, it may be desired to rank neighborhoods according to some measure of intergenerational
mobility or countries according to some measure of academic achievement. These rankings are invariably
computed using estimates rather than the true values of these features. As a result, there may be considerable
uncertainty concerning the rank of each population. In this paper, we consider the problem of accounting
for such uncertainty by constructing confidence sets for the rank of each population. We consider both
the problem of constructing marginal confidence sets for the rank of a particular population as well
as simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of all populations. We show how to construct such confidence
sets under weak assumptions. An important feature of all of our constructions is that they remain computationally
feasible even when the number of populations is very large. We apply our theoretical results to re-examine
the rankings of both neighborhoods in the United States in terms of intergenerational mobility and
developed countries in terms of academic achievement. The conclusions about which countries do
best and worst at reading, math, and science are fairly robust to accounting for uncertainty. By comparison,
several celebrated findings about intergenerational mobility in the United States are not robust to taking
uncertainty into account.


Magne Mogstad                                           Azeem Shaikh
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                   University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street                                   1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                       Chicago IL 60637
and NBER                                                amshaikh@uchicago.edu
magne.mogstad@gmail.com
                                                        Daniel Wilhelm
Joseph P. Romano                                        Gower Street
Department of Statistics                                London WC1E 6BT
Stanford University                                     United Kingdom
Sequoia Hall                                            d.wilhelm@ucl.ac.uk
390 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
romano@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

Rankings of different populations according to the value of some feature of each population are ubiquitous.
Interest in such rankings stem from their ability to convey succinct answers to various questions, such as
whether a particular population is "good" or "bad" in terms of the value of this feature relative to other
populations, or which populations are "best" or "worst" in terms of the value of this feature. A prominent
example from the recent economics literature is provided by Chetty et al. (2014, 2018) and Chetty and
Hendren (2018), in which different populations correspond to different neighborhoods in the United States
and the feature by which it is desired to rank them is some measure of intergenerational mobility. A
further example of contemporary interest is provided by the Programme for International Student Assessment
(PISA), in which different populations correspond to different countries and the feature by which it is desired
to rank them is some measure of academic achievement. These rankings are invariably computed using
estimates rather than the true values of these features. As a result, there may be considerable uncertainty
concerning the rank of each population.

    In this paper, we consider the problem of accounting for such uncertainty by constructing confidence
sets for the rank of each population. We consider both marginal confidence sets for the rank of a particular
population, i.e., random sets that contain the rank of the particular population of interest with probability
approximately no less than some pre-specified level, as well as simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of
all populations, i.e., random sets that contain the ranks of all populations with probability approximately
no less than some pre-specified level. The former confidence sets provide a way of accounting for uncertainty
when answering questions pertaining to the rank of a particular population, whereas the latter confidence
sets provide a way of accounting for uncertainty when answering questions pertaining to the ranks of all
populations. We show how to construct both types of confidence sets under weak assumptions. An impor-
tant feature of all of our constructions is that they remain computationally feasible even when the number
of populations is very large. We apply our inference procedures to re-examine the rankings of both neigh-
borhoods in the United States in terms of intergenerational mobility and developed countries in terms of
academic achievement.

    For each of the preceding confidence sets, we first show how they can be constructed using simultaneous
confidence sets for differences across the populations in the values of the features. The main requirement
underlying our analysis is only that these latter confidence sets for the differences are suitably valid. We show,
however, that it is possible to improve upon this construction using a suitable multiple hypothesis testing
problem without imposing any further assumptions. In this sense, the assumptions involved in establishing
our formal results are weak. A novel feature of the multiple hypothesis testing problem we consider is that it
requires control of the mixed-directional familywise error rate rather than simply the familywise error rate.
As the terminology suggests, the distinction between these two error rates is that the former penalizes not
only false rejections, like the latter, but also false directional assertions. For further discussion, see Bauer
et al. (1986) as well as Sections 3.2.2 and 3.3.2 below.

   As a specific example of the way in which the aforementioned confidence sets may be used by researchers,
we examine in more depth the question of identifying which populations are among the top (or the bottom).
For concreteness, we define a population to be among the top if its rank is less than or equal to a pre-
specified value  . In order to account for uncertainty when answering this question, it may be desired to
construct what we refer to subsequently as a confidence set for the  -best populations, i.e., a random set that


                                                        2
contains the identities of these populations with probability approximately no less than some pre-specified
level. While it is possible to use simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of all populations to construct
such confidence sets, we show that it is possible to improve upon this construction without imposing any
further assumptions.

   In order to illustrate the widespread applicability of our inference procedure, we use it to re-examine the
rankings of both neighborhoods in the United States in terms of intergenerational mobility and developed
countries in terms of academic achievement. The former application uses data from Chetty et al. (2014,
2018), while the latter application uses data from the 2018 PISA test. In each application, we apply our
methodology to compute (i) the marginal confidence sets for the rank of a given place, (ii) the simultaneous
confidence sets for the ranks of all places, and (iii) the confidence sets for the  -best (or the  -worst) places.

    Before describing our empirical results, we emphasize that (i)­(iii) answer distinct economic questions.
Consider, for example, the application to intergenerational mobility and neighborhoods. Marginal confidence
sets answer the question of whether a given place has relatively high or low income mobility compared to
other places. Thus, (i) is relevant if one is interested in whether a particular place is among the worst or
the best places to grow up in terms of income mobility. Simultaneous confidence sets allow such inferences
to be drawn simultaneously across all places. Thus, (ii) is relevant if one is interested in broader geographic
patterns of income mobility across the United States. By comparison, confidence sets for the  -best (or
 -worst) answer the more specific question of which places cannot be ruled out as being among the areas
with the most (least) income mobility. In other words, (iii) is relevant if one is interested in only the top (or
bottom) of a league table of neighborhoods by income mobility.

   In our analysis of data from the 2018 PISA test, we find that the conclusions about which developed
countries do best and worst at reading, math, and science are fairly robust to accounting for uncertainty.
Both the marginal and simultaneous confidence sets are relatively narrow, especially for the countries at the
top and the bottom of the PISA league tables. Indeed, only a small set of countries cannot be ruled out as
being among the top or bottom three in terms of scholastic performance.

    In our analysis of data from Chetty et al. (2014, 2018), we find that several celebrated findings about
intergenerational income mobility in the United States are not robust to taking uncertainty into account.
The key outputs from these studies were "local statistics" on upward mobility across commuting zones or
counties. The stated goal was to draw the attention of policymakers to low-mobility neighborhoods that
need improvement and to help low-income families move to high-mobility neighborhoods. We examine
how informative these local statistics are about a given neighborhood having relatively high or low income
mobility compared to other neighborhoods.

    The most robust findings are obtained if we restrict attention to the 50 most populous commuting zones
or counties. In that case, both the marginal and joint confidence sets are relatively narrow, and few places
cannot be ruled out as being among the top or bottom five. By comparison, in the national ranking of all
commuting zones or counties by income mobility, it is rarely possible to determine with statistical confidence
whether a given place has relatively high or low income mobility compared to other places. Notable exceptions
include many of the commuting zones in the Southeast and in the Great Plains. Another key finding is that
the rankings of even the most populous commuting zones or counties become largely uninformative if one
uses movers across areas to address concerns about selection.

   In order to highlight the importance and policy relevance of these findings, we revisit the recent Creating


                                                        3
Moves to Opportunity Experiment (CMTO) of Bergman et al. (2019). With the aim of helping families
move to neighborhoods with higher mobility rates, the authors conduct a randomized controlled trial with
housing voucher recipients in Seattle and King County. A treatment group of low-income families were offered
assistance and financial support to find and lease units in areas that were classified as high upward-mobility
neighborhoods within the county. The authors define high upward-mobility neighborhoods as Census tracts
with point estimates of upward mobility among the top third of the tracts in the county. We show that
the areas defined as high upward-mobility neighborhoods do not have statistically higher mobility rates as
compared to the other tracts. The classification of a given area as a high upward-mobility neighborhood
may therefore simply reflect statistical uncertainty, not actual differences in upward mobility. In this sense,
one cannot be confident the experiment actually helped low-income families move to neighborhoods with
higher upward mobility.

    Our paper is most closely related to a recent paper by Klein et al. (2018), who consider the problem of
constructing confidence sets analogous to ours. The main difference between their constructions and ours is
that they rely upon simultaneous confidence sets for the values of the features for all populations, whereas, as
mentioned previously, we exploit simultaneous confidence sets for differences in the values of the features for
certain pairs of populations. In Remark 3.10 and Appendix B, we show that their confidence sets are always
at least as large as ours when there are only two populations or in the homogeneous case with common
variances and sample sizes when thre are more than two populations. More importantly, we show that
their method cannot in general produce smaller confidence sets with positive probability uniformly across
populations. While it is unknown if even one component may be smaller with positive probability, we find
in our simulations that their approach generally leads to confidence sets that are much larger than ours for
all populations.

    Other related work includes Goldstein and Spiegelhalter (1996), who propose the use of resampling
methods such as the bootstrap to account for the type of uncertainty with which we are concerned. In
the context of the PISA study, for instance, such a bootstrap procedure has been used to report "range
of ranks" (see OECD (2019, Annex A3)). As explained by Hall and Miller (2009) and Xie et al. (2009),
however, such methods perform poorly when some populations have features whose values are "close" to
one another. In Remark 3.7 and Appendix A, we show that the bootstrap does not satisfy the coverage
requirement when there are more than two populations. Motivated by these observations, Xie et al. (2009)
propose an alternative method for accounting for uncertainty based on combining resampling with a smooth
estimator of the rank which requires, among other things, delicate choices of user-specified "bandwidths".
Our constructions, by contrast, require no such tuning parameters. Finally, we emphasize that the problem
treated in our paper is distinct from that treated in Andrews et al. (2018), who instead develop methods for
inference for the value of the feature of the (random) population that is ranked highest using the estimated
values of these features. The substantive questions of interest in our applications are therefore not amenable
to these methods.

    The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we illustrate the logic underlying our
inference procedures in a stylized example using a subset of the data from one of our empirical applications.
Section 3 then introduces our general setup, including a formal description of the confidence sets we consider.
We first discuss the construction of a marginal confidence set for the rank of a particular population and then
turn our attention to the construction of simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of all populations. As
mentioned previously, in each case, we begin by describing a simple construction that relies on simultaneous


                                                       4
confidence sets for certain pairs of populations before showing how to improve upon this construction using
an appropriately chosen multiple hypothesis testing problem. In Section 4, we examine the finite-sample
behavior of our inference procedure via a simulation study, including a comparison with the method proposed
by Klein et al. (2018). Finally, in Section 5, we apply our inference procedures to re-examine the rankings
of both developed countries in terms of academic achievement and neighborhoods in the United States in
terms of intergenerational mobility.



2    Inference for Ranks in a Stylized Example

Suppose it is desired to rank five commuting zones (CZs) in the United States by a measure of upward
intergenerational mobility. Denote by rj the rank of CZ j based on the mobility measure j . Panel A of
Figure 1 shows estimated mobility measures      ^j with 95% marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or
minus twice the standard error) for five CZs from our dataset in Section 5.2. Linton and Albany have the
highest and lowest mobility estimates among these five CZs and thus the smallest (^ rj = 1 for j = Linton) and
highest (^                                                               ^
          rj = 5 for j = Albany) estimated ranks, respectively. Since j is an estimate of j , the estimated
rank r^j may not equal the true rank rj . In particular, Linton need not have the highest mobility and Albany
need not have the lowest mobility.

    Table 1 summarizes the results of accounting for uncertainty in the ranks of these five CZs using (i)
marginal confidence sets for the rank of a single CZ, (ii) simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of all
CZs (i.e., for the entire ranking), and (iii) confidence sets containing the  -best CZs. We first report the
estimated ranks as well as the point estimates and their standard errors. As explained further below, these
data are all that is required to compute (i)­(iii). The sixth column reports the first set of results, marginal
confidence sets for the rank of each CZ. The second set of results is reported in the seventh column, which
displays simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of all CZs. In general, the simultaneous confidence sets
are at least as large as the marginal ones, but in this example they are identical. The last set of results
is reported in the final column, showing the number of CZs contained in the confidence set for the  -best,
where  varies from one to five across the rows. For instance, with at least 95% confidence, there is only one
CZ that can be the best and there are four CZs that can be among the top two.

    The remainder of this section describes how we arrive at the three set of results in Table 1 in the context
of this example.


Inference on the rank of a particular CZ

Suppose we are interested in the rank of Trenton. From Panel A of Figure 1, we see that its estimated rank
is three, but the mobility estimate is close to that of Gordon and Jordan's mobility estimate has a large
standard error, so one might be uncertain whether Trenton's rank is in fact larger or smaller than three. In
order to move beyond this conjecture, we use the following two-step procedure to construct a confidence set
for Trenton's rank.

   First, we consider the differences in mobility estimates between Trenton and all other CZs. It is clear
that only the signs of the differences in mobility estimates between Trenton and all other CZs being positive
or negative determine Trenton's rank. These differences are displayed in Panel B of Figure 1 together


                                                      5
                                                                                      95% CS
                       Rank                        CZ     ^j
                                                                     SE        marg.        simul.          -best
                             1        1       Linton     0.608   0.014         [1,    1]     [1,   1]          1
                             2        2       Gordon     0.443   0.010         [2,    4]     [2,   4]          4
                             3        3       Trenton    0.433   0.010         [2,    4]     [2,   4]          4
                             4        4       Jordan     0.413   0.050         [2,    5]     [2,   5]          5
                             5        5       Albany     0.331   0.002         [4,    5]     [4,   5]          5

Table 1: Commuting zones (CZs) ranked by the estimated intergenerational mobility measure          ^j . "SE"
                                ^
refers to the standard error of j . "95% CS (marg.)" refers to the 95% marginal confidence set for the rank,
"95% CS (simul.)" to the 95% simultaneous confidence set for all ranks, and " -best" refers to the size of
the 95% confidence set for the " -best" CZs.

                             A: Absolute mobility, ^                           B: Differences in mobility between Trenton and other CZs, ^
                                                     j                                                                                     j,k




       Albany
                                                                     Albany



       Jordan
                                                                     Jordan


       Trenton


                                                                     Gordon
       Gordon



                                                                      Linton
        Linton


                 0.3   0.4                   0.5         0.6                   -0.2             -0.1               0.0                0.1




Figure 1: Panel A shows the estimated mobility with 95% (marginal) confidence sets (estimates plus or minus
twice the standard error) for five CZs. Panel B shows the estimated differences in mobility between Trenton
and all other CZs, together with 95% (simultaneous) confidence sets. Each marginal confidence set covers a
single mobility measure with probability 95% whereas the simultaneous confidence sets simultaneously cover
all differences in mobility measures with probability 95%.


with 95% simultaneous confidence sets. Simultaneous coverage of this confidence set is important. In
order to explain the simultaneous coverage property, it is useful to introduce some further notation. To
this end, let ^ j,k be the estimator of the difference in mobility j,k  j - k for j = Trenton and k 
{Linton, Gordon, Jordan, Albany}. The confidence set in Panel B of Figure 1 is the product of four confidence
sets so the probability of it simultaneously covering all four differences j,k for j = Trenton and k 
{Linton, Gordon, Jordan, Albany} is at least 95%. The bounds for the simultaneous confidence sets depend
on quantiles from the distribution of the maximum (over k ) of the differences   ^ j,k - j,k . In Section 3.1,
we explain how such quantiles may be approximated using the bootstrap, but other constructions are also
possible.

    Second, given the simultaneous confidence set for the differences in mobility, we count how many of
the individual confidence sets lie entirely above and below zero. The first confidence set, which is for the
difference in mobility between Trenton and Linton, lies entirely below zero. Therefore, we can conclude that
Linton has significantly higher mobility than Trenton and thus must be ranked strictly better than Trenton.
The differences in mobility between Trenton and either Gordon and Jordan are not significantly different



                                                                 6
                   A: Two-sided confidence set for all differences in mobility                     B: Two-sided confidence set for the ranking


         Albany                                                                      Albany



         Jordan                                                                      Jordan




         Trenton                                                                     Trenton




         Gordon                                                                      Gordon




          Linton                                                                      Linton



                        -0.2                   0.0                   0.2                       1        2              3               4         5




Figure 2: Panel A shows all estimated differences in mobility, together with 95% (simultaneous) two-sided
confidence sets. Panel B shows estimated ranks together with 95% (simultaneous) two-sided confidence sets.


from zero, so these three CZs cannot be ranked relative to each other. The confidence set for the difference
in mobility between Trenton and Albany lies entirely above zero, so that Albany must be ranked strictly
worse than Trenton. Using the notation of the subsequent sections, there is one CZ that must be ranked
                   -                                                         +
strictly better, |Nj | = 1, and one CZ that must be ranked strictly worse, |Nj | = 1. The confidence set for
the rank of Trenton among the p = 5 CZs is therefore

                                                               -                      +
                                                     Rn,j = {|Nj | + 1, . . . , p - |Nj |} = {2, 3, 4} .

By virtue of the simultaneous coverage property for the differences described above, this set contains the
rank rj of Trenton with probability at least 95%.

    While simple in nature, the preceding procedure illustrates the logic underlying all of our constructions.
In Section 3.2.2, we show that the confidence set Rn,j can be improved through the use of a suitable stepwise
multiple testing procedure. In the first step of the procedure, some CZs are determined to be ranked higher
or lower than the CZ of interest in exactly the manner described above; in subsequent steps, further CZs
are possibly determined to be ranked higher or lower than the CZ of interest by appropriately accounting
for those that were determined to be ranked higer or lower in previous steps. This process continues until
no further CZs can be determined to be ranked higher or lower than the CZ of interest.


Inference on the entire ranking

In order to construct a simultaneous confidence set for the entire ranking of all five CZs, rather than only for
Trenton, the approach is modified in the following fashion. We begin by computing every possible difference in
mobility estimates between all CZs, not only those involving Trenton. These differences are shown in Panel A
of Figure 2 together with simultaneous confidence sets. In this case, the confidence sets simultaneously cover
all differences j,k , for all j, k  {Linton, Gordon, Trenton, Jordan, Albany} with j = k . For each CZ j , we
then count how many confidence sets k lie above and below zero. For instance, for j = Trenton, we obtain
the same result as above, namely that one confidence set lies entirely below and one lies entirely above zero,
      -               +                                                                  -              +
so |Nj   | = 1 and |Nj  | = 1. For j = Linton, all confidence sets lie above zero, so |Nj  | = 0 and |Nj  | = 4.
The confidence sets for each CZ are then constructed using these counts just as above.

                                                                                 7
                 A: One-sided confidence set for all differences in mobility                     B: One-sided confidence set for the ranking


       Albany                                                                      Albany



       Jordan                                                                      Jordan




       Trenton                                                                     Trenton




       Gordon                                                                      Gordon




        Linton                                                                      Linton



      0.4             0.2              0.0             -0.2             -0.4                 1        2              3               4         5




Figure 3: Panel A shows all estimated differences in mobility, together with 95% (simultaneous) one-sided
confidence sets. Panel B shows estimated ranks together with 95% (simultaneous) one-sided confidence sets.


   The result of this procedure is shown in Panel B of Figure 2. The confidence set for Linton contains only
rank one, but the confidence sets for the other CZs contain two to four values. By virtue of the simultaneous
coverage property for the differences, the product of the five CZ-specific confidence sets for the ranks si-
multaneously covers the ranks of all CZs, i.e., rj for all j  {Linton, Gordon, Trenton, Jordan, Albany}, with
probability at least 95%.

    In Section 3.3.2, we show that this simple construction can also be improved through the use of a multiple
testing procedure that parallels the one that we use for the marginal confidence set.


Confidence sets containing the  -best CZs

Suppose it is desired to determine which of the five CZs could be among the  = 2 best CZs. From Panel A
of Figure 1, we see that Linton and Gordon have ranks one and two, but the mobility estimate of Trenton
is close to that of Gordon and Jordan's mobility estimate has large standard errors, so one might consider
that Trenton or Jordan could also be among the top two CZs. The following procedure provides a means of
accounting for this uncertainty formally.
                                                              2-best
   Denote the set of CZs which are among the two best as J0           {j : rj  2}. This set contains at least
two CZs and strictly more than two when CZs are tied at rank one or two. We want to construct a set
 2-best                        2-best
Jn      that contains the set J0      with probability at least 95%.

    A simple approach is based on one-sided simultaneous confidence sets for all ranks. Figure 3 repeats the
computations for Figure 2 except the simultaneous confidence sets for the differences are one-sided (upper
bounds) and the resulting simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks are therefore also one-sided (lower
                 joint
bounds). Let Rn,j      be the j th dimension of the one-sided confidence set for the ranking, i.e., the confidence
set for rj in Panel B of Figure 3. In order to construct a set with the desired coverage property, it suffices
                                   joint
to collect all CZs j for which Rn,j      contains the value two, i.e.,

                                2-best            joint
                               Jn      = {j : 2  Rn,j   } = {Linton, Gordon, Trenton, Jordan} .

By virtue of the coverage property of the simultaneous confidence set for the ranking, this set covers the set of

                                                                               8
                     2-best
the two best CZs, J0        , with probability at least 95%. While this "projection" approach for constructing
the confidence set is parsimonious and intuitive, improvements may be possible by realizing that a CZ can be
among the top two if and only if at most one other CZ (without regard to its identity) has higher mobility.
                                                                               joint
By comparison, the one-sided simultaneous confidence sets for all ranks Rn           encodes some information
about which CZs have higher mobility than another. In Section 3.4, we propose a more "direct" procedure
based on exploiting the insight and show through simulations that it leads to smaller confidence sets.


Key features of the inference approach

Section 3 formally shows that, under weak assumptions, the above three constructions of confidence sets
asymptotically control the probability of covering the objects of interest at the desired level (95% in the
example of this section) uniformly over a large class of possible distributions for the observed data. The
following two aspects of the theoretical results are especially important in our empirical applications and
can already be understood in the context of the example in Panel A of Figure 1.

    First, in our applications, we see that many estimates        ^j are close to one other, such as the mobility
estimates of Gordon and Trenton in the preceding example. It is therefore important to develop inference
methods that do not break down when some (or even all) measures j are (close to) equal to one another.
Formally, our confidence sets achieve this goal because we show that they guarantee coverage uniformly over
a large family of distributions for the observed data, and hence uniformly over all configurations of measures
1 , . . . , p , irrespectively of whether some (or even all) of them are (close to) equal to each other.

   Second, our confidence sets satisfy the uniform coverage requirement under weak conditions. In particular,
the distributions of  ^j - j are allowed to vary across j . Such heterogeneity is salient in our empirical
applications and its importance can already be seen in Panel A of Figure 1: Trenton's mobility estimate has
much smaller standard error than that of Jordan, but much larger than that of Albany.



3     General Setup and Main Results

3.1    Setup and Notation

Let j  J  {1, . . . , p} index populations of interest. Denote by Pj distributions characterizing the different
populations and by (Pj ) the associated features by which it is desired to rank them. In the example of
Section 2, j denotes a county, (Pj ) is a measure of intergenerational mobility in county j , and Pj is the
distribution from which we observe data for estimation of the feature (Pj ). The rank of population j is
defined as
                                      rj (P )  1 +      1{(Pk ) > (Pj )},
                                                    kJ

where P is a distribution with marginals Pj for j  J , and 1{A} is equal to one if the event A holds and
equal to zero otherwise. Let (P )  ((P1 ), . . . , (Pp )) and r(P )  (r(P1 ), . . . , rp (Pp )) . Before proceeding,
a simple example illustrates the way in which ties are handled with this definition of ranks: if (P ) =
(4, 1, 1, 3, 3, 3, 6) , then r(P ) = (2, 6, 6, 3, 3, 3, 1) .




                                                         9
    The primary goal is to construct confidence sets for the rank of a particular population or for the ranks of
all populations simultaneously. More precisely, for a given value of   (0, 1), we use a sample of observations
from P to construct (random) sets Rn,j such that

                                       lim inf inf P {rj (P )  Rn,j }  1 -                                           (1)
                                        n P P


for a pre-specified population j  J , where P denotes a "large" nonparametric family of distributions. Here,
n denotes a measure of the size of the sample, typically the minimum sample size across populations. We
                                joint         joint
also construct (random) sets Rn        j J Rn,j     such that

                                                            joint
                                      lim inf inf P r(P )  Rn     1- .                                               (2)
                                       n P P

                                       joint
In all of our constructions, Rn,j and Rn,j   are subsets of J , allowing for the possibility that the lower endpoint
is 1 or the upper endpoint is p to permit both one-sided and two-sided inference. Below, sets satisfying (1)
are referred to as marginal confidence sets for the rank of a single population and sets satisfying (2) as
simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of all populations.

   In addition, we consider the goal of constructing confidence sets for the identities of all populations whose
rank is less than or equal to a pre-specified value   J , i.e, for a given value of   (0, 1), we construct
                 -best
(random) sets Jn       that are subsets of J and satisfy

                                                  -best         -best
                                  lim inf inf P J0      (P )  Jn      1- ,                                           (3)
                                   n P P


where
                                          -best
                                        J0      (P )  {j  J : rj (P )   } .

Sets satisfying (3) are referred to as confidence sets for the  -best populations.

   Much of the analysis relies upon confidence sets Cn (1 - , S ) for sets of pairwise differences,

                                          S (P )  (j,k (P ) : (j, k )  S ) ,

where j,k (P )  (Pj ) - (Pk ) and S  {(j, k )  J × J : j = k }. We require these to be rectangular in the
sense that
                               Cn (1 - , S ) =      Cn (1 - , S, (j, k ))                             (4)
                                                       (j,k)S

for suitable sets {Cn (1 - , S, (j, k )) : (j, k )  S }. Furthermore, we assume that they satisfy

                                  lim inf inf P {S (P )  Cn (1 - , S )}  1 -  .                                      (5)
                                  n P P



    We now describe some examples of confidence sets that satisfy these two conditions. Let            ^1 , . . . , ^p be
estimators of the features (P1 ), . . . , (Pp ) and  2
                                                    ^j,k an estimator of the variance of ^j - ^k . For S  {(j, k ) 




                                                           10
J × J : j = k }, define the following cumulative distribution functions:

                                                               ^j - 
                                                                    ^k - j,k (P )
                         Llower,n (x, S, P )  P        max                        x       ,                      (6)
                                                      (j,k)S          ^j,k

                                                               j,k (P ) - ( ^j - ^k )
                         Lupper,n (x, S, P )  P        max                            x       ,                  (7)
                                                      (j,k)S           ^j,k

                                                               |^j - ^k - j,k (P )|
                        Lsymm,n (x, S, P )  P          max                          x         .                  (8)
                                                      (j,k)S           ^j,k

                                                           ^n of P to define the following confidence sets:
Further consider estimators of (6) ­ (8) using an estimate P


                 Clower,n (1 - , S )                ^j - ^k - ^j,k L- 1               ^
                                                                    lower,n (1 - , S, Pn ),  ,                   (9)
                                           (j,k)S


                 Cupper,n (1 - , S )                 - , ^j - ^k + ^j,k L- 1               ^
                                                                         upper,n (1 - , S, Pn ) ,               (10)
                                           (j,k)S


                 Csymm,n (1 - , S )                 ^j - ^k ± ^j,k L- 1              ^
                                                                    symm,n (1 - , S, Pn ) ,                     (11)
                                           (j,k)S
                                                                                    
                  Cequi,n (1 - , S )  Clower,n 1 -          ,S       Cupper,n 1 -     ,S .                      (12)
                                                          2                         2

Here, it is understood that, for a cumulative distribution function F (x) on the real line, the quantity
F -1 (1 - ) is defined to be inf {x  R : F (x)  1 - }; it is also understood that, for real numbers a
and b, [a ± b] is defined to be [a - b, a + b]. If the estimators ^1 , . . . , ^p are jointly asymptotically normally
                                    -1             ^n ), t  {lower, upper, symm}, can be computed from the
distributed, then the quantiles Lt,n (1 - , S, P
limiting distributions of the max-statistics in (6)­(8), e.g., through simulation. Alternatively, resampling
methods such as the bootstrap or subsampling may be employed.

    The four confidence sets in (9)­(12) can be viewed as nonparametric generalizations of Tukey (1953)'s
method for all pairwise comparisons and Dunnett (1955)'s method for comparisons with a control. The clas-
sical methods rely on the assumptions of normal populations and equal variances, under which critical values
can be computed using Tukey's studentized range distribution or Dunnet's two-sided range distribution. We
do not impose either of these assumptions, but rather only require an estimate P   ^n of P so that the resulting
confidence set satisfies (5). The argument establishing this condition determines how P and P          ^n should be
defined. For example, suppose we observe an i.i.d. sample X1 , . . . , Xn , where Xi  (Xi,1 , . . . , Xi,p ) has dis-
tribution P . When P is the set of distributions on Rp satisfying a uniform integrability condition, then the
bootstrap and subsampling lead to confidence sets satisfying (5) when (P ) is the population mean vector
and   ^n is the sample mean vector. For other parameters and estimators, see Romano and Shaikh (2012).
This result may also be adapted to the case in which, for each population j  J , we observe nj realizations
from a distribution Pj and the populations are independent of each other, i.e., Xi,j is independent of Xk,l
for all i, j, k, l such that j = l.

Remark 3.1. In light of the above discussion, whether the estimators    ^1 , . . . , ^p are dependent or not does
not pose any conceptual challenges to constructing confidence sets Cn (1 - , S ) satisfying (5).

Remark 3.2. Romano and Shaikh (2012) provide a general theory for establishing (5) in the case when


                                                         11
the number of observations in each population diverges and the number of populations p is fixed. However,
the results can be extended to the high-dimensional case in which p diverges, using, for instance, high-
dimensional central limit theorems in Chernozhukov et al. (2013, 2017, 2019). For relevant results in the
case in which each ^j is a sample mean, see Bai et al. (2019).



3.2     Marginal Confidence Sets for the Rank of a Single Population

3.2.1    A Simple Construction

Suppose we want to construct a confidence set for the rank of population j  J . Define Sj  {(j, k ) : k 
J \ {j }}. For a confidence region Cn (1 - , Sj ) for Sj (P ) that is rectangular in the sense of (4) with
{Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k )) : (j, k )  Sj }, define

                              -
                             Nj        {k  J \ {j } : Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k ))  R- },
                              +
                             Nj        {k  J \ {j } : Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k ))  R+ },

where R+  (0, ) and R- = (-, 0). Using this notation, we have the following result:

Theorem 3.1. If Cn (1 - , S ) satisfies (4) with S = Sj , then, for any P ,

                       -                       +
                   P |Nj | + 1  rj (P )  p - |Nj |  P {Sj (P )  Cn (1 - , Sj )}.

If, in addition, Cn (1 - , S ) also satisfies (5) with S = Sj , then the confidence set

                                               -                      +
                                       Rn,j  |Nj | + 1, . . . , p - |Nj |                                    (13)

satisfies (1).

    The lower bound of the confidence set involves the number confidence sets for the differences Sj (P )
                                 -
which lie entirely below zero, |Nj |. This quantity indicates the number of features (Pk ) that are significantly
                                                                                             -                 +
larger than that of population j . The rank of j must therefore be strictly larger than |Nj    |. Similarly, |Nj |
                                                                                   +
is the number of confidence sets that lie entirely above zero, so that there are |Nj | populations with features
                                                                                                     +
(Pk ) strictly smaller than that of population j . The rank of j can therefore be at most p - |Nj      |.

    The theorem shows that the confidence set Rn,j covers the rank of population j with probability con-
verging to at least 1 - , uniformly over distributions P  P. As mentioned previously, Romano and Shaikh
(2012) provide conditions on P such that Cn (1 - , S ) satisfies (5). The confidence set therefore asymptoti-
cally covers the rank of population j with probability no less than 1 -  even under sequences of distributions
Pn with each Pn  P. In particular, Rn,j covers the rank of j with probability converging to at least 1 - 
even under sequences where some (or all) of (Pk,n ) with k = j approach (Pj,n ) as n  . In this sense,
our results do not require the features (Pk ) to be well separated from that of population j .

Remark 3.3. Choosing a one-sided (two-sided) confidence set Cn (1 - , Sj ) for the differences Sj (P ) leads
to a one-sided (two-sided) confidence set Rn,j for the rank. For instance, suppose Cn (1 - , Sj ) is a lower
bound such as (9). In that case, none of the confidence sets Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k )) can lie entirely below zero,
           -                                                                                                 +
so that |Nj  | = 0 and the resulting confidence set for the rank is an upper bound: Rn,j = {1, . . . , p - |Nj |}.

                                                       12
Similarly, choosing Cn (1 - , Sj ) to be an upper bound such as (10) leads to the one-sided confidence set
            -
Rn,j = {|Nj   | + 1, . . . , p} on the rank.

Remark 3.4. Suppose Cn (1 - , Sj ) satisfies (4)­(5) with S = Sj and that each Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k )) with
(j, k )  Sj is consistent in the sense that its length tends to zero as n  . If in addition all elements
of (P ) are distinct, then Rn,j = rj (P ) with probability approaching one and, as a result, the coverage
probability P {rj (P )  Rn,j } converges to one. This feature follows from the fact that if (Pj ) > (Pk ), then
with probability tending to one, Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k )) lies entirely above zero. Similarly, if (Pj ) < (Pk ),
then with probability tending to one, Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k )) lies entirely below zero.

Remark 3.5. Since the coverage result in Theorem 3.1 only requires the confidence set Cn (1 - , Sj ) to be
rectangular and to satisfy (5), Remark 3.1 implies that there are no conceptual challenges in allowing for
dependence in the estimators  ^1 , . . . , ^p .

Remark 3.6. In the presence of ties, there is some ambiguity in the way in which we define the rank of
a population. Let rj (P )  1 + kJ 1{(Pk ) > (Pj )} and r              ¯j (P )  p - kJ 1{(Pk ) > (Pj )} be the
smallest (i.e., best) and largest (i.e., worst) possible rank of population j . If population j is not tied with
any other population, then rj (P ) = r  ¯j (P ) and the rank is unique. On the other hand, when population j is
tied with at least one other population, then rj (P ) < r   ¯j (P ) and different definitions of the rank may select
different values from the interval Rj (P )  [rj (P ), r ¯j (P )]. Suppose Cn (1 - , S ) satisfies (4) and (5) with
S = Sj . An inspection of the proof of Theorem 3.1 reveals that the confidence set Rn,j not only covers our
definition of the rank, rj (P ), in the sense of (1), but also any other "reasonable" definition of the rank in
the sense that
                                                                   cont
                                     lim inf inf P Rj (P )  Rn,j           1 - ,
                                     n P P

          cont
where Rn,j      [min(Rn,j ), max(Rn,j )] is the interval from the smallest to the largest value in the confidence
set Rn,j . In fact, one can show that there exist distributions P so that the inequality holds with equality:

                                                        cont
                                        lim P Rj (P )  Rn,j  =1- .
                                       n


In this sense, our confidence set is not conservative.

Remark 3.7. In contrast to the confidence set Rn,j , those based on the bootstrap and Bayes approaches
such as those in Goldstein and Spiegelhalter (1996) perform poorly when for some k = j (Pk ) is (close to)
equal to (Pj ). For concreteness, consider the following bootstrap procedure. For a population j , denote
by  ^ the estimator of (Pj ) computed on a bootstrap sample and let r        
                                                                            ^j be the rank computed using the
     j
                       ^         ^
bootstrap estimators 1 , . . . , p . Confidence sets for rj could then be constructed using upper and/or lower
                          
empirical quantiles of r ^j conditional on the data. In Appendix A, we show that this intuitive approach
fails to satisfy the uniform coverage requirement (1) unless p = 2. When there are ties with population j
and p > 2, then the approach even fails the pointwise coverage requirement for a fixed P and, in fact, the
coverage probability tends to zero as p grows. For further discussion, see Xie et al. (2009) and Hall and
Miller (2009). Our approach, on the other hand, does not rely on a consistent estimator of the distribution of
estimated ranks but rather on the availability of simultaneous confidence sets for the differences Sj (P ) with
asymptotically coverage no less than the desired level uniformly over P  P. Such simultaneous confidence
sets are available under weak conditions and, in particular, do not restrict the configuration of the features
(Pj ). In comparison to Xie et al. (2009), our approach also circumvents smoothing of the indicator in the
definition of the ranks and thus the need for choosing such a smoothing parameter.

                                                         13
Remark 3.8. Requiring the confidence sets for the differences Cn (1 - , S ), to be rectangular in the sense
of (4) simplifies the presentation of our approach and the results, but is not essential. In practice, however,
it might be computationally challenging to check whether a "slice" of a non-rectangular confidence region
lies entirely above or below zero.


3.2.2   A Stepwise Improvement

In this section, we propose a stepwise method to improve the confidence set in Theorem 3.1. Our inference
problem shares some similarities with Tukey's simultaneous comparisons of all pairwise means and Dunnet's
comparisons of all means with a common control, which can be improved through the use of stepwise
procedures; see Chapter 8 of Westfall et al. (1999) and Section 9 of Lehmann and Romano (2005). One key
difference, however, is that the application of stepwise methods in our problem requires multiple tests that
control not only the familywise error rate, but also directional errors. Unfortunately, little is known about
control of directional errors in stepwise methods; Guo and Romano (2015) is one of only a few exceptions.

    Consider the construction of a two-sided confidence set for the rank rj (P ) by inverting tests of the family
of two-sided hypotheses,
                              Hj,k : j,k (P ) = 0 versus Kj,k : j,k (P ) = 0                                 (14)

for (j, k )  Sj . A directional error occurs when the null hypothesis is rejected and j,k (P ) is declared
positive when in fact j,k (P ) is negative; similarly, a directional error occurs if j,k (P ) is declared negative
when it is positive. By making directional claims to multiple tests of two-sided hypotheses, one is increasing
the possibility of making errors and it is important to account for the possibility of such directional (or Type
3) errors. Define

                                      -
                                     Sj (P )  {(j, k )  Sj : j,k (P )  0},
                                      +
                                     Sj (P )  {(j, k )  Sj : j,k (P )  0},

which are the sets of pairs of populations whose differences are smaller/larger than or equal to zero, and

                          Rej-
                             j  {(j, k )  Sj : reject Hj,k and claim j,k (P ) < 0},

                          Rej+
                             j  {(j, k )  Sj : reject Hj,k and claim j,k (P ) > 0},


which are the sets of pairs for which a test rejects the difference being equal to zero in favor of it being,
respectively, strictly smaller or larger than zero. The probability of making any mistake, either a false
rejection or an incorrect determination of a sign, is

                                    +
                        mdFWERP  P Sj (P )  Rej-        -          +
                                               j =  or Sj (P )  Rejj =  ,                                    (15)

which is referred to as the mixed directional familywise error rate.

   Our goal is to develop a multiple hypothesis testing procedure for (14) that controls the mdFWER and
                                                                                    -
then obtain the desired two-sided confidence set for the rank rj (P ) by replacing Nj      +
                                                                                      and Nj in (13) by Rej-
                                                                                                           j




                                                       14
and Rej+
       j . We consider multiple hypotheses testing procedures that control the mdFWER in the sense that


                                         lim sup sup mdFWERP                                               (16)
                                          n P P


because the coverage probability of the resulting confidence set is bounded from below by one minus the
mdFWER:
Theorem 3.2. For any P ,

                          P |Rej-                         +
                                j | + 1  rj (P )  p - |Rejj |  1 - mdFWERP .


Furthermore, if Rej-         +
                    j and Rejj are computed by an algorithm for which (16) holds with mdFWERP as defined
in (15), then the confidence set
                                    Rn,j  |Rej-                          +
                                                j | + 1, . . . , p - |Rejj |                       (17)

satisfies (1).

   In order to implement the result in Theorem 3.2 we need to devise a procedure for testing (14) that
controls the mdFWER. To this end, similarly as in Bauer et al. (1986), we propose to test the family of
one-sided hypotheses,
                            Hk,l : k,l (P )  0 versus Kk,l : k,l (P ) > 0                          (18)

for (k, l)  Sj  {(k, l)  J × J : k = l and one of k, l is equal to j }. Note that this family of null hypotheses
includes the hypotheses j,k (P )  0 and k,j (P )  0. With

                              -
                          Rej j  {(j, k )  Sj : reject Hk,j and claim j,k (P ) < 0},
                              +
                          Rej j  {(j, k )  Sj : reject Hj,k and claim j,k (P ) > 0},

the familywise error rate for testing the family (18) can be written as

                  FWERP  P reject at least one true hypothesis Hk,l with (k, l)  Sj
                                 +              -     -                 +
                            = P Sj (P )  Rej j =  or Sj (P )  Rej j =  .

Notice that the mdFWER for testing the family of two-sided hypotheses in (14) is equal to the FWER
for testing the family of one-sided hypotheses in (18), i.e., mdFWERP = FWERP . Therefore, instead of
devising a procedure that satisfies (16) we could instead devise one that satisfies

                                          lim sup sup FWERP  .                                             (19)
                                            n P P



    Consider the following simple one-step procedure. Let Cn (1 - , Sj ) be the one-sided confidence set in
(9) with S = Sj . We reject any hypothesis Hk,l , (k, l)  Sj , for which Cn (1 - , Sj , (k, l)) does not contain
zero and claim k,l (P ) > 0. Under suitable restrictions on P, this approach satisfies (19), but it can be
improved through a stepwise version similar to those in Romano and Wolf (2005):
Algorithm 3.1 (Stepdown Procedure).

      Step 0: Set I0 = Sj and s = 0.

                                                      15
        Step 1: Form the confidence set Cn (1 - , S ) in (9) with S = Is .

        Step 2: Reject any Hk,l with (k, l)  Is for which 0  Cn (1 - , Is , (k, l)) and claim k,l (P ) > 0.

        (a) If no (further) null hypotheses are rejected, then stop.
        (b) If any null hypotheses are rejected, then let Is+1  Is denote the hypotheses that have not
            previously been rejected, set s = s + 1, and return to Step 1.

   Under suitable restrictions on P, this stepwise procedure satisfies (19) when Cn (1 - , S ) is, for example,
one of the confidence sets described in Section 3.1; see Romano and Shaikh (2012). By Theorem 3.2, the
confidence set
                                                 -                     +
                                  Rn,j  |Rej j | + 1, . . . , p - |Rej j | ,
             -         +
where Rej j and Rej j are computed through Algorithm 3.1, therefore satisfies (1).

Remark 3.9. Stepwise improvements of one-sided confidence sets for the rank can be devised through a
small modification of Algorithm 3.1. Consider the goal of constructing a one-sided confidence set for the
rank rj (P ) with lower endpoint equal to 1 by inverting tests of the family of one-sided hypotheses

                                Hj,k : j,k (P )  0     versus    Kj,k : j,k (P ) > 0

for all (j, k )  Sj . This testing problem is identical to the one in (18) except that Sj is replaced by Sj .
                                                           -
Then, Algorithm 3.1, with Sj replaced by Sj , yields Rej j =  so the resulting confidence set Rn,j in (17)
has lower endpoint equal to 1 and satisfies (1). Analogously, we can construct a one-sided confidence set for
the rank rj (P ) with upper endpoint equal to p.


3.3      Joint Confidence Sets for the Ranks of All Populations

In this section, we show how arguments similar to those in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 can be used to construct
simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks of all populations.


3.3.1     A Simple Construction

Define Sall  {(j, k )  J × J : j = k }. Let Cn (1 - , Sall ) be a confidence region for Sall (P ) that is
                                                                                                                    -
rectangular in the sense of (4) with {Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k )) : (j, k )  Sall }. Similarly to the definitions of Nj
      +
and Nj  , for each j  J , denote by

                               -
                              Nj, all  {k  J \ {j } : Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k ))  R- },
                               +
                              Nj, all  {k  J \ {j } : Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k ))  R+ }

                                                                                                                -
the sets of confidence sets for the differences Sall (P ) that lie entirely below and above zero. The set Nj,    all
   +
(Nj, all ) therefore contains all populations k whose features  ( Pk ) are significantly larger (smaller) than that
of population j . The following result is analogous to Theorem 3.1:




                                                         16
Theorem 3.3. If Cn (1 - , S ) satisfies (4) with S = Sall , then, for any P ,
                                                                       
                                                                       
                               -                            +
                 P           |Nj, all | + 1  rj (P )  p - |Nj,all |         P {Sall (P )  Cn (1 - , Sall )}.
                                                                       
                     j J


If, in addition, Cn (1 - , S ) also satisfies (5) with S = Sall , then the confidence set

                                         joint            -                           +
                                        Rn              |Nj, all | + 1, . . . , p - |Nj,all |                  (20)
                                                  j J


satisfies (2).

   Remarks similar to those after Theorem 3.1 also apply to Theorem 3.3.

Remark 3.10. An alternative approach to constructing a confidence set that satisfies (2) is based on
simultaneous confidence sets for the features (P ) rather than for their pairwise differences Sall (P ). The
recent paper by Klein et al. (2018) is a special case of this approach. In Appendix B, we prove that, in
some special cases, the resulting confidence set for the ranking is strictly larger than our proposal in (20).
In addition, in our simulations in Section 4, we find that their confidence set is always at least as large as
ours, but in most cases substantially larger.


3.3.2    A Stepwise Improvement

Consider the goal of constructing a two-sided confidence set for all ranks. In order to describe a way in
which we can improve upon Theorem 3.3 consider the problem of testing (14) for all (j, k )  Sall . Define

                                          -
                                         Sall (P )  {(j, k )  Sall : j,k (P )  0} ,
                                          +
                                         Sall (P )  {(j, k )  Sall : j,k (P )  0}

and let Rej-                          -            +                          +
           j,all  {k  J : (j, k )  Rejall } and Rejj,all  {k  J : (j, k )  Rejall } with


                             Rej-
                                all  {(j, k )  Sall : reject Hj,k and claim j,k (P ) < 0} ,

                             Rej+
                                all  {(j, k )  Sall : reject Hj,k and claim j,k (P ) > 0} .


The mixed directional familywise error rate for the problem of testing (14) for all (j, k )  Sall is then

                                        +
                            mdFWERP  P Sall (P )  Rej-          -            +
                                                     all =  or Sall (P )  Rejall =  .                          (21)

The following result is analogous to Theorem 3.2.

Theorem 3.4. For any P ,
                                                                               
                                                                               
                     P          |Rej-                             +
                                    j,all | + 1  rj (P )  p - |Rejj,all |           1 - mdFWERP .
                                                                               
                         j J


Furthermore, if Rej-            +
                   j,all and Rejj,all are computed by an algorithm for which (16) holds with mdFWERP as



                                                                17
defined in (21), then the confidence set

                                   joint
                                  Rn               |Rej-                            +
                                                       j,all | + 1, . . . , p - |Rejj,all |                      (22)
                                             j J


satisfies (2).

   In order to implement the result in Theorem 3.4 we need to devise a procedure that controls the mdFWER.
As for the marginal confidence sets, we can control the mdFWER for the two-sided testing problem by
controlling the FWER,

                  FWERP  P {reject at least one true hypothesis Hk,l with (k, l)  Sall } ,                       (23)

for the one-sided testing problem (18) with (k, l)  Sall .

    Consider the following simple one-step procedure. Let Cn (1 - , Sall ) be the one-sided confidence set in
(9) with S = Sall . We reject any hypothesis Hk,l , (k, l)  Sall , for which Cn (1 - , Sall , (k, l)) does not contain
zero and claim k,l (P ) > 0. Under suitable restrictions on P, this approach satisfies (19) with FWERP
as defined in (23), but it can be improved through a stepwise version similar to those in Romano and Wolf
(2005):

Algorithm 3.2 (Stepdown Procedure).

      Step 0: Set I0 = Sall and s = 0.

      Step 1: Form the confidence set Cn (1 - , S ) in (9) with S = Is .

      Step 2: Reject any Hk,l with (k, l)  Is for which 0  Cn (1 - , Is , (k, l)) and claim k,l (P ) > 0.

       (a) If no (further) null hypotheses are rejected, then stop.
       (b) If any null hypotheses are rejected, then let Is+1  Is denote the hypotheses that have not
           previously been rejected, set s = s + 1, and return to Step 1.

   Under suitable restrictions on P, this stepwise procedure satisfies (19) with FWERP as defined in (23)
when Cn (1 - , S ) is, for example, one of the confidence sets described in Section 3.1; see Romano and
Shaikh (2012). By Theorem 3.4, the confidence set

                                    joint
                                   Rn              |Rej-                          +
                                                       all | + 1, . . . , p - |Rejall |       ,
                                             j J


where Rej-          +
         all and Rejall are computed through Algorithm 3.2, therefore satisfies (2).




3.4    Confidence Sets for the  -Best Populations

The goal of this section is to construct confidence sets for the  -best populations, i.e., for given values of
                                                             -best
  J and   (0, 1), we want to construct (random) sets Jn            that satisfy (3).




                                                            18
                              joint            joint
    Given a confidence set Rn        j J Rn,j        that satisfies (2), such as those in (20) and (22), it is
                                -best
straightforward to construct Jn       satisfying (3) by defining

                                         -best            joint
                                       Jn       j  J :   Rn,j           .                                   (24)

In this section, however, we propose a more "direct" approach which, in simulations, we have found to
perform better than the naive projection in (24). For a given value of   J and some j  J , consider the
hypothesis
                                              Hj : rj (P )  .

Let  be a permutation of J such that (P(1) )  (P(2) )  . . .  (P(p) ) and define K  {K  J : |K | =
 - 1} to be the set of all subsets of J with cardinality  - 1 (i.e., K = {} when  = 1). The null hypothesis
Hj is equivalent to
                                           max         {(Pk ) - (Pj )}  0
                                   kJ \{ (1),..., ( -1)}

and implies
                                       min max {(Pk ) - (Pj )}  0.
                                       K K kJ \K

In order to form a test statistic for this inequality, we replace the features (Pj ) by their estimators:

                                         Tn,j  min max {^k - ^j }.                                          (25)
                                                 K K kJ \K


Further, for I  J and K  K, let

                                   Tn,I,K  max max {^k - ^j - k,j (P )}
                                             j I kJ \K


and denote by Mn (x, I, K, P )  P {Tn,I,K  x} the cdf of Tn,I,K . Finally, define the critical value

                                                       -1
                                   ^n (1 - , I )  max Mn
                                   c                                   ^n )
                                                          (1 - , I, K, P
                                                  K K


                  ^n of P . The following algorithm is a stepwise procedure for testing the family of null
for some estimate P
hypotheses Hj with j  J .

Algorithm 3.3.

     Step 0: Set I0 = J and s = 0.

     Step 1: Reject any Hj with j  Is for which Tn,j > c
                                                       ^n (1 - , Is ).

      (a) If no (further) null hypotheses are rejected, then stop.
      (b) If any null hypotheses are rejected, then let Is+1  Is denote the hypotheses that have not
          previously been rejected, set s = s + 1, and repeat Step 1.

    The confidence set for the  -best populations can then be defined as all those j  J for which Hj is not
rejected by Algorithm 3.3.




                                                        19
Theorem 3.5. Assume that, for each K  K,

                                                    -1          -best          ^n )  1 -  .
                 lim inf inf P Tn,J  -best (P ),K  Mn  (1 - , J0      (P ), K, P                              (26)
                  n P P              0



Then the confidence set
                                      -best
                                    Jn       {j  J : Hj is not rejected } ,

computed through Algorithm 3.3, satisfies (3).

    Under a uniform integrability condition on P, the uniform asymptotic coverage requirement (26) holds
                       ^n ; see Romano and Shaikh (2012).
for various choices of P

Remark 3.11. One could replace Tn,j by a studentized version of the statistic,

                                                              ^k - 
                                                                    ^j
                                           Tn,j  min max               ,
                                                  K K kJ \K     ^k,j

where  2
      ^k,j is an estimator of the variance of ^k - ^j , and modify Mn (x, I, K, P ) to be the distribution of

                                                          ^k - 
                                                               ^j - k,j (P )
                                    Tn,I,K  max max                          .
                                              j I kJ \K          ^k,j

Studentization may be especially desirable when the distributions of ^j vary considerably.

                                                                                                            -1
Remark 3.12. The computation of the critical value c        ^n (1 - , I ) involves the maximization of Mn      (1 -
, I, K, P ^n ) over K  K. For instance, when  = 2, then K = {{1}, {2}, . . . , {p}}. For  > 1, there are
   p
  -1 elements in K, so the construction of the critical value becomes computationally more demanding the
larger  . There are, however, at least two special cases in which the optimization becomes trivial. First of
all, to form a confidence set for the best population ( = 1), no optimization is necessary because in this
case K = {}. Second, suppose     ^1 - (P1 ), . . . , ^p - (Pp ) are exchangeable. In this case, one can show that
                   ^
Mn (1 - , I, K, Pn ) is independent of K , so the the computation of the critical value c    ^n (1 - , I ) does not
require optimization over K  K regardless of the value of  .

Remark 3.13. The  -worst populations in terms of 1 (P ), . . . , p (P ) are also the  -best populations in
terms of -1 (P ), . . . , -p (P ). Therefore, the procedure described above can be used for the construction
of a confidence set for the  -worst populations by simply changing the signs of the features (Pj ) and their
estimators.

Remark 3.14. Similarly to the reasoning in Remark 3.1 there are no conceptual challenges in satisfying
(26) while allowing for dependence in the estimators ^1 , . . . , ^p .

                                                          -best
Remark 3.15. The problem of finding a subset Jn                  satisfying (3) is related to the subset selection
problem in the PhD thesis by Gupta (1956). He assumed that           ^j and (Pj ) are the sample and population
mean, respectively, and are such that   ^1 - (P1 ), . . . , ^p - (Pp ) are i.i.d. from a normal distribution with
known variance. For this case, he proposed a confidence set for the identity of the population with the largest
mean. Many extensions of Gupta's idea have been proposed since then; see Gupta and Panchapakesan
(1979, Chapters 11­19) for a review. Appendix C shows that this approach only guarantees coverage of
one, but not necessarily all, of the best populations in case there are ties. For example, if there are only


                                                        20
two populations (p = 2) and their means are equal, then the probability of Gupta's confidence set covering
  1-best
J0       is strictly less than the desired level 1 - . In contrast, the confidence set proposed in this section
                            -best
asymptotically covers J0          for any   J with probability no less than the desired level. Importantly,
unlike Gupta's confidence set, our proposal does not rely on his i.i.d. assumption. Allowing for heterogeneity
in the populations' distributions is important in our empirical applications in which the populations' variances
differ substantially across populations.



4     Simulations

In this section, we examine the finite-sample performance of several procedures for constructing confidence
sets for a single rank, for all ranks, and for the set of  -best populations with a simulation study.


Data generating process

For each population j = 1, . . . , p, we generate an i.i.d. sample Xj,1 , . . . , Xj,n from N (j , 1) so that all samples
across populations are mutually independent. The parameter   (1 , . . . , p ) is defined as follows:

                                       1 = tmax + 1
                                                           1
                                       2 = 3 = tmax +
                                                           2
                                       4 , . . . , p lie on a grid from 0 to tmax

We vary tmax  {0, 2}, 1 on a grid from 0 to 2, and 2  {1, 3}. Therefore, in all scenarios, the first three
populations, j = 1, 2, 3, possess ranks less than or equal to 2. All other elements of  are placed on an
equally spaced grid from 0 to tmax . The magnitude of 1 determines how well the top three populations
are separated from the remaining ones and 2 how well (2 , 3 ) are separated from 1 . For tmax = 0, all
populations outside the top three have equal mean, whereas for tmax = 2 they differ. When tmax = 0 and
1 = 0, then all elements of  are equal to 0. We also vary the number of populations p  {3, 10, 50} and
the number of observations per population n  {100, 200}. All simulations are based on 1, 000 Monte Carlo
samples and  = 0.05.


Simulation exercises

We consider three inference problems: inference on the rank of the first population, simultaneous inference
on all ranks, and inference on the set of  -best populations with  = 2. Tables 4­9 show empirical coverage
frequencies and Figures 15­17 plot the sizes, averaged over the Monte Carlo samples, of the confidence
sets. For inference on a single and on all ranks, we present coverage of the set of ranks, i.e., of Rj (P ) and
R1 (P ) × . . . × Rp (P ) with Rj (P ) defined as in Remark 3.6.

   We consider different procedures for constructing the confidence sets. Let   ^j and   2
                                                                                        ^j  denote the sample
                                                2      2    2
mean and variance for the j th population and ^j,k   ^j +  ^k . Critical values for the different methods are
based on the parametric bootstrap to mimic inference in the empirical section, in which we only observe



                                                           21
point estimates and standard errors so a nonparametric bootstrap cannot be implemented.1 Specifically, we
                                                                              2       2
use 1, 000 draws of normal random vectors Z  (Z1 , . . . , Zp )  N (0, diag(^
                                                                            1   ,...,^p )). For inference on a
single rank and on all ranks, we compare the following methods, setting S = Sj or S = Sall , respectively:

"DM": the simple constructions in (13) and (20), based on symmetric confidence sets for the differences in
   means as in (11), where L-    1              ^
                               symm,n (1 - , S, Pn ) is the empirical (1 - )-quantile of the 1, 000 draws of
   max(j,k)S |Zj - Zk |/^j,k .

"DM.step": the stepwise constructions (17) computed through Algorithm 3.1 and (22) computed through
   Algorithm 3.2, based on confidence sets for the differences in means as in (9), where, in the sth step,
   L-  1                 ^
     lower,n (1 - , Is , Pn ) is the empirical (1 - )-quantile of the 1, 000 draws of max(j,k)Is (Zj - Zk )/^j,k .

"M": the alternative confidence set described in Appendix B, based on symmetric confidence sets for the
    means as in (34), where q1- is the empirical (1 - )-quantile of the 1, 000 draws of maxj J |Zj |/^ j .2

For inference on the  -best populations, we compare the following methods:

"DM": the projection confidence set in (24), based on confidence sets for the differences in means as in (10),
   where L-    1              ^
            upper,n (1 - , S, Pn ) is the empirical (1 - )-quantile of the 1, 000 draws of max(j,k)Sall (Zk -
   Zj )/^j,k .

"DM.step": the projection confidence set "DM" except that stepwise improvements as in Remark 3.9 are
   applied.

"T": the test inversion procedure from Section 3.4, using the test statistic in (25), where the critical value
    ^n (1 - , I ) is the maximum (over K  K) of the empirical (1 - )-quantile of the 1, 000 draws of
    c
    maxj J maxkJ \K {Zk - Zj }.

"M": the projection confidence set in (24), based on symmetric confidence sets for the differences in means
    as in "M" above.

"naive": select the two populations with the largest sample means.


Results for inference on a single and on all ranks

We obtain five insights from the simulation results for inference on a single and on all ranks. First, Tables 4­7
show that all methods control the coverage frequency at the desired nominal level for small and large sample
sizes, regardless of whether means are tied or nearly tied, and regardless of whether there are few or many
populations to be ranked. The only instances of some degree of undercoverage occur when means outside
of the top three populations are not well separated (tmax = 0) and either the sample size is small or the
number of populations is large (see Tables 4 and 6).

  Second, the coverage frequency of "M" is approximately equal to one in all scenarios whereas our methods
"DM" and "DM.step" tend to have coverage frequency closer to the desired level. In consequence, our
    1 Simulation results for the nonparametric bootstrap, which are not reported here, are very similar to the results for the

parametric bootstrap.
    2 Using q
             1- as defined in (35) or (36) yields almost identical results, but we choose to use bootstrap quantiles here to make
the method more similar to our proposals "DM" and "DM.step", which also use bootstrap quantiles.


                                                               22
methods tend to lead to confidence sets for the ranks that are not larger than those of "M" and substantially
smaller in most scenarios. This can be clearly seen in Figures 15 and 16. The confidence set of "M" maybe
more than twice as large as those of "DM" and "DM.step" (see, for example, the top row of graphs in
Figure 15). Improvements in the size of confidence sets by using the stepwise method ("DM.step") instead
of the single-step method ("DM") are small.

    Third, Figures 15 and 16 show that all methods lead to confidence sets that become smaller as the means
become better separated from each other (1 increases or 2 decreases). Consider, for example, inference on
the rank of the first population in Figure 15. The top row of graphs shows the average length of confidence
sets for 2 = 3, tmax = 0, and p = 10. When 1 = 0, then all means are equal to zero, so the first population's
mean is not separated from any of the other means. In this case, the confidence sets have length close to
ten. As 1 increases the mean of the first population becomes well separated from all other populations and
the lengths of the confidence sets decrease towards one. The bottom row of graphs shows the average length
of confidence sets for 2 = 1, tmax = 0, and p = 10. Similarly as in the top row, for 1 = 0 all means are
equal to zero and the confidence sets have length close to ten. As 1 increases, however, the lengths of the
confidence sets decrease towards three rather than one because, in this scenario, the first three populations
are tied at rank equal to one. These results illustrate the fact that our confidence sets control the coverage
probability uniformly over data-generating processes, even when there are (near-)ties.

   Fourth, comparing left and right columns of the graphs in Figures 15 and 16 shows that the lengths of
the confidence sets decrease as the sample size grows, reflecting the fact that a large sample size leads to
small variances of the estimated means so that true differences in means are easier to detect.

    Finally, comparing Tables 4 and 5 shows that the means outside of the top three being equal (tmax = 0)
or well separated (tmax = 2) has almost no effect on the coverage frequencies of the confidence sets for
the first population. In contrast, comparing Tables 6 and 7 reveals that, for the simultaneous confidence
sets for all ranks, the degree of separation governed by tmax has a large impact. When all means are well
separated, then the confidence sets recover the true differences between the means with high probability
(in fact, with probability approaching one as the sample size grows) so the coverage probability of the
simultaneous confidence sets is close to one.


Results for inference on the  -best populations

The simulation results for inference on the  -best populations provide four insights. First, Tables 8 and 9
show that all methods except "naive" control the coverage frequency at the desired nominal level for small
and large sample sizes, regardless of whether means are tied or nearly tied, and regardless of whether there
are few or many populations to be ranked. The "naive" method never covers the set of  -best populations
because, by definition it only selects two populations even though, in all scenarios, there are at least three
populations among the two best.

    Second, the coverage frequency of "M" is approximately equal to one in all scenarios whereas our methods
"T", "DM" and "DM.step" tend to have coverage frequency closer to the nominal level. In consequence,
our methods tend to lead to confidence sets for the 2-best populations that are not larger than those of "M"
and substantially smaller in most scenarios. For instance, the top row of graphs in Figure 17 shows that
the confidence sets of "M" may be up to about 50% larger than those of our proposed methods. The more
direct method ("T") generally produces even smaller confidence sets than the projection methods "DM" and

                                                     23
"DM.step", but the gains are modest. Similarly, the stepwise improvements ("DM.step") help shorten the
confidence sets relative to "DM", but the gains are modest. Overall, the three methods "DM", "DM.step",
and "T" perform similarly well.

   Third, as in the case of inference on a single rank and on all ranks, comparing the top and the bottom
rows of Figure 17 shows that as the first three populations' means become better separated from the others
(2 decreases or 1 increases). The lengths of the confidence sets shrink because it is easier to recover the
populations with rank less than or equal to two (exactly those first three populations).

   Fourth, as in the case of inference on a single rank and on all ranks, comparing the left and the right
columns of Figure 17 shows that an increase in sample size leads to smaller confidence sets.

    Finally, comparing all columns in Tables 8 and 9 except the first ones shows that the means for populations
with rank strictly larger than two being equal (tmax = 0) or well separated (tmax = 2) has no effect on the
coverage frequencies of the confidence sets for the first population. This degree of separation only matters
when the populations of rank no larger than two are not well separated from the remaining populations (first
columns of the two tables). In this case, better separation of the means (first column of Table 9 compared to
first column of Table 8) leads to recovery of the true differences between the means with higher probability
so the coverage probability of the confidence set for the 2-best is higher.



5     Empirical Applications

5.1    Ranking of Developed Countries by Student Performance in PISA

We now apply our inference procedures from Section 3 to re-examine the question that motivates the PISA
test: Which countries do best and worst at reading, math, and science?


What is PISA and why does it matter?

Over the past two decades, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) have
conducted the PISA test. The goal of this test is to evaluate and compare educational systems across
countries by measuring 15-year-old school students' scholastic performance on mathematics, science, and
reading. The PISA test was first performed in 2000 and then repeated every three years. Each country that
participates in a given year has to draw a sample of at least 5,000 students to be tested. The results from
the PISA test are reported on a scale constructed using a generalized form of the Rasch model (OECD,
2017). For each domain (reading, math, and science), the scale is constructed with a mean score of 500 and
standard deviation of 100. The scores are then tabulated by country in what has become known as PISA's
international league tables.

   Every three years, the release of these league tables stimulates a global discussion about education systems
and school reform in both international media and at the national level across many OECD countries. Indeed,
several governments have set national performance targets based on how well the country ranks in the league
tables (Breakspear (2012)). A low ranking in the PISA league table is known to cause media attention and
political discussion. In Germany, for example, the poor results in the first PISA test triggered a heated



                                                      24
                                                  OECD Countries Mean 2018 PISA Reading Test Scores

                             525
                                                                                                          estimate
                                                                                                          estimate +/- 2SE

                             500
       Reading Test Scores




                             475



                             450



                             425



                             400
                                                nia
                                               ada
                                                 nd
                                                 nd
                                                 ea
                                                 nd
                                               den
                                              land

                                                   s
                                                om




                                                                                                                 mbia
                                                 an
                                                   a
                                                   k
                                               way

                                                   y
                                              enia
                                               ium
                                               nce

                                                    l
                                                blic
                                               nds
                                                tria
                                                 nd
                                                  ia
                                                                                                  Italy

                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                    nd
                                                                                                                     el
                                                                                                                 ourg

                                                                                                                    ey
                                                                                                                   blic
                                                                                                                  ece

                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                   ico
                                             tuga
                                            man
                                             tate




                                            mar




                                                                                                  gar
                                             trali




                                                                                                                 Chil
                                           Latv




                                                                                                 uan


                                                                                                                Isra


                                                                                                               Turk
                                         Finla
                                          Irela
                                           Kor
                                          Pola




                                         zerla
                                           Jap




                                                                                              Icela




                                                                                                               Mex
                                        Esto




                                         ingd




                                          Aus
                                          epu




                                                                                                              epu
                                        Belg
                                          Fra



                                       herla




                                                                                                              Gre
                                        Can




                                        Swe




                                        Nor


                                       Slov
                                        Zea




                                                                                            Hun




                                                                                                             emb
                                       Aus




                                                                                                            Colo
                                      ed S




                                       Por
                                       Den




                                                                                            Lith
                                      Ger




                                    ch R




                                                                                                          ak R
                                    ed K




                                    Swit
                                   Net
                                 New




                                                                                                         Lux
                                 Unit




                                                                                                      Slov
                               Cze
                               Unit




Figure 4: Point estimates and marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or minus twice the standard
errors) of the expected reading score on the PISA test for each OECD country (except for Spain for which
there is no data)


debate about the country's education system, which ultimately resulted in wide-ranging reforms (Hubert,
2006).


How much should we trust the ranking in PISA's league tables?

In order to examine which countries do best and worst at reading, math, and science, we use publicly available
data from the 2018 PISA test. We restrict attention to the OECD countries. Since PISA never combines
math, science, and reading scores into an overall score, we perform our analyses separately for each domain.
For brevity, we focus on the league table for reading, but we report a complete set of results for each domain
in Appendix F.1.

    We begin by presenting the point estimates and marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or minus
twice the standard errors) for the expected reading test score in each OECD country.3 These results are
reported in Figure 4. There is considerable variation in the point estimates across countries. Estonia ranks
first with an average test score of around 523. The runner up is Canada, followed by Finland in third place.
At the bottom of the league table, one finds Chile, Mexico, and Columbia. These countries have reading
scores that are more than 20% lower than the countries at the top of the league table.

    By applying our procedures from Section 3 to the point estimates and standard errors in Figure 4, we
can compute (i) the marginal confidence set for the rank of a given country, (ii) the simultaneous confidence
set for the ranks of all countries, and (iii) confidence sets for the  -best (or the  -worst) countries. Marginal
confidence sets answer the question of whether a given country is performing relatively well on the reading test
as compared to the other countries. Thus, (i) is relevant if one is interested in whether a particular country
   3 The       only exception is Spain, for which there is no data available.


                                                                     25
is among the worst or the best countries in terms of its scholastic performance on reading. Simultaneous
confidence sets allow such inferences to be drawn simultaneously for all countries. Thus, (ii) is relevant if one
is interested in broader geographic patterns of scholastic performance in reading across OECD countries. By
comparison, confidence sets for the  -best (or  -worst) answer the more specific question of which OECD
countries cannot be ruled out as being among the countries with the best (worst) scholastic performance in
reading. In other words, (iii) is relevant if one is interested in only the top (or bottom) of the international
league table.

    The confidence sets are implemented as described in Section 4, using the stepwise procedures ("DM.step")
for the confidence sets for ranks and the projection method ("DM.step") for the  -best and  -worst problems.
All confidence sets are computed at the 95% nominal level.

   Figure 5 presents the ranking of the OECD countries according to the point estimates of the expected
reading scores. Panel A displays the marginal confidence sets while Panel B reports the simultaneous
confidence sets. Table 2 reports additional results for the top five countries (Panel A) and the bottom five
countries (Panel B). Each Panel of this table presents results for math, reading, and science. For each
domain, we report the point estimates, the standard errors, the 95% marginal confidence sets for the ranks,
and the number of countries that cannot be ruled out (with 95% confidence) as being among the set of
countries with the  -highest (top panel) or the  -lowest (bottom panel) expected PISA test scores.

   As evident from Panel A of Figure 5, the marginal confidence sets are relatively narrow, especially for
the countries at the top and the bottom of the ranking. This finding suggests that citizens of these countries
can be quite confident in the reading performance of their pupils. For instance, the lower endpoint of the
confidence set for Estonia suggests it is (with 95% confidence) the country with at least the fifth-highest
expected test score. By comparison, the upper endpoint of the confidence set for Columbia suggests (with
95% confidence) that it is among the bottom two OECD countries in terms of scholastic performance on
reading.

    A natural question is whether the ranking of the OECD countries according to the expected reading score
remains informative if one allows inferences to be drawn simultaneous across all countries. The results in
Panel B of Figure 5 suggest the ranking remains fairly informative, especially at the top and at the bottom of
the PISA league table. Therefore, we can be fairly certain about which countries are at the top and bottom
of the ranking. In addition, the columns denoted by " -best" and " -worst" in Table 2 show the number of
countries in the 95% confidence set for the  -best and  -worst. Only eight (five) countries cannot be ruled
out as being among the top (bottom) three countries in terms of scholastic performance on reading.




                                                       26
                                       Ranking by Reading Score with 95% Marginal CS

                             A
             Colombia
                 Mexico
                    Chile
                Greece
       Slovak Republic
                  Turkey
          Luxembourg
                   Israel
                Iceland
              Lithuania
              Hungary
                     Italy
                  Latvia
           Switzerland
                 Austria
           Netherlands
       Czech Republic
               Portugal
                 France
               Belgium
              Slovenia
             Germany
                Norway
              Denmark
              Australia
                  Japan
       United Kingdom
         United States
          New Zealand                                                                        Quartile
               Sweden
                 Poland                                                                         1
                   Korea                                                                        2
                 Ireland                                                                        3
                Finland
               Canada                                                                           4
                Estonia
                             1   5        10         15           20       25          30      35
                                                           Rank
                                     Ranking by Reading Score with 95% Simultaneous CS

                             B
             Colombia
                 Mexico
                    Chile
                Greece
       Slovak Republic
                  Turkey
          Luxembourg
                   Israel
                Iceland
              Lithuania
              Hungary
                     Italy
                  Latvia
           Switzerland
                 Austria
           Netherlands
       Czech Republic
               Portugal
                 France
               Belgium
              Slovenia
             Germany
                Norway
              Denmark
              Australia
                  Japan
       United Kingdom
         United States
          New Zealand                                                                        Quartile
               Sweden
                 Poland                                                                         1
                   Korea                                                                        2
                 Ireland                                                                        3
                Finland
               Canada                                                                           4
                Estonia
                             1   5        10         15           20       25          30      35
                                                           Rank




Figure 5: Panel A: for each OECD country, we plot its rank by reading score and the 95% marginal
confidence set ("CS"). Panel B: for each OECD country, we plot its rank by reading score and the 95%
simultaneous confidence set ("CS"). Different quartiles of the rankings are indicated with different colors.
                                                    27
         Panel A: Top 5
                                              Math                                                      Reading                                              Science
         Rank         Country         Score        SE      95% CS           -best    Country   Score       SE     95% CS        -best    Country    Score      SE      95% CS             -best
           1     1     Japan         526.97     2.47            [1, 6]         6     Estonia   523.02     1.84      [1, 5]       6       Estonia    530.11     1.88     [1,   4]          4
           2     2      Korea        525.93     3.12            [1, 6]         7     Canada    520.09     1.80      [1, 6]       7        Japan     529.14     2.59     [1,   4]          5
           3     3     Estonia       523.41     1.74            [1, 6]          7    Finland   520.08     2.31      [1, 6]        8      Finland    521.88     2.51     [1,   6]          6
           4     4   Netherlands     519.23     2.63            [1, 8]         11    Ireland   518.08     2.24      [1, 7]       8        Korea     519.01     2.80     [2,   7]          7
           5     5     Poland        515.65     2.60           [1, 11]         13     Korea    514.05     2.94     [1, 11]       14      Canada     518.00     2.15     [3,   7]          11
         Panel B: Bottom 5
                                            Math                                                        Reading                                               Science




28
         Rank        Country       Score      SE        95% CS            -worst    Country    Score      SE      95% CS        -worst    Country     Score      SE     95% CS             -worst
          33    5     Turkey       453.51     2.26      [32,   34]         6        Slovakia   457.98     2.23    [30,   34]     8        Israel     462.20     3.62     [30,      34]         9
          34    4     Greece       451.37     3.09      [32,   34]         6         Greece    457.41     3.62    [30,   34]     7        Greece     451.63     3.14     [33,      35]         6
          35    3      Chile       417.41     2.42      [35,   36]         3         Chile     452.27     2.64    [32,   34]     5        Chile      443.58     2.42     [34,      35]         4
          36    2     Mexico       408.80     2.49      [35,   36]         3         Mexico    420.47     2.75    [35,   36]     2        Mexico     419.20     2.58     [36,      37]         2
          37    1    Colombia      390.93     2.99      [37,   37]         1        Colombia   412.30     3.25    [35,   36]     2       Colombia    413.32     3.05     [36,      37]         2

     Table 2: Panel A: Top 5 among the OECD countries ranked by PISA test scores in Math, Reading, and Science with the marginal 95% confidence
     sets ("CS") for their ranks and the size of the 95% confidence set for the  -best. Panel B: Bottom 5 among the OECD countries ranked by PISA
     test scores in Math, Reading, and Science with marginal 95% confidence sets ("CS") for their ranks and the size of the 95% confidence set for the
      -worst. Note: Spain is absent in the Reading test score results so the lowest possible rank for Reading is 36.
5.2     Ranking Neighborhoods by Intergenerational Mobility

We now apply our inference procedures from Section 3 to re-examine the question that motivates the work
of Chetty et al. (2014, 2018) and Chetty and Hendren (2018): Where in the United States is the land of
opportunity?


Data and background

The empirical analysis in this section is based on publicly available estimates of intergenerational income
mobility across areas in the United States. These estimates come from two studies that both use tax records
covering the U.S. population. The first is Chetty et al. (2018).4 They document how children's expected
incomes conditional on their parents' incomes vary according to the area (commuting zone (CZ), county, or
Census tract) in which they grew up. The second is Chetty and Hendren (2018).5 The goal of this paper is
to examine the degree to which the differences in income mobility across areas reflect causal effects of place.
Both studies present the empirical results through league tables and heat maps which rank places according
to point estimates of income mobility.

    In the baseline analysis, Chetty et al. (2018) define the following measure of intergenerational mobility:

                                               ¯cp  E [yi |c(i) = c, p(i) = p] ,
                                               y                                                                             (27)

where yi is child i's percentile rank in the national distribution of incomes relative to all others in her birth
cohort; child i's income is measured as her average income in the years 2014­2015 (aged 31­37 depending on
cohort); p(i) denotes the child's parental income percentile in the national distribution of parental income in
child i's birth cohort; and c(i) is the area in which the child i grew up. As in Chetty et al. (2018), we focus
on y¯c25 , the expected income rank of children who grew up in area c with parents at the 25th percentile of
the national income distribution of parental income. Following Chetty et al. (2018), we refer to the estimates
of y
   ¯c25 as correlational estimates of upward mobility.

    In Figure 6, we present the estimates of y ¯c25 with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or minus
twice the standard errors) from Chetty et al. (2018). These correlational estimates of upward mobility cover
all the 741 commuting zones and 3208 of the 3219 counties.6 We first sort the places by the values of y    ^
                                                                                                           ¯c25 ,
and then report these point estimates and their marginal confidence intervals for each CZ (top graph) and
county (bottom graph). There is considerable variation in y    ^
                                                               ¯c25 across areas. Since CZs typically comprise
several counties, it is not surprising that the standard errors tend to be a lot larger when a neighborhood is
defined as a county rather than as a CZ.

    In Chetty and Hendren (2018), the parameters of interest are the exposure effects of spending an ad-
ditional year of one's childhood in a given area. Consider a child i from a set of one-time movers from an
origin o(i) to a destination d(i). She moves at the age m(i) and spends A - m(i) time in the destination.


     4 The data files could be accessed following these links: commuting zones; counties and tracts. The variables of interest in

all three files are kfr pooled pooled p25 and kfr pooled pooled p25 se.
     5 The data files could be accessed following these links: commuting zones and counties. The variables of interest are

causal p25 czkr26 and causal p25 czkr26 se for commuting zones; causal p25 cty kr26 and causal p25 cty kr26 se for counties.
     6 Following Chetty et al. (2018) we use 1990 Commuting Zones classification and 2000 counties classification. For 11 counties

data is not available.


                                                               29
                                                         Mean percentile rank in the national distribution of child's average family income in 2014-2015

                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                  estimate
                                                                                                                                                  estimate +/- 2SE




                                       0.6
           Child's Income Percentile




                                       0.4




                                       0.2




                                             0                             200                          400                                600
                                                                                               Commuting Zone
                                                 Mean percentile rank in the national distribution of child's average family income in 2014-2015

                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                   estimate
                                                                                                                                                   estimate +/- 2SE




                                       0.6
           Child's Income Percentile




                                       0.4




                                       0.2




                                             0                                   1000                               2000                                   3000
                                                                                                    County


Figure 6: Estimates of y¯c25 , the expected percentile rank of a child's average household income for 2014-2015
in the national distribution of her cohort, with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or minus twice
the standard errors). The estimates cover all 741 commuting zones (Top) and 3208 of the 3219 counties
(Bottom).

The (vector of the) amount of time spent in a given area is denoted by:
                                                                                        
                                                                                        A - mi
                                                                                                           if c = d(i)
                                                                                        
                                                                              eic       mi                 if c = o(i)                                                (28)
                                                                                        0                  otherwise
                                                                                                   30
The exposure effects can be estimated by the regression model:

                                                   yi = od + #»   #» +  ,
                                                             ei · µ    i                                                    (29)

where od is an origin-by-destination fixed effect, #» e i  (eic : c = 1, 2, . . .) is a vector of explanatory variables
for the number of years that child i lived in place c during her childhood, and the exposure effects are
given by the parameters µ   #»  (µ : c = 1, 2, . . .)  (µ0 + µ1 p : c = 1, 2, . . .), where p is the parental income
                                   cp                     c     c
percentile. The estimates are normalized to be mean zero across places, so that µcp measures the exposure
effect relative to the average place. As in Chetty and Hendren (2018) we focus on µc25 , the effect of spending
an additional year of childhood in area c for children with parents at the 25th percentile of the national
income distribution of parental income. Following Chetty and Hendren (2018), we refer to the estimates of
µc25 as movers estimates of exposure effects.

   In Figure 7, we present the point estimates of µc25 with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or
minus twice the standard errors) from Chetty and Hendren (2018). These results cover 595 of the 741 CZs
and 2367 of the 3219 counties.7 The point estimates suggest considerable variation in exposure effects across
areas. The standard errors are, however, sizable, indicating that it can be difficult to draw firm conclusions
about which areas produce more or less upward mobility.

    Given the relatively large standard errors, in a subset of the analyses, we restrict attention to the most
populous CZs and counties. The motivation for this sample restriction is to examine if one can achieve a
more informative ranking by restricting attention to larger areas. This sample restriction is also imposed in
a subset of the analyses of Chetty et al. (2014, 2018) and Chetty and Hendren (2018). In Appendix F.2, we
present point estimates of y ¯c25 and µc25 with marginal confidence intervals for the 50 most populous CZs
and counties. As expected, the estimates are more precise for this restricted set of areas as compared to the
population of CZs and counties at large. The gains in precision are particularly salient for the correlational
estimates. By way of comparison, the standard errors of the movers estimates remain relatively large even
if one restricts attention to the most populous areas.

    Before we present the confidence sets for the ranks, there are two remarks worth making about the
estimated exposure effects. First, Chetty and Hendren (2018) report both the raw estimates of the exposure
effect of place c, µc25 , as well as forecasts that minimize the mean-squared-error (MSE) of the predicted
impact of growing up in place c. We focus on the raw estimates. This choice is, in part, because Chetty
and Hendren (2018) do not report the confidence intervals on the forecasts, but also because the forecasts
are very similar to the correlational estimates in most CZs. The reason is that the forecasts are constructed
as weighted averages of the correlational estimates (based on stayers) and the mover estimates, with greater
weight on the mover estimates when they are more precisely estimated. Given that most estimates of µc25
are very noisy, the forecast estimates are very similar to the correlational estimates. Indeed, we calculate
that in a majority of the CZs, the forecasts assign at least 90 percent of the weight to the correlational
estimates.

   Second, the movers estimators may not necessarily be independent across CZs. While our inference
procedures accommodate dependence in a straightforward fashion (see Remarks 3.5 and 3.14), doing so
would require not only standard errors for each mobility estimate, but an estimate of the whole covariance
matrix of the estimators. Such information is unfortunately not available to us. Thus, we are unable to
   7 Chetty   and Hendren (2018) do not report results for the other counties and CZs due to limited data in these areas.


                                                              31
                                      Movers Estimates based on child's income at the age 26

                        6
                                                                                                  estimate
                                                                                                  estimate +/- 2SE



                        3
     Movers Estimate




                        0




                       -3




                       -6

                            0               200                                   400                          600
                                                        Commuting Zone



                                      Movers Estimates based on child's income at the age 26

                        6
                                                                                                  estimate
                                                                                                  estimate +/- 2SE



                        3
     Movers Estimate




                        0




                       -3




                       -6

                            0   500                  1000                    1500              2000
                                                             County




Figure 7: Movers estimates of exposure effects µc25 with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or
minus twice the standard errors). The estimates cover 595 of the 741 commuting zones (Top) and 2367 of
the 3219 counties (Bottom).


examine if the movers estimators are dependent or incorporate such dependence in the construction of the
confidence sets for the ranks. Furthermore, ignoring potential dependence among the estimators most likely
understates the uncertainty in the estimates we use, so we conjecture our very wide confidence sets for the


                                                            32
ranks would widen even further when accounting for dependence.


Ranking places by income mobility

By applying our procedures from Section 3 to the point estimates and standard errors in Figures 6 and 7, we
can compute (i) the marginal confidence sets for the rank of a given place, (ii) the simultaneous confidence
sets for the ranks of all places, and (iii) the confidence sets for the  -best (or the  -worst) ranked places.

    Before presenting the results, we again emphasize that (i)­(iii) answer distinct economic questions.
Marginal confidence sets answer the question of whether a given place has relatively high or low income
mobility compared to other places. Thus, (i) is relevant if one is interested in whether a particular place is
among the worst or the best places to grow up in terms of income mobility. Simultaneous confidence sets
allow such inferences to be drawn simultaneously across all places. Thus, (ii) is relevant if one is interested
in broader geographic patterns of income mobility across the United States. By comparison, confidence sets
for the  -best (or  -worst) answer the more specific question of which places cannot be ruled out as being
among the areas with the most (least) income mobility. In other words, (iii) is relevant if one is interested
in only the top (or bottom) of a league table of neighborhoods by income mobility.

    The confidence sets are implemented as described in Section 4, using the stepwise procedures ("DM.step")
for the confidence sets for ranks and the projection method ("DM.step") for the  -best and  -worst problems.
All confidence sets are computed at the 95% nominal level.


Ranking of the most populous places

We begin the empirical analysis by considering the 50 largest CZs by population size. Figure 8 presents the
ranking of these CZs according to the point estimates of y¯c25 . Panel A displays the marginal confidence sets
while Panel B reports the the simultaneous confidence sets. Table 3 reports additional results for the top
five CZs (Panel A) and the bottom five CZs (Panel B). Each panel of this table presents two sets of results:
Columns 3­7 are based on the correlational estimates of upward mobility y   ¯c25 , while columns 8­12 are based
on the movers estimates of exposure effects µc25 . For each set of results, we report the point estimates, the
standard errors, the 95% marginal confidence sets, and the number of places in the 95% confidence sets for
the  -best (top panel) or the  -worst values of y
                                                ¯c25 or µc25 .

   Among the 50 largest CZs by population size, the point estimates of y        ¯c25 range from 0.457 in San
Francisco to 0.355 in Charlotte. As evident from Panel A of Figure 8, the marginal confidence sets based
on the correlational estimates are relatively narrow, especially for the CZs at the top and the bottom of the
ranking. This finding suggests that citizens of these CZs can be quite confident in the mobility ranking of
their hometown. For instance, with 95% confidence, San Franciso is among the top two of these 50 CZs in
terms of income mobility. By comparison, with 95% confidence, Charlotte is among the bottom three of
these 50 CZs in terms of income mobility.

    A natural question is whether the ranking of the CZs according to the correlational estimates remains
informative if one allows inferences to be drawn simultaneously across all places. The results in Panel B of
Figure 8 suggest this is indeed the case and we can have high confidence about which CZs are at the top and
bottom of the correlational ranking. The sizes of the confidence sets for the  -best and  -worst CZs confirm


                                                      33
this finding. For example, only four (three) places cannot be ruled out as being among the top (bottom) two
CZs in terms of income mobility. Furthermore, there are only six places that cannot be ruled out as being
among the top five CZs, while ten CZs cannot be ruled out as being among the bottom five places.

    Taken together, the results based on y¯c25 suggest it is possible to achieve a quite informative ranking of
the 50 largest CZs according to upward mobility. By contrast, the exposure effects µc25 are too imprecisely
estimated to draw firm conclusions about which CZs produce more or less upward mobility. As evident from
the marginal confidence sets for µc25 in column 11 of Table 3, it is difficult to learn much about whether a
particular CZ has relatively high or low exposure effects. For example, the citizens of Seattle cannot rule
out with 95% confidence that the majority of other CZs have higher income mobility. Drawing inferences
simultaneously across all CZs is even more challenging, as evident by the  -best and  -worst results for µc25 .
Consider, for example, column 12 of Panel A in Table 3. As these results show, none of the 50 CZs can be
ruled out as being among the top five places in terms of exposure effects.




                                                      34
                                       Commuting Zones with 95% Marginal CS
          Charlotte

                       A
             Atlanta
       Jacksonville
       Indianapolis
            Raleigh
         Columbus
          Baltimore
          Cincinnati
             Detroit
             Dayton
             Tampa
      New Orleans
          Nashville
           St. Louis
      Port St. Lucie
          Cleveland
           Orlando
         Las Vegas
         Milwaukee
              Dallas
     Grand Rapids
             Fresno
       Kansas City
           Chicago
           Phoenix
       Philadelphia
       San Antonio
              Austin
              Miami
         Fort Worth
             Buffalo
           Portland
         Bridgeport
             Denver
           Houston
         San Diego
       Sacramento
    Washington DC
        Providence
       Los Angeles
        Manchester
             Seattle
          New York
         Pittsburgh
            Newark
          San Jose
       Minneapolis
             Boston
     Salt Lake City
     San Francisco

                       1        10               20               30             40              50
                                                           Rank
                                     Commuting Zones with 95% Simultaneous CS
          Charlotte

                       B
             Atlanta
       Jacksonville
       Indianapolis
            Raleigh
         Columbus
          Baltimore
          Cincinnati
             Detroit
             Dayton
             Tampa
      New Orleans
          Nashville
           St. Louis
      Port St. Lucie
          Cleveland
           Orlando
         Las Vegas
         Milwaukee
              Dallas
     Grand Rapids
             Fresno
       Kansas City
           Chicago
           Phoenix
       Philadelphia
       San Antonio
              Austin
              Miami
         Fort Worth
             Buffalo
           Portland
         Bridgeport
             Denver
           Houston
         San Diego
       Sacramento
    Washington DC
        Providence
       Los Angeles
        Manchester
             Seattle
          New York
         Pittsburgh
            Newark
          San Jose
       Minneapolis
             Boston
     Salt Lake City
     San Francisco

                       1        10               20               30             40              50
                                                           Rank

Figure 8: Panel A: point estimates and the 95% marginal confidence sets ("CS") for the ranking of the 50
most populous CZs by y ¯c25 . Panel B: point estimates and the 95% simultaneous confidence sets ("CS") for
the ranking of the 50 most populous CZs by y ¯c25 .

                                                      35
    As shown in Appendix F.2, the above conclusions do not materially change if we instead consider the 50
largest counties by population size. On the one hand, it is possible to achieve a quite informative ranking of
these counties according to y
                            ¯c25 . Both the marginal and the simultaneous confidence sets are fairly narrow,
and relatively few counties are included in the confidence sets for the  -best or the  -worst places. On
the other hand, the exposure effects µc25 are too imprecisely estimated to obtain an informative ranking of
counties according to income mobility. First of all, the marginal confidence sets for µc25 are generally too wide
to draw conclusions about whether a particular county has among the highest or the lowest exposure effect,
as evident from column 11 of Table 10.8 Furthermore, the  -best and  -worst results for µc25 show that the
ranking of counties by exposure effects is largely uninformative when inferences are drawn simultaneously
across all places. Consider, for example, column 12 of Table 10. These results show that none of these
counties can be ruled out as being among the top two places when it comes to exposure effects, and only
one county can be ruled out as being at the very bottom of this ranking.

  Panel A: Top 5
                                   Correlational                                                           Movers
  Rank               CZ            ^
                                   y
                                   ¯c25      SE       95% CS             -best          CZ           µ
                                                                                                     ^c25       SE       95% CS          -best
    1     1    San Francisco      0.457     0.001          [1,   2]          4       Seattle         0.229     0.082      [1,   38]       44
    2     2    Salt Lake City     0.457     0.001          [1,   4]          4    Washington DC      0.163     0.077      [1,   41]       48
    3     3        Boston         0.453     0.001          [1,   4]          5      Cleveland        0.124     0.107      [1,   48]       50
    4     4     Minneapolis       0.452     0.001          [2,   5]          5     Fort Worth        0.121     0.090      [1,   48]       50
    5     5       San Jose        0.449     0.001          [4,   6]          6     Minneapolis       0.116     0.120      [1,   48]       50
 Panel B: Bottom 5
                                  Correlational                                                          Movers
 Rank              CZ           ^
                                y
                                ¯c25       SE       95% CS             -worst         CZ          µ
                                                                                                  ^c25        SE       95% CS          -worst
   46     5      Raleigh        0.369     0.001     [45,   46]          10         Charlotte      -0.248     0.096      [3, 50]         49
   47     4    Indianapolis     0.364     0.001     [46,   47]           5       Port St. Lucie   -0.263     0.090      [3, 50]         49
   48     3    Jacksonville     0.358     0.001     [48,   50]           4          Raleigh       -0.278     0.105      [3, 50]         49
   49     2      Atlanta        0.358     0.001     [48,   50]          3           Fresno        -0.377     0.100     [13, 50]         48
   50     1     Charlotte       0.355     0.001     [48,   50]           3        New Orleans     -0.391     0.111     [14, 50]         48

Table 3: Panel A: Top 5 among the 50 most populous commuting zones ranked by the correlational estimates
on the left and by the movers estimates on the right. Panel B: Bottom 5 among the 50 most populous
commuting zones ranked by the correlational estimates on the left and by the movers estimates on the right.
"95% CS" refers to the 95% marginal confidence set for the rank, and " -best" and " -worst" refer to the
size of the 95% confidence sets for the " -best" and " -worst" commuting zones.



National ranking of places by income mobility

So far, we have focused on the 50 largest CZs and counties by population size. We now shift attention to all
CZs and counties, revisiting the key question of Chetty et al. (2014), Chetty et al. (2018) and Chetty and
Hendren (2018): Where in the United States is the land of opportunity?

    In order to analyze this question, the authors present heat maps based on estimates of upward mobility.
They construct these maps by dividing the CZs (or the counties) into deciles based on their estimated value
   ¯c25 .9 Panel A of Figure 9 presents the heat map for the CZs. This map is the same as presented in
of y
   8 An exception is DuPage for which the marginal confidence set suggests that its exposure effect is relatively high compared

most of the other counties.
   9 In recent work, Chetty et al. (2018) define a neighborhood to be a Census-tract, which is one level more granular than

counties. They then construct heat maps (referred to as the Opportunity Atlas) by dividing the Census-tracts into deciles based


                                                                         36
Chetty et al. (2014). Lighter colors represent deciles with higher values of y   ¯c25 . The point estimates of
income mobility vary significantly across areas. For example, CZs in the top decile have an y    ^
                                                                                                 ¯c25 > 0.517,
while those in the bottom decile have y   ^
                                          ¯c25 < 0.362. Note that the 36th percentile of the family income
distribution for children at age 31­37 is $26,800, while the 52nd percentile is $44,800; hence, the differences
in upward mobility across these areas correspond to substantial differences in children's incomes.

    The stated purpose of heat maps such as the one in Panel A of Figure 9 is to draw the attention of
policymakers to low-mobility neighborhoods that need improvement and to help low-income families move
to high-mobility neighborhoods. A natural question is how informative the local statistics reported in these
maps are about a given neighborhood having relatively high or low income mobility compared to other
neighborhoods. To answer this question, we construct two new heat maps. These maps are constructed by
reassigning each CZ to one of the ten groups used in Panel A according to the upper endpoint (Panel B
of of Figure 9) and the lower endpoint (Panel C of Figure 9) of the simultaneous confidence sets. These
confidence sets allow inferences to be drawn simultaneously across all CZs. Thus, the new results in Figure 9
make precise what conclusions one can actually draw about where income mobility in the United States is
relatively high and low.

     In order to interpret the results, it is useful to observe that if the simultaneous confidence sets were
sufficiently narrow, then the heat map in Panel B would be identical to the heat map in Panel C. It is only
in this case the point estimates of y
                                    ¯c25 and, thus, the heat map in Panel A (or, equivalently, in Chetty et al.
(2014, p. 1591)), would give a reliable answer to the question of where in the United States is the land of
opportunity. More generally, how much we can learn about this question depends on how similar the heat
map in Panel B is to the heat map in Panel C. If the CZs that have lighter colors in Panel B also have lighter
colors in Panel C, then we can be confident that these areas have high mobility. Conversely, if the CZs that
have darker colors in Panel C also have darker colors in Panel B, then we can be confident that these areas
have low mobility.

    A visual inspection of the heat maps in Panels B and C of Figure 9 indicates that the uncertainty tends
to be too large to draw firm conclusions about which CZs have high or low income mobility compared to
other places in the United States. In other words, it is not possible to statistically tell apart the CZs where
children have opportunities to succeed from those without such opportunities. Notable exceptions include
many of the commuting zones in the Southeast and in the Great Plains, where mobility is relatively low and
high, respectively.

    We investigate these tentative conclusions in greater depth in Figure 10. For each CZ, we compute the
difference between the lower and the upper endpoint of the simultaneous confidence set. Next, we plot
these differences against the estimated ranks of the CZs. The larger the difference, the less we know about
the ranking of a CZ. To ease interpretation, we normalize the differences by the number of CZs. Thus, a
difference of 1 means one cannot determine with confidence whether a CZ has the highest or the lowest
income mobility in the United States. By comparison, a difference of 0 means we can be confident in the
exact rank of the CZ.

   As evident from Figure 10, the results tend to be much more informative in the upper and the lower
parts of the ranking. In other words, we can be most confident in conclusions about which CZs that have
on their estimated value of y
                            ¯c25 . The estimates and standard errors of y
                                                                        ¯c25 for each Census-tract level is available here. When
using this data, we find that both the marginal and simultaneous confidence sets are far too wide to draw conclusions about
income mobility at such a granular level.


                                                              37
the highest or the lowest income mobility. One possible explanation of this finding is that y      ¯c25 is more
precisely estimated among the CZs that rank at the top and at the bottom. As shown in Appendix F.3, this
explanation is at odds with the data. The standard errors of y   ¯c25 are not particularly small for these CZs.
Instead, the explanation is that the point estimates of y
                                                        ¯c25 differ more across the CZs in the upper and the
lower parts of the ranking as compared to the CZs in the middle of the ranking.

     A limitation of Figure 10 is that it only shows where in the ranking the results are most informative,
not where in the United States. Thus, Figure 11 is useful because it highlights which of the spatial patterns
of income mobility are robust to accounting for uncertainty in the estimates of y      ¯c25 . The heat map in
Panel A is constructed by assigning the CZs to groups depending on the lower and upper endpoints of
the simultaneous confidence sets. A CZ is assigned to a high mobility group if the upper endpoint of its
simultaneous confidence set is in the top half of the national ranking of CZs, i.e., when the confidence set lies
entirely in the top half of the ranking, indicating high mobility. A CZ is assigned to a low mobility group if
the lower endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the bottom half of the national ranking of CZs,
i.e., when the confidence set lies entirely in the bottom half of the ranking, indicating low mobility. Grey
colors represent the CZs with simultaneous confidence sets such that the places cannot be assigned to either
the high or the low mobility group. The heat map in Panel B is constructed in the same way, except the
high (low) mobility group is now defined as the top (bottom) quartile in the national ranking of the CZs.

   The results in Figure 11 calls for caution on concluding which CZs have high or low income mobility
compared to other places in the United States. In the national ranking of places by income mobility, it is
rarely possible to statistically tell if a given CZ has relatively high or low income mobility compared to other
CZs. There are, however, two important exceptions: Upward mobility is with 95% confidence low in many
CZs in the Southeast and high in many CZs in the Great Plains.

    As shown in Appendices F.3 and F.4, the national ranking becomes largely uninformative if one defines
a neighborhood to be a county or if one uses the movers estimates. In other words, it is not possible to draw
firm conclusions about which counties in the United States have relatively high or low values of y¯c25 . Nor is
it possible to say much about which CZs or counties produce more or less upward mobility as measured by
the exposure effects µc25 .




                                                       38
                                                                            A




                                                                            B
                                                                                              Rank




                                                                            C




Figure 9: Ranking of Commuting Zones by point estimates and lower and upper endpoints of simultaneous
confidence sets. The heat maps are based on estimates of y    ¯c25 , the mean percentile rank of child's average
household income for 2014-2015, for the full set of CZs. Panel A: the map is constructed by dividing the
CZs into deciles based on the estimated values of y
                                                  ¯c25 , and shading the areas so that lighter colors correspond
to higher absolute mobility. Panel B: each CZ is re-assigned to one of the ten groups used in Panel A
according to the lower endpoint of its 95% simultaneous confidence set. Panel C: each CZ is re-assigned to
one of the ten groups used in Panel A according to the upper endpoint of its 95% simultaneous confidence
set.


                                                      39
                                  1.00




                                  0.75
Upper Endpoint - Lower Endpoint
        Number of CZs




                                  0.50




                                  0.25




                                  0.00

                                         0   200                       400                   600
                                                                    Rank

                                             Likely Top Half   Undetermined   Likely Bottom Half



Figure 10: For each CZ, we compute the difference between the upper and the lower endpoint of the 95%
simultaneous confidence set. Next, we plot these differences against the estimated ranks of the CZs. To ease
interpretation, we normalize the differences by the number of CZs. Thus, a difference of 1 means one cannot
tell whether a CZ has the highest or the lowest income mobility in the United States. By comparison, a
difference of 0 means we can be confident in the exact rank of the CZ. Each dot in the graph represents
a CZ. The CZ is assigned to a high mobility group (light color) if the upper endpoint of its simultaneous
confidence set is in the top half of the national ranking. The CZ is assigned to a low mobility group (red
color) if the lower endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the bottom half of the national ranking.
Grey colors represent the CZs with simultaneous confidence sets such that the places cannot be assigned to
either the high or the low mobility group.




                                                               40
                                                                                             A




                                                                                      Likely Top Half
                                                                                      Likely Bottom Half
                                                                                      Undetermined




                                                                                             B




                                                                                      Likely Top Quartile
                                                                                      Likely Bottom Quartile
                                                                                      Undetermined




Figure 11: The heat map in Panel A is constructed by assigning the CZs to groups depending on the lower
and upper endpoints of the simultaneous confidence sets. A CZ is assigned to a high mobility group, Likely
Top Half, if the upper endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the top half of the national ranking
of CZs, i.e., when the confidence set lies entirely in the top half of the ranking, indicating high mobility.
A CZ is assigned to a low mobility group, Likely Bottom Half, if the lower endpoint of its simultaneous
confidence set is in the bottom half of the national ranking of CZs, i.e., when the confidence set lies entirely
in the bottom half of the ranking, indicating low mobility. Grey colors represent the CZs with simultaneous
confidence sets such that the places cannot be assigned to either the high or the low mobility group, i.e., the
Undetermined CZs. The heat map in Panel B is constructed in the same way, except the high and low
mobility groups are now defined in terms of top and bottom quartiles in the national ranking of the CZs.
Thus, we refer to these groups as Likely Top Quartile and Likely Bottom Quartile.


                                                      41
5.3       Illustrating the Policy Implications of the Uncertainty in the Rankings

The estimates of Chetty et al. (2014, 2018) and Chetty and Hendren (2018) have been highly influential
both among policymakers and researchers. For example, the rankings of neighborhoods by (point estimates
of) intergenerational mobility play a key role in Chetty's 2014 Testimony for the Budget Comittee United
States Senate (Chetty, April 1, 2014). In this testimony (pages 6 and 7), he emphasizes that policy should
target areas that are ranked at the bottom of the league tables based on their estimates of upward mobility:

"Since rates of upward mobility vary widely across cities, place-based policies that focus on specific cities ­
such as Charlotte or Milwaukee ­ may be more effective than addressing the problem at a national level."

and, moreover, that it is key to disseminate information about which areas have relatively high and low
estimates of upward mobility:

"Perhaps the most cost-effective way to improve mobility may be to publicize local statistics on economic
mobility and other related outcomes. Simply drawing attention to the areas that need improvement can
motivate local policy makers to take action. Moreover, without such information, it is difficult to determine
which programs work and which do not. The federal government is well positioned to construct such statistics
at minimal cost with existing data. The government could go further by offering awards or grants to areas
that have substantially improved their rates of upward mobility. Shining a spotlight on the communities
where children have opportunities to succeed can enable others to learn from their example and increase
opportunities for economic mobility throughout America."

    In light of the large degree of uncertainty, however, one may be concerned that such local statistics (e.g.,
the league tables and heat maps) do not necessarily contain valuable information about economic mobility.
As a consequences of this uncertainty, it can also be problematic to use such statistics to design policy or
target interventions. In order to illustrate the problems that might arise if one chooses to use rankings based
on these statistics, we re-visit the recent Creating Moves to Opportunity (CMTO) Experiment of Bergman
et al. (2019). This experiment is a collaboration between researchers and public housing authorities to
introduce and evaluate interventions to "create moves to opportunity" for low-income families.


The CMTO experiment

The motivation for the CMTO experiment is the argument that low-income families tend to live in neigh-
borhoods with low upward mobility. In order to understand how policy may be designed to help low-income
families move to neighborhoods with higher mobility rates, the authors perform a randomized controlled
trial with housing voucher recipients in Seattle and King County. A treatment group of low-income families
were offered assistance and financial support to find and lease units in areas that were classified as high
upward-mobility neighborhoods.

   The authors "define high upward-mobility neighborhoods as Census tracts that have historical rates of
upward income mobility in approximately the top third among tracts in the Seattle and King County area"
(Bergman et al., 2019, p. 10, Section III.B Defining Opportunity Areas).10 Following this definition, we use


  10 In practice, the authors make a few adjustments to this definition. We refer to Appendix A of Bergman et al. (2019) for a
discussion of these adjustments.


                                                             42
the estimates of y¯c25 for the 397 tracts in the Seattle and King County area to classify areas as upward-
mobility neighborhoods.11 Figure 12 plots these estimates alongside marginal confidence intervals (estimates
plus or minus twice the standard errors). The point estimates vary considerably, but the standard errors are
relatively large. Figure 13 presents a map of Seattle and King County which shows the location of the 132
tracts that have historical rates of upward income mobility in the top third, and, as a result, are classified
by us as high upward-mobility neighborhoods.

                                          Mean percentile rank in the national distribution of child's average family income in 2014-2015


                                                                                                                          estimate
                                                                                                                          estimate +/- 2SE


                                    0.6
        Child's Income Percentile




                                    0.4




                                    0.2



                                          0                     100                     200                    300                    400
                                                                                       Tract

Figure 12: Estimates of y¯c25 , the expected percentile rank of child's average household income for 2014-2015
in the national distribution of her cohort, with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or minus twice
the standard errors) for all 397 Census tracts in Seattle and King County.




  11 These              estimates are available at https://www.opportunityatlas.org/


                                                                                     43
Figure 13: This map of Seattle and King County shows the location of the 132 tracts that were classified as
high upward-mobility neighborhoods. High-upward-mobility neighborhood consists the Census tracts with
estimates of y
             ¯c25 among the top third of the tracts in the Seattle and King County area.


Did CMTO help families move to opportunity neighborhoods?

In light of our previous findings, one might worry the tracts defined as high upward-mobility neighborhoods
do not have statistically higher mobility rates as compared to the other tracts. This concern raises the
question of whether whether one could be confident that CMTO would actually help families move to high
opportunity neighborhoods, prior to the experiment taking effect. To examine this, it is insufficient to test
whether average mobility among tracts in the top third is higher than in the bottom two thirds. Rather,
the key question is whether some of the tracts in the bottom two thirds can have mobility higher than the
tracts in the top one third. To see why, consider the following two examples.

    Suppose average mobility among tracts in the top third is higher because of one tract having high mobility
while all other tracts in the top third have mobility lower than those in the remaining two thirds. In that
case, only families moving to that single high-mobility tract are treated with higher mobility while all other
families are treated with lower mobility. On average, the families that moved to top third tracts because of
the experiment may therefore have moved to neighborhoods with lower mobility. Of course, whether or not
this is the case will depend on the distribution of mobility across neighborhoods to which families actually
moved. Without making assumptions about the individual tracts the families would move from and to as a
result of the experiment, the average effect can be zero, positive or negative.

                                                     44
   Suppose instead the average in the top third is higher because all the tracts in the top third have high
mobility except one tract that has mobility lower than those in the remaining two thirds. In that case,
families moving to that single low-mobility tract are treated with lower mobility while all other families
are treated with higher mobility. On average, families that moved to the top third tracts because of the
experiment may again have moved to neighborhoods with lower mobility. As before, whether or not this is
the case will depend on the distribution of mobility across neighborhoods to which the families would move
from and to as a result of the experiment. Without making assumptions about this, the average effect can
again be zero, positive or negative.

    Of course, these are extreme cases but they help make an important point: Whether the tracts in the
top one third have higher rates of upward mobility on average is neither sufficient nor necessary for low
income families to be moving to neighborhoods with higher upward mobility as a result of the experiment.12
Without making assumptions about the individual tracts the families would move from and to as a result
of the experiment, the necessary and sufficient condition is that then none of the tracts in the bottom two
thirds can have mobility higher than the tracts in the top one third.

    To examine this condition, we compute a 95% confidence set for the  -best tracts in the Seattle and
King County, where  is set equal to 132 (approximately one-third). The confidence set is implemented as
described in Section 4, using the stepwise procedure ("DM.step"). We find that all but 2 out of 397 tracts
could be among the top third, and, as a result, be classified as high upward-mobility neighborhood according
to our definition. Thus, we conclude that one cannot be confident the experiment would actually help low-
income families to move to neighborhoods with higher upward mobility. The classification of some areas
as high upward-mobility neighborhoods may simply reflect statistical uncertainty, not actual differences in
upward mobility.



6     Concluding remarks

In this paper we show how to account for uncertainty in the ranking of different populations according
to the value of some feature of each population. We consider both the problem of constructing marginal
confidence sets for the rank of a particular population as well as simultaneous confidence sets for the ranks
of all populations. We show how to construct such confidence sets under weak assumptions.

    We also provide two empirical examples in which our method produces highly informative confidence sets
for ranks. One is the ranking of countries according to the results on the PISA test. The other is the ranking
of the most populous commuting zones or counties in the United States according to upward mobility. Such
rankings by upward mobility, however, become much less informative if one includes all commuting zones of
counties, if one defines neighborhoods with even more granularity (e.g., by considering census tracts), or if
one uses movers across areas to address concerns about selection.

   A natural question is why it is difficult to achieve an informative ranking in certain cases. Based on our
simulations, in which our confidence sets in some cases cover the true ranking with probability close to one,
one may be concerned that this phenomenon stems from a lack of power of our procedures. We emphasize,

    12 This argument does not rely on heterogeneous effects of place or non-random mobility. Even if the effect of a given tract

is the same for all families or low-income families move randomly to tracts in the top third, the average treatment effect of the
experiment may very well be negative


                                                               45
however, that these situations may arise precisely when the ranking is most informative. To see this, consider
the case in which standard errors of the mobility estimates, say, are nearly zero for all neighborhoods (relative
to the differences in mobility estimates across neighborhoods). Due to the discreteness of the ranks, the
ranking has essentially no uncertainty and any "reasonable" confidence set should cover the true ranking
with probability (close to) one. In other situations when there is more uncertainty in the ranking, our method
achieves coverage closer to the nominal level. These features are borne out in our simulations.

    We therefore feel that a more appropriate explanation for why it may not be possible to achieve an
informative ranking is that researchers may simply be demanding too much from the data. This explanation
is most plausible when estimates vary substantially across populations but standard errors are large, when
standard errors are small but the estimates do not vary much across populations, or when both standard
errors are large and estimates do not vary much across populations. To think about when our (or any)
approach will deliver an informative ranking, a useful starting point is the naive pairwise comparisons that
ignore the multiple testing issue. Take, for example, the 397 tracts in the CMTO experiment in Seattle.
To obtain a complete ranking of these tracts by upward mobility, it is necessary to compare 78,606 unique
pairs. The problem is that at most 30.2% of these pairs consist of tracts that differ significantly at the 95%
significance levels. Importantly, the conclusion that 30.2% of the pairs are significantly different ignores
that one has performed 78606 comparisons, so even by chance, many of these comparisons will show up
as significant when in fact they are not. Indeed, when taking the multiple testing into account, it is clear
the uncertainty is too large to achieve an informative ranking of the tracts in Seattle according to upward
mobility.




                                                       46
Appendix A                     The "Naive" Bootstrap Undercovers
In this section, we show that the "naive" bootstrap as described in Remark 3.7 does not satisfy the uniform coverage requirement
unless p = 2. Furthermore, we show that when there are ties and p > 2, then the approach even fails the pointwise coverage
requirement for a fixed P and, in fact, the coverage probability tends to zero as p grows.

    To simplify the subsequent discussion, we focus on the case in which the estimators of the features (Pj ) are independent
and normally distributed, ^j  N ((Pj ), 1) for all j  J . In this case, we obtain finite-sample results, but they easily extend
to the asymptotic case when n   and variances are unknown. Suppose (Pj ) = 0 for all j  J . Consider the parametric
bootstrap in which we draw  ^  N (  ^j , Ip ) independently, conditional on the data ^ = (^1 , . . . , ^p ) .
                             j

    Suppose we want to construct a one-sided confidence set for the rank of population j , for which the upper endpoint is equal
to p:
                                                              ^, . . . , p ,
                                                   Rn,j   L    j

where L^  is the -quantile of r   , conditional on the data 
                                ^j                              ^. Further suppose all populations are tied with (Pj ) = 0 for all
         j
                                                                           
j  J , so that all ranks are equal to one, rj (P ) = 1 for all j  J . For Rn, 1 to cover the rank r1 (P ) = 1 with probability no less
than 1 - , it must be the case that the event

                                   E       ^  = 1|
                                        P {L      ^}  1 -     =     P {^ > max{^ , . . . , ^ }|^}  
                                             1                          1       2           p

holds. Consider first p = 2. Then,

                               P    ^ > max{
                                            ^ , . . . , ^ } ^ =P     ^ > 
                                                                         ^  ^
                                     1       2           p            1   2

                                                                      ^ - 
                                                                          ^1 - ( ^ - ^2 )  ^2 -  ^1
                                                             =P        1
                                                                              2           >         ^
                                                                                                    
                                                                               2               2
                                                                         ^2 - 
                                                                               ^1
                                                             =1-           
                                                                             2

so that
                                                                  ^2 - 
                                                                        ^1
                                            P {E } = P   1-                         =1- .
                                                                      2
                                              
Therefore, the bootstrap confidence interval Rn, 1 covers r1 (P ) with the desired probability.

    Now consider p > 2. Let M be the index such that ^M = max{^2 , . . . , ^p }. First note that

                           P       ^ > max{
                                           ^ , . . . , ^ } ^ <P    ^ > 
                                                                       ^  ^                                                      (30)
                                    1       2           p           1   M

                                                                    ^ - 
                                                                        ^1 - (^ - ^M )   ^M - ^1
                                                                     1                           ^
                                                           =P                M         >         
                                                                              2             2
                                                                        ^M - 
                                                                             ^1
                                                           =1-            
                                                                           2

Let F be the event
                                                                   ^M - 
                                                                        ^1
                                                  F      1-                          .
                                                                      2
Clearly, by the strict inequality in (30), E  F and P {E } < P {F }. Letting z1- be the (1 - )-quantile of the standard
normal distribution, we have

                                            ^M - 
                                                 ^1                     max{^2 , . . . , ^p } - ^1
                            P {F } = P               z1-       =P                                   z1-   ,
                                               2                                     2
                                                         
which, for example, is strictly less than P {(^2 -  ^1 )/ 2  z1- } = 1 - . Therefore, P {E } < 1 -  and the confidence set
                                                                                          ^           ^
Rn, 1 does not cover the rank r1 (P ) with the desired probability. Moreover, as p  , max{2 , . . . , p }   in probability, so
the coverage probability tends to zero.




                                                                   47
Appendix B                     An Alternative Construction of Confidence Sets for
                               Ranks
Let Cn (1 - ) be a confidence set that is rectangular in the sense that

                                                     Cn (1 - ) =           Cn (1 - , j )
                                                                     j J


for suitable sets {Cn (1 - , j ) : j  J }, and that simultaneously covers the vector of features (P ) with limiting probability
1 - :
                                            lim inf inf P {(P )  Cn (1 - )}  1 -  .
                                           n P P

For instance, the confidence set could be constructed as in Example 3.7 of Romano and Shaikh (2012). Define
                                -
                               Nj     k  J \ {j } : Cn (1 - , j ) lies entirely below Cn (1 - , k)
                                +
                               Nj     k  J \ {j } : Cn (1 - , j ) lies entirely above Cn (1 - , k)          .

Then, it is easy to see that
                                                          -                       +
                                     lim inf inf P     |N j | + 1  rj (P )  p - |Nj |             1-
                                     n P P

and                                                                                               
                                                                                                  
                                                           -                               +
                                lim inf inf P           |N j |   + 1  rj (P )  p -       |Nj |       1- .
                                 n P P                                                            
                                                 j J

Therefore,
                                                             -                        +
                                                 Rn,j      |Nj | + 1, . . . , p - | N j |                                        (31)
is a confidence set that covers the rank rj (P ) with limiting probability at least 1 -  and

                                              joint                -                        +
                                             Rn                  |Nj | + 1, . . . , p - | N j |                                  (32)
                                                        j J

is a confidence set that covers the vector of ranks r(P ) with limiting probability at least 1 - .

    To formally compare the approach proposed in the main text with the one of this section, we focus on the case in which
the estimators of the features (Pj ) are independent and normally distributed, i.e.,
                                       ^ 
                                       1
                                       .
                                       .N                                2 (P1 )        2 (Pp )
                                       .               (P ), diag                ,...,               ,                           (33)
                                                                          n1             np
                                       ^p
                                       

where  2 (Pj ) > 0, j  J are known. In this case, we obtain finite-sample comparisons between the two methods, but the results
easily extend to asymptotic (as n  ) comparisons and to the case of unknown variances.
                                                             joint
    We consider the confidence set for the entire ranking, Rn      , based on Cn (1 - ), where Cn (1 - ) =      j J   Cn (1 - , j ) is
such that
                                         Cn (1 - , j ) =  ^j ±   
                                                                   (Pj )
                                                                         q1- , j  J ,                                            (34)
                                                                     nj
and q1- is either the
                                      1 + (1 - )1/p
                                                    - quantile of the N (0, 1) distribution                                      (35)
                                             2
or the
                                                
                                         1-          - quantile of the N (0, 1) distribution .                                   (36)
                                                2p
The quantile in (35) imposes independence of the estimators and (36) is the quantile used in the Bonferroni method. We
          joint                        joint
compare Rn      to our confidence set Rn     based on Cn (1 - , Sall ) with Cn (1 - , Sall ) = (j,k)Sall Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k))
such that
                                                                       2          2
                               Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k)) = ^j - ^k ±  (Pj ) +  (Pk ) q1- ,                                   (37)
                                                                        nj         nk




                                                                     48
where q1- is the
                                                                           |^j - ^k - j,k (P )|
                                        (1 - ) - quantile of      max                                   .
                                                               (j,k)Sall       2 (Pj )        2 (Pk )
                                                                                nj
                                                                                         +     nk

This quantile is similar to L- 1
                             symm,n (1 - , Sall , P ) as defined in (8) except that the estimated variances in (8) are replaced by
the population variances.

    In the following lemma, R(P ) denotes the set of ranks defined in Remark 3.6.
                                         joint
Lemma B.1. Suppose (33) holds. Let Rn          be based on Cn (1 - ) = j J Cn (1 - , j ) satisfying (34) with q1- as defined
                             joint
in either (35) or (36). Let Rn     be based on Cn (1 - , Sall ) = (j,k)Sall Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k)) satisfying (37). Then the
following statements hold:

                        joint                      joint               joint
 (i) For any   (0, 1), Rn     satisfies P (r(P )  Rn     )  P (R(P )  Rn     ) > 1 - .
                           joint                      joint               joint
 (ii) For any   (0, 1), Rn       satisfies P (r(P )  Rn     )  P (R(P )  Rn     )  1 - , where the second inequality is satisfied
      with equality when all elements of (P ) are equal.
                      joint                 joint
(iii) If p = 2, then Rn     is a subset of Rn     , and a strict subset with positive probability.
                                                                            joint                 joint
(iv) If  (Pj ) =  (Pk ) for all j, k  J and nj = nk for all j, k  J , then Rn     is a subset of Rn     , and a strict subset with
     positive probability.

                                                                   joint
     This lemma shows, first, that the alternative confidence set Rn     covers the ranking r(P ) and the set of ranks R(P ) each
with probability strictly larger than 1 - , independently of the configuration of features (P1 ), . . . , (Pp ). On the other hand,
our proposed confidence set for the set of ranks achieves coverage probability equal to 1 -  in the case when all features (Pj )
are equal. In addition, there are two special cases in which our approach leads to bounds on the ranks that are not wider and
strictly narrower than the alternatives proposed in this section: when there are only two populations or when the variances and
sample sizes of all populations are equal.

    In the case when p > 2, not all variances, and not all sample sizes are equal, then our confidence set and the alternative
proposed in this section cover the ranking with probability strictly larger than 1 - . In this case, we do not know whether our
method leads to smaller confidence sets. However, we can compare the endpoints of the two confidence sets as follows. In the
proof of the lemma, we show that

               P           joint
                   r(P )  Rn       P      (Pj ) - (Pk )  ^j - ^k ± (j + k )q1-                 for all (j, k)  Sall    >1- ,
                
where j   (Pj )/ nj . Similarly, our confidence set satisfies

              P            joint
                   r(P )  Rn       P     (Pj ) - (Pk )  ^j - ^k ±          2 +  2q
                                                                           j                    for all (j, k)  Sall   1- .
                                                                               k 1-

Comparing the two expressions, it is clear that we cannot have

                                                   (j + k )q1- <        2 +  2q
                                                                        j   k 1-

for all (j, k)  Sall . In particular, if there is one pair (j, k) such that this strict inequality holds, then there must be at least one
other pair (j , k ) such that the inequality is reversed:

                                                 (j + k )q1- >          2 + 2 q
                                                                        j        .
                                                                            k 1-

                                joint                                                                          joint
Therefore, the confidence set Rn      cannot be contained in ours. Whether our confidence set is contained in Rn     in general,
we leave open for future research.

Remark B.1. Consider the case in which (P ) is a vector of expectations and          ^ the corresponding vector of sample means.
                                joint
Then, the two confidence sets Rn      in Lemma B.1, one using the critical value in (35) and the other the Bonferroni critical value
in (36), coincide with the two proposals in Klein et al. (2018). The simulations in Section 4 confirm the results in Lemma B.1
by showing that our confidence sets for ranks are either of similar or strictly smaller size than those by Klein et al. (2018).



Appendix C                   Comparison With Gupta (1956)
Gupta (1956) proposes a confidence set that contains the identity of the population with the largest mean, based on observations


                                                                   49
from independent, normally distributed populations with equal and known variances:

                                                    ¯n  N                      2 (P )
                                                    X                µ(P ),             ,                                      (38)
                                                                                n
                                                Gupta
where  2 (P ) > 0 is known. His confidence set Jn     contains all j  J such that

                                                                ¯ n,j  d 
                                                        ¯ n,k - X
                                                    max X                
                                                                          (P )
                                                                               ,
                                                    kJ                     n
where d solves
                                                     (u + d)p-1 (u)du = 1 -  ,                                                 (39)

 and  denote the cdf and pdf of the standard normal distribution, and   (0, 1/2). Let  be an arbitrary permutation
of J such that µ(P(1) )  µ(P(2) )  . . .  µ(P(p) ), where µ(Pj ) is the j th element of µ(P ). Gupta shows that the best
population,  (1), is contained in his confidence set with probability no less than 1 - :

                                  P          Gupta
                                       (1)  Jn           =P          ¯ n,k - X
                                                                 max X       ¯ n,(1)  d 
                                                                                         (P )
                                                                 kJ                       n
                                                                 p
                                                                                     (P )
                                                         =            (k)        x+d              (1) (x)dx
                                                                k=2
                                                                                      n
                                                                                            p-1
                                                                               (P )
                                                                (1)        x+d                    (1) (x)dx
                                                                                n

                                                         =       (u + d)p-1 (u)du

where j and j denote the cdf and pdf of the normal distribution with mean µ(Pj ) and variance  2 (P )/n. The first equality
uses normality and independence of the means. The inequality above follows because, since the populations have equal variances
their distributions are stochastically ordered by their means. The final equality is due to a change of variables. Since d is chosen
                                                                                   Gupta
so that the last expression is equal to 1 - , the coverage probability P  (1)  Jn          is no smaller than 1 - . The inequality
becomes an equality when all means are equal to each other. In this sense, Gupta's approach selects the critical value from the
least-favorable configuration of means.

     The requirement of covering  (1) with probability no less than a prespecified level is not the same as covering the set
                         1-best                                                                         1-best
of 1-best populations, J0       , as defined in Section 3.4. In fact, Gupta's confidence set may cover J0      with probability
strictly less than 1 -  when the largest mean µ(P(1) ) is tied with at least one other mean. To see this consider the case p = 2
and suppose µ(P1 ) = µ(P2 ). Then, by the distributional assumption (38), we have
                               1-best   Gupta                         Gupta
                          P   J0       Jn           =P       {1, 2}  Jn

                                                    =P       max max{X  ¯ n,k - X¯ n,j }  d  (P )
                                                                                             
                                                             j J kJ                            n
                                                                 X¯ n,k - µk (P )         ¯ n,j - µj (P )
                                                                                          X
                                                    =P       max                   - min                  d
                                                             kJ      (P )/ n          j J    (P )/ n

                                                    =2       [(u + d) - (u)] (u)du

The last equality uses the expression of the distribution of the range statistic for two i.i.d. standard normal random variables.
Since, for all d > 0,

             2    [(u + d) - (u)] (u)du =         (u + d)(u)du +                  (u + d)(u)du - 1 <           (u + d) (u)du

and since  > 1/2 implies that d solving (39) for p = 2 must be positive, we have
                                                      1-best   Gupta
                                                P    J0       Jn                  <1- .


    Consider now the case when p > 2 and t of the means are tied as the best (2  t  p), say

                                         µ(P1 ) = . . . = µ(Pt ) > µ(Pt+1 )  . . .  µ(Pp ) .




                                                                      50
                                                                               contour plot of CPU (p,t)




                                                      0.15
                                            0.05




                                                                     5
                                                                   0.2
                                     15
                                     10
                                 t




                                                     5

                                                              45
                                                    0.3

                                                           0.
                                                                             5
                                                                         0.6
                                     5


                                              5
                                           0.5



                                               75         5
                                             0.      0.8

                                                              0.95




                                                                         5                  10             15

                                                                                            p



                               Figure 14: Contour plot of CP U (p, t) with 1 -  = 0.95.


Then
                          1-best   Gupta                                              Gupta
                     P   J0       Jn               =P                {1, . . . , t}  Jn

                                                   =P                    max    max{X         ¯ n,j }  d 
                                                                                      ¯ n,k - X            
                                                                                                            (P )
                                                                     j {1,...,t} kJ                          n
                                                                                 ¯
                                                                                Xn,k - µ(Pk )                 X¯ n,j - µ(Pj )
                                                   P                  max                      - min                          d
                                                                     k{1,...,t}     (P )/ n       j {1,...,t}     (P )/ n

                                                   =t                [(u + d) - (u)]t-1 (u)du

                                                                                       U
                                                                                  CP       (d,t)

Denote by d(p) the solution to (39), i.e. Gupta's choice of critical value for a given number of populations p. Figure 14 plots
                                   U
the contours of CP U (p, t)  CP (d(p), t) (with 1 -  = 0.95) as a function of the number of populations p and the number of
ties at the largest mean t. This is an upper bound on the probability with which Gupta's confidence set covers the set of 1-best
                1-best
populations, J0        . Only in the lower right corner of the plot, i.e. for large p and small t, is the upper bound of the coverage
probability larger than the desired level 0.95, otherwise it is strictly smaller.
                                                                                     1-best
    Therefore, for most (t, p) combinations, Gupta's confidence set does not cover J0       with the desired probability whereas
                                                    -best
our proposals in Section 3.4 asymptotically cover J0       with probability no less than 1 -  for  = 1, but also for any other
 > 1.




                                                                                       51
Appendix D                     Proofs

D.1       Proofs of Results in the Main Text
Proof of Theorem 3.1. Suppose the event Sj (P )  Cn (1 - , Sj ) holds. Then, any k = j such that Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k))  R-
satisfies (Pj ) < (Pk ). Therefore, the rank rj (P ) is strictly larger than the number of k = j for which Cn (1-, Sj , (j, k))  R- .
Similarly, any k = j such that Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k))  R+ satisfies (Pj ) > (Pk ). Therefore, the rank rj (P ) is bounded above
by the number of elements in J minus the number of k = j for which Cn (1 - , Sj , (j, k))  R+ . This establishes the first
inequality of the theorem and the coverage statement follows immediately.


Proof of Theorem 3.2. Suppose Sj   +
                                     (P )  Rej-             -           +
                                              j =  and Sj (P )  Rejj = . Then,  (Pj ) <  (Pk ) for (j, k )  Rejj and
                                                                                                                         -
                             +
(Pj ) > (Pk ) for (j, k)  Rejj , so the bounds on the rank follow just as in the proof of Theorem 3.1. This establishes the first
inequality of the theorem and the coverage statement follows immediately.


Proof of Theorem 3.3. Analogous to the proof of Theorem 3.1.


Proof of Theorem 3.4. Analogous to the proof of Theorem 3.2.


Proof of Theorem 3.5. Let   { permutation of J : (P(1) )  . . .  (P(p) )} be the set of permutations of J that preserve
the ranking of the elements of (P ). Notice that rj (P ) = min  -1 (j ) and denote by j      a permutation that achieves the
                     - 1                  - 1                    
minimum, i.e. (j ) (j ) = min  (j ). The permutation j may vary with j , but two different permutations j                and  
                                                                                                                                k
can differ only on elements for which the corresponding elements in (P ) are equal (i.e. (P (t) ) = (P (t) ) for all j, k, t  J ).
                                                                                           j          k
Pick an arbitrary    {1    , . . . ,   } and define
                                     p

                                                      J   {  (1), . . . ,   ( - 1)} .

Then:

                                              Hj                   rj (P )  
                                                                     -1
                                                                   (j ) (j )  
                                                                   (Pj )  (P ( ) )
                                                                               j

                                                                   (Pj )  (P ( ) )
                                                                   (Pj )  (Pk )    k  J \ J 
                                                                    max {(Pk ) - (Pj )}  0                                               (40)
                                                                   kJ \J 


    The statement of the theorem obviously holds when all hypotheses are false. Therefore, assume that at least one of the
                                                                                                                                    -best
hypotheses is true. Let s ^ be the smallest integer such that there is a false rejection at Step s  ^, i.e. there is a ^
                                                                                                                       j  Is
                                                                                                                           ^  J0          (P )
                                                      -best                                        -best
such that Tn,^
             j >  ^
                  c n (1 - , I ^
                               s ). By definition, J 0      ( P )  I s
                                                                     ^ and therefore c
                                                                                     ^ n (1 - , J 0       ( P ))  c
                                                                                                                  ^n (1 - , I s
                                                                                                                              ^ ). Thus,
                                                                                    -best
                                               max          Tn,j  Tn,^  ^n (1 - , J0
                                                                     j >c                 (P ))
                                               -best
                                           j J0      (P )

and
                                                                                    -best
                                    FWERP  P          reject at least one Hj , j  J0      (P )

                                                                                          -best
                                               P             max              ^n (1 - , J0
                                                                       Tn,j > c                 (P ))   .                                (41)
                                                          -best
                                                      j J0      (P )




                                                                       52
To compute this probability consider:


                     P         max        Tn,j  x   =P           max            min max      ^k - ^j   x
                             -best
                         j J0      (P )                          -best
                                                             j J0      (P ) K K kJ \K


                                                    P            max            max      ^k - 
                                                                                              ^j   x
                                                                 -best                
                                                             j J0      (P ) kJ \J


                                                    P            max            max      ^k - 
                                                                                              ^j - k,j (P )   x
                                                                 -best                
                                                             j J0      (P ) kJ \J


                                                     min P              max           max    ^k - 
                                                                                                  ^j - k,j (P )           x
                                                        K K           -best
                                                                  j J0      (P ) kJ \K

                                                    = min P      Tn,J  -best (P ),K  x                                            (42)
                                                        K K             0


where the second inequality follows from (40).
                                                                                                                 -best
    Then there exists a set K  = Kn
                                   (P )  K such that, by combining (41), (42), and the definition of c
                                                                                                     ^n (1 - , J0      (P )),
we have
                                                                                    -best
                         FWERP  1 - min P           Tn,J  -best (P ),K  c
                                                                        ^n (1 - , J0      (P ))
                                            K K          0

                                                                         -1          -best          ^n )
                                     =1-P      Tn,J  -best (P ),K   max Mn  (1 - , J0      (P ), K, P
                                                    0                   K K

                                                                     -1          -best
                                     1-P       Tn,J  -best (P ),K   Mn  (1 - , J0      (P ), K  , P
                                                                                                  ^n )            .
                                                    0

Therefore,

                                                                                    -1          -best
              lim sup sup FWERP  1 - lim inf inf P            Tn,J  -best (P ),K   Mn  (1 - , J0      (P ), K  , P
                                                                                                                 ^n )
              n P P                          n P P                 0

                                                                                         -1          -best          ^n )
                                      1 - lim inf inf min P         Tn,J  -best (P ),K  Mn  (1 - , J0      (P ), K, P
                                             n P P K K                      0

                                     ,

where the last inequality follows from (26) and the fact that K is a finite set. The desired result now follows because
                                            -best         -best
                           lim inf inf P {J0      (P )  Jn      } = 1 - lim sup sup FWERP  1 - .
                            n P P                                                 n P P




D.2      Proofs of Results in the Appendix
Proof of Lemma B.1. Since the quantile in (35) is smaller than that in (36), we show the results for (35) and the analogous
                                                           
results for (36) then follow immediately. Define j   (Pj )/ nj .

     Consider the claim (i). Suppose j,k (P )  Cn (1 - , (j, k))  [         ^j - ^k ± (j + k )q1- ] for all (j, k)  Sall . Then, for
            -                                                                                                             +
all k  Nj     , the interval Cn (1 - , (j, k)) lies entirely below zero, so that (Pj ) < (Pk ). Similarly, for all k  Nj    , we have
                                                                                                                                    -
(Pj ) > (Pk ). Therefore, the smallest possible value of the rank of j cannot be smaller than the number of elements in Nj            ,
                   -                                                                                                           +
i.e. rj (P )  |Nj    |, and the largest value of the rank of j cannot be larger than p minus the number of elements in Nj        , i.e.
                  +
¯j (P )  p - |Nj
r                   |. Therefore,

                                       joint
                           P   R(P )  Rn            P   j,k (P )  Cn (1 - , (j, k)) for all (j, k)  Sall              .




                                                                       53
Letting j,k  j /(j + k ), we have

                              P   j,k (P )  Cn (1 - , (j, k)) for all (j, k)  Sall

                              =P     (Pj ) - (Pk )  ^j - ^k ± (j + k )q1-            for all (j, k)  Sall
                                                 ^j - (Pj )
                                                              ^k - (Pk )
                                                              
                              =P       max                  -             q1-
                                     (j,k)Sall     j + k         j + k
                                                       ^j - (Pj )
                                                                               ^k - (Pk )
                                                                               
                              =P       max       j,k              - (1 - j,k )             q1-
                                     (j,k)Sall             j                       k
                                                         ^j - (Pj )
                                                                      ^k - (Pk )
                                                                      
                              >P       max       max                ,                  q1-
                                     (j,k)Sall               j            k
                                           ^j - (Pj )
                                           
                              =P     max               q1-
                                     j J       j

                              =1- ,

The strict inequality follows from the fact that, for any numbers   (0, 1) and A = -B , we have |A - (1 -  )B < max{|A|, |B |}.
This inequality is applicable above because j,k  (0, 1) and P {(   ^j - (Pj ))/j = ( ^k - (Pk ))/k } = 0 for all (j, k)  Sall .
Therefore, the desired claim in (i) follows.

    Part (ii) follows from analogous arguments to those in the proof of Theorem 3.3 and in Remark 3.6.

    Consider part (iii). Notice that, for p = 2, q1- is the (1 - /2)-quantile of the standard normal distribution. Suppose
there is a k  J such that Cn (1 - , k) lies entirely above Cn (1 - , j ), i.e.,

                                                       ^k - k q1- > 
                                                                    ^j + j q1-

or, equivalently,
                                                   ^j - 
                                                        ^k + (j + k )q1- < 0 .
                                                                               2 +  2 and q
This implies that Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k)) lies entirely below zero if j + k > j   k        1- > q1- . The former condition
obviously holds because j > 0 for all j  J . The latter follows because, since   (0, 1),
                                                             
                                                         1+ 1-             
                                                                      >1-    .
                                                              2            2
                                  -          -                                                +      +
Therefore, we have shown that |Nj   |  |Nj     | for all j  J . Similarly, we can show that |Nj |  |Nj | for all j  J . For
  -       -
|Nj | < |Nj | to occur for some j  J , there must exist a k  J such that

                                     ^j - ^k +     2 +  2q        ^   ^
                                                   j   k 1- < 0 < j - k + (j + k )q1-

or, equivalently,
                                           ^k - 
                                                ^j         2 +  2q
                                                           j   k 1- , (j + k )q1-          .
This event occurs with positive probability because the interval has positive length, as shown above, and the difference in the
                                                                   +        +
estimators is normally distributed. Similarly, we can show that |Nj  | < |Nj  | for some j  J occurs with positive probability,
so the desired claim follows.

    Finally, consider part (iv). Suppose there is a k  J such that Cn (1 - , k) lies entirely above Cn (1 - , j ), i.e.,

                                                       ^j - 
                                                            ^k + 2 (P )
                                                                   q1- < 0 .
                                                                    n
                                                                               1
Notice that q1- is the (1 - )-quantile from the distribution of max(j,k)Sall      |Zj - Zk |, where Z1 , . . . , Zp are i.i.d. N (0, 1)
                                                                                2
random variables. This quantile satisfies 2q1- < 2q1- for all   (0, 1) so that
                                             
                                    ^j - ^k + 2
                                                 (P )
                                                      q1- <   ^j - ^k + 2 (P )
                                                                          q1- < 0 ,
                                                 n                         n
                                                                                 -      -
which means that Cn (1 - , Sall , (j, k)) lies entirely below zero. Therefore, |Nj |  |Nj | for all j  J . Similarly, we can show
       +      +
that |Nj |  |Nj | for all j  J . The remainder of the proof is then similar to that of part (iii).




                                                                  54
Appendix E         Simulation Results

                                                                     1
    n     2   p    test         0     0.22    0.44    0.67    0.89        1.11    1.33    1.56    1.78      2
    100   1   3    M         0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                   DM        0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
                   DM.step   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
              10   M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.940   0.993   0.980   0.980   0.980       0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980
                   DM.step   0.940   0.992   0.975   0.971   0.973       0.973   0.973   0.973   0.973   0.973
              50   M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.950   1.000   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                   DM.step   0.950   1.000   0.998   0.994   0.993       0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993
          3   3    M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.948   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM.step   0.948   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
              10   M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.940   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM.step   0.940   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
              50   M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.950   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM.step   0.950   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
    200   1   3    M         0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
                   DM        0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956       0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956
                   DM.step   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956       0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956
              10   M         0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                   DM        0.950   0.988   0.986   0.986   0.986       0.986   0.986   0.986   0.986   0.986
                   DM.step   0.950   0.983   0.976   0.975   0.975       0.975   0.975   0.975   0.975   0.975
              50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.947   0.997   0.996   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
                   DM.step   0.947   0.996   0.996   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
          3   3    M         0.997   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.956   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM.step   0.956   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
              10   M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.950   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM.step   0.950   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
              50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM        0.947   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                   DM.step   0.947   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000


          Table 4: Single Rank: coverage frequency of the confidence sets for tmax = 0




                                                     55
                                                                 1
n     2   p    test         0     0.22    0.44    0.67    0.89        1.11    1.33    1.56    1.78      2
100   1   3    M         0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
               DM        0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
               DM.step   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
          10   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.973   0.986   0.980   0.980   0.980       0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980
               DM.step   0.968   0.981   0.973   0.973   0.973       0.973   0.973   0.973   0.973   0.973
          50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.996   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
               DM.step   0.994   0.996   0.993   0.993   0.993       0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993
      3   3    M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.948   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.948   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
          10   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.973   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.968   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
          50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.996   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.994   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
200   1   3    M         0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
               DM        0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956       0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956
               DM.step   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956       0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956   0.956
          10   M         0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
               DM        0.987   0.987   0.986   0.986   0.986       0.986   0.986   0.986   0.986   0.986
               DM.step   0.982   0.980   0.975   0.975   0.975       0.975   0.975   0.975   0.975   0.975
          50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
               DM.step   0.995   0.996   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
      3   3    M         0.997   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.956   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.956   0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
          10   M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.987   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.982   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
          50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.996   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.995   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000


      Table 5: Single Rank: coverage frequency of the confidence sets for tmax = 2




                                                 56
                                                                   1
n     2     p    test         0     0.22    0.44    0.67    0.89        1.11    1.33    1.56    1.78      2
100   1     3    M         0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
                 DM        0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
                 DM.step   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
            10   M         0.997   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM        0.943   0.964   0.964   0.964   0.964       0.964   0.964   0.964   0.964   0.964
                 DM.step   0.943   0.963   0.959   0.959   0.957       0.957   0.957   0.957   0.957   0.957
            50   M         0.993   0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994       0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994
                 DM        0.930   0.934   0.934   0.934   0.934       0.934   0.934   0.934   0.934   0.934
                 DM.step   0.930   0.933   0.931   0.931   0.932       0.932   0.932   0.932   0.932   0.932
      3     3    M         0.997   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
                 DM        0.948   0.977   0.978   0.978   0.978       0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978
                 DM.step   0.948   0.976   0.975   0.974   0.972       0.972   0.971   0.971   0.971   0.971
            10   M         0.997   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM        0.943   0.969   0.970   0.969   0.969       0.969   0.969   0.969   0.969   0.969
                 DM.step   0.943   0.968   0.966   0.964   0.964       0.963   0.961   0.962   0.962   0.962
            50   M         0.993   0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994       0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994
                 DM        0.930   0.935   0.935   0.935   0.935       0.935   0.935   0.935   0.935   0.935
                 DM.step   0.930   0.935   0.933   0.933   0.932       0.933   0.932   0.932   0.932   0.932
200   1     3    M         0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
                 DM        0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954       0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954
                 DM.step   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954       0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954
            10   M         0.995   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
                 DM        0.946   0.964   0.964   0.964   0.964       0.964   0.964   0.964   0.964   0.964
                 DM.step   0.946   0.961   0.959   0.959   0.959       0.959   0.959   0.959   0.959   0.959
            50   M         0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990       0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990
                 DM        0.940   0.944   0.944   0.944   0.944       0.944   0.944   0.944   0.944   0.944
                 DM.step   0.940   0.941   0.940   0.940   0.940       0.940   0.940   0.940   0.940   0.940
      3     3    M         0.997   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM        0.954   0.985   0.985   0.985   0.985       0.985   0.985   0.985   0.985   0.985
                 DM.step   0.954   0.983   0.980   0.978   0.978       0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978
            10   M         0.995   0.998   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM        0.946   0.970   0.969   0.970   0.970       0.970   0.970   0.970   0.970   0.970
                 DM.step   0.946   0.967   0.965   0.967   0.967       0.965   0.965   0.965   0.965   0.965
            50   M         0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990       0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990
                 DM        0.940   0.944   0.944   0.944   0.944       0.944   0.944   0.944   0.944   0.944
                 DM.step   0.940   0.941   0.940   0.940   0.939       0.940   0.940   0.940   0.940   0.940


          Table 6: All Ranks: coverage frequency of the confidence sets for tmax = 0




                                                   57
                                                                   1
n     2     p    test         0     0.22    0.44    0.67    0.89        1.11    1.33    1.56    1.78      2
100   1     3    M         0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
                 DM        0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
                 DM.step   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948       0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948   0.948
            10   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM        0.988   0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994       0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994
                 DM.step   0.981   0.990   0.989   0.989   0.989       0.989   0.989   0.989   0.989   0.989
            50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM        0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM.step   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
      3     3    M         0.997   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
                 DM        0.948   0.977   0.978   0.978   0.978       0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978
                 DM.step   0.948   0.976   0.975   0.974   0.972       0.972   0.971   0.971   0.971   0.971
            10   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM        0.988   0.999   1.000   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM.step   0.981   0.996   0.997   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
            50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM        0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM.step   0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
200   1     3    M         0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
                 DM        0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954       0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954
                 DM.step   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954       0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954   0.954
            10   M         0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM        0.988   0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990       0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990   0.990
                 DM.step   0.986   0.988   0.988   0.988   0.988       0.988   0.988   0.988   0.988   0.988
            50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM        0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM.step   0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
      3     3    M         0.997   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
                 DM        0.954   0.985   0.985   0.985   0.985       0.985   0.985   0.985   0.985   0.985
                 DM.step   0.954   0.983   0.980   0.978   0.978       0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978   0.978
            10   M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM        0.988   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
                 DM.step   0.986   0.993   0.993   0.992   0.993       0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993
            50   M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM        0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 DM.step   0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000


          Table 7: All Ranks: coverage frequency of the confidence sets for tmax = 2




                                                   58
                                                                 1
n     2   p    test         0     0.22    0.44    0.67    0.89        1.11    1.33    1.56    1.78      2
100   1   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
               DM.step   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
               T         0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993       0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.992   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
               DM.step   0.991   0.999   0.998   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
               T         0.992   0.998   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.985   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.984   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         0.990   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
      3   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   0.999   0.999   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
               DM        0.996   0.992   0.982   0.979   0.979       0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979
               DM.step   0.995   0.989   0.978   0.974   0.973       0.968   0.968   0.968   0.968   0.968
               T         0.993   0.990   0.981   0.979   0.979       0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.992   0.998   0.998   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
               DM.step   0.991   0.998   0.998   0.997   0.997       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
               T         0.992   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.985   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.984   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         0.990   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   0.998   0.998   0.998
200   1   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
               DM.step   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
               T         0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.985   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.985   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         0.988   1.000   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.986   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.985   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         0.991   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
      3   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
               DM        0.995   0.988   0.985   0.984   0.984       0.984   0.984   0.984   0.984   0.984
               DM.step   0.995   0.987   0.983   0.980   0.980       0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980
               T         0.995   0.986   0.982   0.981   0.981       0.981   0.981   0.981   0.981   0.981
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   0.999   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.985   0.996   0.995   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
               DM.step   0.985   0.996   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
               T         0.988   0.996   0.995   0.993   0.992       0.990   0.991   0.990   0.990   0.990
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.986   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.985   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         0.991   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000


          Table 8:  -Best: coverage frequency of the confidence sets for tmax = 0




                                                 59
                                                                 1
n     2   p    test         0     0.22    0.44    0.67    0.89        1.11    1.33    1.56    1.78      2
100   1   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
               DM.step   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
               T         0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993       0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993   0.993
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
               DM.step   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
               T         0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
      3   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   0.999   0.999   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
               DM        0.996   0.992   0.982   0.979   0.979       0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979
               DM.step   0.995   0.989   0.978   0.974   0.973       0.968   0.968   0.968   0.968   0.968
               T         0.993   0.990   0.981   0.979   0.979       0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979   0.979
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.999   0.998   0.998   0.997   0.997       0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997   0.997
               DM.step   0.998   0.997   0.997   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
               T         0.997   0.997   0.996   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         1.000   1.000   1.000   0.998   0.998       0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998   0.998
200   1   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
               DM.step   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
               T         0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995       0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995   0.995
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.998   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   0.997   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         0.997   1.000   0.999   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
      3   3    naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   0.999   0.999       0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999   0.999
               DM        0.995   0.988   0.985   0.984   0.984       0.984   0.984   0.984   0.984   0.984
               DM.step   0.995   0.987   0.983   0.980   0.980       0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980   0.980
               T         0.995   0.986   0.982   0.981   0.981       0.981   0.981   0.981   0.981   0.981
          10   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        0.998   0.997   0.996   0.996   0.996       0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996   0.996
               DM.step   0.997   0.996   0.994   0.993   0.994       0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994   0.994
               T         0.997   0.995   0.992   0.992   0.992       0.991   0.991   0.991   0.991   0.991
          50   naive     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000       0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
               M         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM        1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               DM.step   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
               T         1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000


          Table 9:  -Best: coverage frequency of the confidence sets for tmax = 2




                                                 60
                                                          M              q

                                                          DM             q

                                                          DM.step        q


                                                                     0   0.22 0.44 0.67 0.89 1.11 1.33 1.56 1.78   2

                                 delta2=3                                                delta2=3
                                  n=100                                                   n=200
              q
              q     q                                                q
                                                                     q
                                                                             q
                                                                                                                       10
                    q
                        q
                                                                                                                       8
                                                                             q
                                                                             q


                                                                                                                       6

                        q                                                        q
                        q
                             q
                                                                                                                       4



                             q    q                                              q
                                                                                 q                                     2
                             q                                                       q
                                  q    q
                                       q    q    q    q     q                        q    q   q     q   q    q     q
length




                                 delta2=1                                                delta2=1
                                  n=100                                                   n=200
         10   q
              q     q                                                q
                                                                     q
                                                                             q
                    q
                        q
          8                                                                  q
                                                                             q



          6
                        q                                                        q
                        q
                             q
          4
                             q    q                                              q
                                  q    q    q    q    q     q                        q    q   q     q   q    q     q

          2



              0   0.22 0.44 0.67 0.89 1.11 1.33 1.56 1.78   2

                                                            delta1

                  Figure 15: Single Rank: length of the confidence sets for tmax = 0 and p = 10.




                                                                61
                                                          M              q

                                                          DM             q

                                                          DM.step        q


                                                                     0   0.22 0.44 0.67 0.89 1.11 1.33 1.56 1.78   2

                                 delta2=3                                                delta2=3
                                  n=100                                                   n=200
              q    q
                   q                                                 q       q                                         10
                        q                                                    q

                        q
                                                                                 q                                     9
                             q

                                                                                 q
                             q    q                                                  q
                                  q
                                       q                                                                               8
                                  q                                                  q    q
                                            q                                        q
                                       q
                                       q
                                                 q                                        q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                       7
                                            q
                                            q
                                                      q
                                                 q                                            q     q
                                                 q                                            q
                                                            q                                                          6
                                                      q
                                                      q                                             q
                                                                                                    q   q
                                                            q                                                q
                                                                                                        q    q     q
length




                                 delta2=1                                                delta2=1
                                  n=100                                                   n=200
         10   q    q                                                 q
                   q                                                         q


                        q                                                    q
          9


          8             q
                        q



                                                                                 q
          7
                             q

                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
          6                  q
                                  q
                                  q    q    q    q    q     q                        q    q   q     q   q    q     q




              0   0.22 0.44 0.67 0.89 1.11 1.33 1.56 1.78   2

                                                            delta1

              Figure 16: Multiple Ranks: length of the confidence sets for tmax = 0 and p = 10.




                                                                62
                                                          naive          q

                                                          M              q

                                                          DM             q

                                                          DM.step        q

                                                          T              q


                                                                     0   0.22 0.44 0.67 0.89 1.11 1.33 1.56 1.78   2

                                  delta2=3                                               delta2=3
                                   n=100                                                  n=200
              q    q      q
                          q   q                                      q       q
                                                                             q   q                                     10
                                   q                                             q   q
                              q
                                       q
                                   q
                                   q                                                      q
                                             q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     q                                 8
                                       q
                                       q
                                       q
                                                 q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                          q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                                      q
                                                                                                    q
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 q          q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                       4
                                                      q
                                                      q                                             q   q
                                                            q                                       q   q    q     q


              q    q      q   q    q   q     q   q    q     q        q       q   q   q    q   q     q   q    q     q   2
length




                                  delta2=1                                               delta2=1
                                   n=100                                                  n=200
         10   q    q
                   q
                                                                     q       q

                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                          q

          8

                          q
                          q
                          q
          6
                                                                                 q

                              q
          4
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                              q
                              q    q   q     q   q    q     q                        q    q   q     q   q    q     q


          2   q    q      q   q    q   q     q   q    q     q        q       q   q   q    q   q     q   q    q     q



              0   0.22 0.44 0.67 0.89 1.11 1.33 1.56 1.78   2

                                                            delta1

                       Figure 17:  -Best: length of the confidence sets for tmax = 0 and p = 10.




                                                                63
Appendix F                           Supporting Results for the Empirical Applications

F.1                  PISA Student Tests in OECD Countries: Math and Science Proficiency

                                              OECD Countries Mean 2018 PISA Math Test Scores


                            525                                                                        estimate
                                                                                                       estimate +/- 2SE

                            500
      Math Test Scores




                            475


                            450


                            425


                            400
                                                    an
                                                    ea
                                                   nia
                                                  nds
                                                    nd
                                                    nd
                                                  ada

                                                      k
                                                 enia
                                                  ium


                                                  den
                                                   om




                                                   blic
                                                    nd



                                                  way

                                                      y
                                                    nd


                                                   tria
                                                     ia
                                                  nce
                                     New eland
                                                 land

                                                       l
                                                      a
                                       ak R Italy

                                          emb c
                                                 ourg

                                                     in
                                                     ia
                                                      y
                                                      s
                                                     el
                                                    ey
                                                  ece

                                                      e
                                                   ico
                                                mbia
                                                tuga
                                               man




                                                   bli




                                                tate
                                                mar




                                                 gar
                                                trali




                                                Chil
                                              Latv




                                               Spa
                                               uan



                                               Isra
                                              Turk
                                              Jap
                                               Kor



                                             Pola
                                            zerla




                                            Finla




                                             Irela




                                             Mex
                                            Esto




                                            ingd




                                             Aus
                                             epu




                                             epu
                                          herla




                                           Belg




                                             Fra




                                            Gre
                                           Can




                                           Swe


                                            Nor
                                          Slov




                                           Zea




                                          Hun
                                          Aus




                                         Colo
                                         ed S
                                           Por
                                          Den




                                            Ic




                                          Lith
                                         Ger

                                       ch R
                                       Swit




                                       ed K
                                      Net




                                     Lux




                                    Unit
                                  Slov
                                  Cze
                                  Unit




                                             OECD Countries Mean 2018 PISA Science Test Scores



                            525                                                                        estimate
                                                                                                       estimate +/- 2SE


                            500
      Science Test Scores




                            475



                            450



                            425
                                                   nia




                                                  ada


                                                 land
                                                   nia
                                                   om
                                    New oland




                                                  nds




                                                    ia

                                                 ourg
                                                   nd



                                                                                                        blic
                                                                                                           el
                                                                                                        ece

                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                         ico
                                                                                                      mbia
                                                   an
                                                   nd
                                                   ea




                                                      y
                                                      a
                                                      s
                                                  den

                                       ch R ium
                                                  blic
                                                   nd
                                                   nd
                                                  nce

                                                      k
                                                       l
                                                  way
                                                  tria
                                                    ia
                                                    in


                                          emb y



                                                    ey
                                                                                                       Italy
                                                tuga
                                               man


                                                tate




                                                mar




                                                 gar
                                                trali




                                                                                                      Chil
                                              Latv
                                               Spa
                                               uan




                                                                                                     Isra
                                              Turk
                                            Icela
                                              Jap
                                            Finla
                                               Kor




                                             Irela
                                            zerla




                                                                                                   Mex
                              Esto




                                                 e
                                            ingd




                                             Aus
                                             epu




                                                                                                   epu
                                          herla




                                           Belg




                                                                                                  Gre
                                             Fra
                                           Can




                                           Swe




                                            Nor
                                          Slov
                                           Zea




                                          Hun
                                          Aus




                                                                                                 Colo
                                         ed S




                                           Por
                                          Den
                                             P




                                          Lith
                                         Ger




                                                                                                     ak R
                                       ed K




                                       Swit
                                      Net




                                     Lux
                                    Unit




                                                                                                 Slov
                                  Cze
                                  Unit




Figure 18: Mean PISA Test Scores with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or minus twice the
standard errors) for the sample of OECD countries. The PISA scale is normalized to approximately fit a
normal distribution with the mean of 500 and standard deviation of 100. Top: Math Test Score; Bottom:
Science Proficiency Test Score.



                                                                64
                                       Ranking by Math Score with 95% Marginal CS
           Colombia

                           A
               Mexico
                  Chile
              Greece
                Turkey
                 Israel
       United States
            Hungary
            Lithuania
                 Spain
        Luxembourg
     Slovak Republic
                   Italy
            Australia
             Portugal
        New Zealand
              Iceland
               France
                Latvia
               Austria
     Czech Republic
               Ireland
           Germany
              Norway
     United Kingdom
             Sweden
              Finland
             Belgium
            Slovenia
            Denmark                                                                         Quartile
             Canada                                                                              1
         Switzerland
               Poland                                                                            2
         Netherlands                                                                             3
              Estonia
                 Korea                                                                           4
                Japan
                           1   5        10        15        20          25          30      35
                                                         Rank
                                    Ranking by Math Score with 95% Simultaneous CS
           Colombia

                           B
               Mexico
                  Chile
              Greece
                Turkey
                 Israel
       United States
            Hungary
            Lithuania
                 Spain
        Luxembourg
     Slovak Republic
                   Italy
            Australia
             Portugal
        New Zealand
              Iceland
               France
                Latvia
               Austria
     Czech Republic
               Ireland
           Germany
              Norway
     United Kingdom
             Sweden
              Finland
             Belgium
            Slovenia
            Denmark                                                                         Quartile
             Canada                                                                              1
         Switzerland
               Poland                                                                            2
         Netherlands                                                                             3
              Estonia
                 Korea                                                                           4
                Japan
                           1   5        10        15        20          25          30      35
                                                         Rank

Figure 19: Panel A: for each OECD country, we plot its rank by math score and the 95% marginal confidence
set ("CS"). Panel B: for each OECD country, we plot its rank by math score and the 95% simultaneous
confidence set ("CS"). Different quartiles of the rankings are indicated with different colors.

                                                   65
                                      Ranking by Science Score with 95% Marginal CS
           Colombia

                           A
               Mexico
                  Chile
              Greece
                 Israel
     Slovak Republic
                   Italy
                Turkey
              Iceland
        Luxembourg
            Hungary
            Lithuania
                 Spain
                Latvia
               Austria
              Norway
             Portugal
            Denmark
               France
         Switzerland
               Ireland
     Czech Republic
             Belgium
             Sweden
       United States
            Australia
           Germany
         Netherlands
     United Kingdom
            Slovenia                                                                          Quartile
        New Zealand                                                                                 1
               Poland
             Canada                                                                                 2
                 Korea                                                                              3
              Finland
                Japan                                                                               4
              Estonia
                           1   5         10         15        20         25           30       35
                                                           Rank
                                    Ranking by Science Score with 95% Simultaneous CS
           Colombia

                           B
               Mexico
                  Chile
              Greece
                 Israel
     Slovak Republic
                   Italy
                Turkey
              Iceland
        Luxembourg
            Hungary
            Lithuania
                 Spain
                Latvia
               Austria
              Norway
             Portugal
            Denmark
               France
         Switzerland
               Ireland
     Czech Republic
             Belgium
             Sweden
       United States
            Australia
           Germany
         Netherlands
     United Kingdom
            Slovenia                                                                          Quartile
        New Zealand                                                                                 1
               Poland
             Canada                                                                                 2
                 Korea                                                                              3
              Finland
                Japan                                                                               4
              Estonia
                           1   5         10         15        20         25           30       35
                                                           Rank

Figure 20: Panel A: for each OECD country, we plot its rank by science proficiency score and the 95%
marginal confidence set ("CS"). Panel B: for each OECD country, we plot its rank by science proficiency
score and the 95% simultaneous confidence set ("CS"). Different quartiles of the rankings are indicated with
different colors.
                                                    66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F.2
                                                                                                                                                    Child's Income Percentile                                                                                                                                                                                      Child's Income Percentile




                                                                                                                                             0.35
                                                                                                                                                        0.40
                                                                                                                                                                     0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San
                                                                                                                              Ber                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fr
                                                                                                                                    gen                                                                                                                                                                                             Salt ancisc
                                                                                                                               Fair                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lak           o
                                                                                                                                      fa                                                                                                                                                                                                       eC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ity
                                                                                                                             Nas x
                                                                                                                                    s                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Min oston
                                                                                                                             DuP au                                                                                                                                                                                                        nea
                                                                                                                          Mid age                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San olis
                                                                                                                       Mon dlesex                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jos
                                                                                                                            tgom                                                                                                                                                                                                            New e
                                                                                                                                     ery
                                                                                                                             Q                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pitts ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               bu
                                                                                                                        San ueens                                                                                                                                                                                                         New rgh
                                                                                                                             ta C
                                                                                                                                    lara                                                                                                                                                                                                           York
                                                                                                                               S                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                         Ora uffolk                                                                                                                                                                                                    Man eattle
                                                                                                                              nge                                                                                                                                                                                                            c
                                                                                                                           Hon CA                                                                                                                                                                                                     Los hester
                                                                                                                                  o                                                                                                                                                                                                        An
                                                                                                                           Salt lulu                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pro geles
                                                                                                                                  Lak                                                                                                                                                                                              Was viden
                                                                                                                                         e                                                                                                                                                                                             hing           ce
                                                                                                                       We         K                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                           stch ing                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sac on DC
                                                                                                                                  este                                                                                                                                                                                                     ram
                                                                                                                           A             r                                                                                                                                                                                              San ento
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Die




     national distribution of her cohort (¯
                                                                                                                       Con lameda
                                                                                                                           tra C                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hou go
                                                                                                                                   osta                                                                                                                                                                                                            sto
                                                                                                                             F                                                                                                                                                                                                               De n
                                                                                                                        Los airfield                                                                                                                                                                                                    Brid nver
                                                                                                                            Ang                                                                                                                                                                                                               gep
                                                                                                                           Hen eles                                                                                                                                                                                                        Por or t
                                                                                                                                nep                                                                                                                                                                                                              tlan
                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bu d
                                                                                                                          San Erie                                                                                                                                                                                                      For ffalo
                                                                                                                                D                                                                                                                                                                                                            tW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   or th
                                                                                                                          Alle iego
                                                                                                                        Sac gheny                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mia
                                                                                                                            ram                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mi
                                                                                                                                   ento                                                                                                                                                                                               San Austin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A




     and the 50 most populous counties (Bottom Panel).
                                                                                                                                Kin




67
                                                                                                                           New gs                                                                                                                                                                                                     Phil ntonio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ade
                                                                                                                                   York                                                                                                                                                                                                           lph
                                                                                                                     San        H                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pho ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   en
                                                                                                                         Ber arris
                                                                                                                              nard                                                                                                                                                                                                         Chic ix
                                                                                                                       Mia
                                                                                                                           mi- ino                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kan           a
                                                                                                                                 Da                                                                                                                                                                                                         sas go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City
                                                                                                                            Oak de
                                                                                                                                   la                                                                                                                                                                                               Gra Fresn
                                                                                                                           Rive nd                                                                                                                                                                                                      nd R            o
                                                                                                                                  rsid                                                                                                                                                                                                           apid
                                                                                                                              Tarr e                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dall
                                                                                                                           Mar ant                                                                                                                                                                                                      Milw          as
                                                                                                                                 icop                                                                                                                                                                                                          auk
                                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                                                                                              Las           ee
                                                                                                                                Bex                                                                                                                                                                                                            Veg
                                                                                                                            Bro ar                                                                                                                                                                                                         Orla as
                                                                                                                                  war
                                                                                                                                         d                                                                                                                                                                                               Cle ndo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Por velan
                                                                                                                        Palm Bronx                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50 Most Populous Commuting Zones and Counties




                                                                                                                               Bea                                                                                                                                                                                                       t St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              . Lu
                                                                                                                                       ch                                                                                                                                                                                                  St. cie
                                                                                                                                 Cla                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lou
                                                                                                                            St.        rk                                                                                                                                                                                                 Na           is
                                                                                                                                 Lou
                                                                                                                                        is                                                                                                                                                                                           New shville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Orle
                                                                                                                                 Co                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ans
                                                                                                                             Pine ok                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tam
                                                                                                                              Ora
                                                                                                                                     llas                                                                                                                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                    nge                                                                                                                                                                                                      Day a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ton
                                                                                                                       Hills Dallas                                                                                                                                                                                                           Det
                                                                                                                            boro                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cin roit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cin
                                                                                                                          Cuy ugh                                                                                                                                                                                                         Balt nati
                                                                                                                        Phil ahoga                                                                                                                                                                                                              im
                                                                                                                            ade                                                                                                                                                                                                         Colu ore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mbu
                                                                                                                         Milw lphia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R           s
                                                                                                                                                                                estimate




                                                                                                                                auk
                                                                                                                                       e                                                                                                                                                                                              India aleigh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               estimate




                                                                                                                             Fra e                                                                                                                                                                                                           nap
                                                                                                                                  nkli                                                                                                                                                                                                Jac           o
                                                                                                                               Way n                                                                                                                                                                                                       kso lis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean percentile rank in the national distribution of child's average family income in 2014-2015 for 50 most populous CZs




                                                                                                                                       n                                                                                                                                                                                                         nvil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       le
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mean percentile rank in the national distribution of child's average family income in 2014-2015 for 50 most populous counties




                                                                                                                              Mar e                                                                                                                                                                                                          Atla
                                                                                                                                      io
                                                                                                                                                                                estimate +/- 2SE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cha nta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               estimate +/- 2SE




                                                                                                                               She n                                                                                                                                                                                                             rlott
                                                                                                                                      lby                                                                                                                                                                                                               e




     the standard errors) from Chetty et al. (2018) for the 50 most populous Commuting Zones (Top Panel)
                                          yc25 ) with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus or minus twice
     Figure 21: Estimates of the mean percentile rank of child's average household income for 2014-2015 in the
                                                                                                                                                    Movers Estimates                                                                                                                                                       Movers Estimates




                                                                                                                                             -0.5
                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                              Dup                                                                                                                                                                    Sea
                                                                                                                                    ag                                                                                                                                                     Was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                             Har e                                                                                                                                                               ingt ttle
                                                                                                                         Con       tfo                                                                                                                                                                on
                                                                                                                            tra C rd                                                                                                                                                             Cle DC
                                                                                                                                   osta                                                                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                For land
                                                                                                                               Ber
                                                                                                                                    ge                                                                                                                                                               tW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Min          or
                                                                                                                              Pine n                                                                                                                                                               nea th
                                                                                                                                     llas                                                                                                                                                                 po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Por lis
                                                                                                                                    Er                                                                                                                                                                   tlan
                                                                                                                             Oak ie                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                   land                                                                                                                                                              Da
                                                                                                                                Fair                                                                                                                                                            Las yton
                                                                                                                                      fa                                                                                                                                                               Veg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             as
                                                                                                                              Que x
                                                                                                                                    ens                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                          Ora                                                                                                                                                                 Kan uffalo
                                                                                                                               ng                                                                                                                                                                   sas
                                                                                                                         Phil e CA                                                                                                                                                          Salt           C
                                                                                                                             ade                                                                                                                                                                  Lak ity
                                                                                                                                  lphia                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                San City
                                                                                                                        We Kings                                                                                                                                                              Jac Diego
                                                                                                                            stch                                                                                                                                                                   kso
                                                                                                                                  e                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                           Mid ster                                                                                                                                                             Milw ville
                                                                                                                                dles                                                                                                                                                                   auk
                                                                                                                                       ex                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                 Dad                                                                                                                                                                 Den
                                                                                                                                         e                                                                                                                                                                  ve
                                                                                                                        Mon      H a rr                                                                                                                                                              Bos r
                                                                                                                             tgom is                                                                                                                                                             Cin ton
                                                                                                                                     e                                                                                                                                                      Gra       cin
                                                                                                                            Mar ry                                                                                                                                                              nd R nati
                                                                                                                                 icop                                                                                                                                                         Phil apids
                                                                                                                             St L a                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                   ouis                                                                                                                                                     San delphia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ncis
                                                                                                                                   King                                                                                                                                                                      c
                                                                                                                                  Cla                                                                                                                                                               New o
                                                                                                                                       rk                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                S                                                                                                                                                                  Pho rk
                                                                                                                         Sac uffolk                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                             ram                                                                                                                                                                  San nix
                                                                                                                                   ento                                                                                                                                                       Sac Jose
                                                                                                                                She                                                                                                                                                                ram
                                                                                                                                      lb                                                                                                                                                                  e




68
                                                                                                                            Ham y                                                                                                                                                                Colu nto
                                                                                                                                   ilto                                                                                                                                                                 mbu
                                                                                                                         San
                                                                                                                              ta C n                                                                                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                        Los         lar                                                                                                                                                                Mia
                                                                                                                             Ang a                                                                                                                                                                 St.       mi
                                                                                                                                   eles                                                                                                                                                                  Lou
                                                                                                                              Na                                                                                                                                                                               is
                                                                                                                      San                                                                                                                                                                              Dall
                                                                                                                          Ber ssau                                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                               nard                                                                                                                                                                Hou s
                                                                                                                                      in                                                                                                                                                                  st




     Panel) and for the 50 most populous counties (Bottom Panel).
                                                                                                                             Bro o                                                                                                                                                                Nas on
                                                                                                                                  w                                                                                                                                                                      hvil
                                                                                                                           Alle ard                                                                                                                                                            Pro             le
                                                                                                                                ghe                                                                                                                                                                 vide
                                                                                                                                       ny                                                                                                                                                        Pitts nce
                                                                                                                                  Coo                                                                                                                                                                  b  u
                                                                                                                                         k                                                                                                                                                    India         rgh
                                                                                                                                Dall                                                                                                                                                                 nap
                                                                                                                                       as                                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                 Bex                                                                                                                                                              Balt lis
                                                                                                                                       ar                                                                                                                                                               imo
                                                                                                                              Fra                                                                                                                                                                             re
                                                                                                                                  nkli                                                                                                                                                                Det
                                                                                                                                         n                                                                                                                                                                  roit
                                                                                                                                Way                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                            Salt ne                                                                                                                                                            Man tlanta
                                                                                                                         Palm     L a  ke
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     che
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Brid ster
                                                                                                                                Bea                                                                                                                                                                   gep
                                                                                                                                       ch                                                                                                                                                                    or t
                                                                                                                                 Bro                                                                                                                                                                  Tam
                                                                                                                                       nx                                                                                                                                                         New pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Movers estimates based on child's income at the age 26 for 50 most populous CZs




                                                                                                                               Tarr                                                                                                                                                                       Yo
                                                                                                                                     an                                                                                                                                                       Los
                                                                                                                               Ora t                                                                                                                                                               Ang rk
                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                Movers estimates based on child's income at the age 26 for the 50 most populous counties




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          eles
                                                                                                                            Rive ge
                                                                                                                                  rs                                                                                                                                                                   Aus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                            New ide                                                                                                                                                                Chic in
                                                                                                                                   Y                                                                                                                                                                       ag
                                                                                                                           Cuy ork
                                                                                                                                ah                                                                                                                                                                 Orla o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                                          Milw oga                                                                                                                                                            San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ant o
                                                                                                                                auk
                                                                                                                                       ee                                                                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cha nio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    estimate




                                                                                                                               Mar                                                                                                                                                                       rlott
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Por                e
                                                                                                                                                                             estimate




                                                                                                                           Hen ion                                                                                                                                                               t St
                                                                                                                                 nep                                                                                                                                                                  . Lu
                                                                                                                            Ala         in                                                                                                                                                                  cie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rale
                                                                                                                        Hills meda                                                                                                                                                                          igh
                                                                                                                             boro                                                                                                                                                                    F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    estimate +/- 2SE




                                                                                                                                    ugh                                                                                                                                                      New resno
                                                                                                                                                                             estimate +/- 2SE




                                                                                                                              Fair                                                                                                                                                                  Orle
                                                                                                                                   field                                                                                                                                                                   ans




     or minus twice the standard errors) from Chetty and Hendren (2018) for the 50 most populous CZs (Top
     Figure 22: Movers estimates of the exposure effects (µc25 ) with marginal confidence intervals (estimates plus
                                            Counties with 95% Marginal CS
              Shelby

                         A
              Marion
              Wayne
             Franklin
         Milwaukee
        Philadelphia
          Cuyahoga
       Hillsborough
               Dallas
             Orange
             Pinellas
                Cook
            St. Louis
                Clark
        Palm Beach
               Bronx
            Broward
               Bexar
           Maricopa
              Tarrant
           Riverside
            Oakland
       Miami-Dade
     San Bernardino
               Harris
           New York
                Kings
        Sacramento
          Allegheny
          San Diego
                 Erie
           Hennepin
        Los Angeles
             Fairfield
       Contra Costa
           Alameda
       Westchester
                 King
           Salt Lake
           Honolulu
         Orange CA
              Suffolk
        Santa Clara
             Queens
       Montgomery
          Middlesex
            DuPage
             Nassau
              Fairfax
              Bergen
                         1       10              20               30             40              50
                                                           Rank
                                          Counties with 95% Simultaneous CS
              Shelby

                         B
              Marion
              Wayne
             Franklin
         Milwaukee
        Philadelphia
          Cuyahoga
       Hillsborough
               Dallas
             Orange
             Pinellas
                Cook
            St. Louis
                Clark
        Palm Beach
               Bronx
            Broward
               Bexar
           Maricopa
              Tarrant
           Riverside
            Oakland
       Miami-Dade
     San Bernardino
               Harris
           New York
                Kings
        Sacramento
          Allegheny
          San Diego
                 Erie
           Hennepin
        Los Angeles
             Fairfield
       Contra Costa
           Alameda
       Westchester
                 King
           Salt Lake
           Honolulu
         Orange CA
              Suffolk
        Santa Clara
             Queens
       Montgomery
          Middlesex
            DuPage
             Nassau
              Fairfax
              Bergen
                         1       10              20               30             40              50
                                                           Rank

Figure 23: Panel A: point estimates and the 95% marginal confidence sets ("CS") for the ranking of the 50
most populous counties by y¯c25 . Panel B: point estimates and the 95% simultaneous confidence sets ("CS")
for the ranking of the 50 most populous counties by y¯c25 .

                                                      69
                                       Commuting Zones with 95% Marginal CS
       New Orleans

                        A
              Fresno
             Raleigh
       Port St. Lucie
           Charlotte
        San Antonio
            Orlando
            Chicago
               Austin
        Los Angeles
           New York
              Tampa
          Bridgeport
         Manchester
              Atlanta
              Detroit
           Baltimore
        Indianapolis
          Pittsburgh
         Providence
           Nashville
            Houston
               Dallas
            St. Louis
               Miami
          Columbus
        Sacramento
           San Jose
            Phoenix
             Newark
      San Francisco
        Philadelphia
      Grand Rapids
           Cincinnati
              Boston
              Denver
          Milwaukee
        Jacksonville
          San Diego
      Salt Lake City
        Kansas City
              Buffalo
          Las Vegas
              Dayton
            Portland
        Minneapolis
          Fort Worth
           Cleveland
     Washington DC
              Seattle

                        1       10             20               30              40            50
                                                         Rank
                                     Commuting Zones with 95% Simultaneous CS
       New Orleans

                        B
              Fresno
             Raleigh
       Port St. Lucie
           Charlotte
        San Antonio
            Orlando
            Chicago
               Austin
        Los Angeles
           New York
              Tampa
          Bridgeport
         Manchester
              Atlanta
              Detroit
           Baltimore
        Indianapolis
          Pittsburgh
         Providence
           Nashville
            Houston
               Dallas
            St. Louis
               Miami
          Columbus
        Sacramento
           San Jose
            Phoenix
             Newark
      San Francisco
        Philadelphia
      Grand Rapids
           Cincinnati
              Boston
              Denver
          Milwaukee
        Jacksonville
          San Diego
      Salt Lake City
        Kansas City
              Buffalo
          Las Vegas
              Dayton
            Portland
        Minneapolis
          Fort Worth
           Cleveland
     Washington DC
              Seattle

                        1       10             20               30              40            50
                                                         Rank

Figure 24: Panel A: point estimates and the 95% marginal confidence sets ("CS") for the ranking of the
50 most populous CZs by µc25 . Panel B: point estimates and the 95% simultaneous confidence sets ("CS")
for the ranking of the 50 most populous CZs by µc25 .

                                                    70
                                        Counties with 95% Marginal CS
          Fairfield

                      A
     Hillsborough
         Alameda
         Hennepin
            Marion
       Milwaukee
        Cuyahoga
         New York
         Riverside
           Orange
            Tarrant
             Bronx
      Palm Beach
         Salt Lake
            Wayne
          Franklin
             Bexar
             Dallas
              Cook
        Allegheny
          Broward
   San Bernardino
           Nassau
      Los Angeles
      Santa Clara
         Hamilton
            Shelby
      Sacramento
            Suffolk
              Clark
               King
          St Louis
         Maricopa
     Montgomery
             Harris
              Dade
        Middlesex
     Westchester
             Kings
      Philadelphia
       Orange CA
           Queens
            Fairfax
          Oakland
               Erie
           Pinellas
           Bergen
     Contra Costa
          Hartford
           Dupage

                      1      10              20              30             40             50
                                                    Rank
                                      Counties with 95% Simultaneous CS
          Fairfield

                      B
     Hillsborough
         Alameda
         Hennepin
            Marion
       Milwaukee
        Cuyahoga
         New York
         Riverside
           Orange
            Tarrant
             Bronx
      Palm Beach
         Salt Lake
            Wayne
          Franklin
             Bexar
             Dallas
              Cook
        Allegheny
          Broward
   San Bernardino
           Nassau
      Los Angeles
      Santa Clara
         Hamilton
            Shelby
      Sacramento
            Suffolk
              Clark
               King
          St Louis
         Maricopa
     Montgomery
             Harris
              Dade
        Middlesex
     Westchester
             Kings
      Philadelphia
       Orange CA
           Queens
            Fairfax
          Oakland
               Erie
           Pinellas
           Bergen
     Contra Costa
          Hartford
           Dupage

                      1      10              20              30             40             50
                                                    Rank
                                                                                                 µc25


Figure 25: Panel A: point estimates and the 95% marginal confidence sets ("CS") for the ranking of the
50 most populous counties by µc25 . Panel B: point estimates and the 95% simultaneous confidence sets
("CS") for the ranking of the 50 most populous counties by µc25 .
                                                   71
   Panel A: Top 5

                            Correlational                                             Movers

   Rank        County     y
                          ^c25     SE     95% CS         -best      County        µ
                                                                                  ^c25       SE      95% CS        -best

     1    1    Bergen     0.520   0.002     [1,   1]      2         DuPage        0.540     0.123    [1,   10]     25
     2    2    Fairfax    0.511   0.002     [2,   2]      2         Hartford      0.325     0.182    [1,   50]     50
     3    3    Nassau     0.493   0.002     [3,   3]      4       Contra Costa    0.306     0.129    [1,   45]     50
     4    4    DuPage     0.484   0.002     [4,   6]      8         Bergen        0.302     0.186    [1,   50]     50
     5    5   Middlesex   0.480   0.002     [4,   8]      8         Pinellas      0.276     0.127    [1,   48]     50

   Panel B: Bottom 5

                             Correlational                                                 Movers

   Rank        County     y
                          ^c25     SE     95% CS         -worst      County        µ
                                                                                   ^c25       SE      95% CS        -worst

    46    5   Milwaukee   0.363   0.001   [45,    47]      6          Marion      -0.153     0.082    [2,   50]      49
    47    4    Franklin   0.360   0.001   [46,    47]      5        Hennepin      -0.185     0.100    [2,   50]      49
    48    3     Wayne     0.346   0.001   [48,    49]      3        Alameda       -0.257     0.114    [5,   50]      49
    49    2    Marion     0.344   0.001   [48,    49]      3       Hillsborough   -0.279     0.116    [5,   50]      49
    50    1     Shelby    0.318   0.001   [50,    50]      1         Fairfield    -0.386     0.199    [4,   50]      49


Table 10: Panel A: Top 5 among the 50 most populous counties ranked by the correlational estimates on
the left and by the movers estimates on the right. Panel B: Bottom 5 among the 50 most populous counties
ranked by the correlational estimates on the left and by the movers estimates on the right. "95% CS" refers
to the 95% marginal confidence set for the rank, and " -best" and " -worst" refer to the size of the 95%
confidence sets for the " -best" and " -worst" counties.




                                                          72
F.3                 ^
       Heat Maps of y
                    ¯c25 for Counties and Structure of the Rankings




                             0.06




                             0.04
             Pointwise SE




                             0.02




                             0.00
                                    0     200                    400                 600
                                                               Rank


                            0.005



                            0.004



                            0.003
                 ^k+1
                  c25
            ^k - y
            yc25




                            0.002



                            0.001



                            0.000
                                    0     200                    400                 600
                                                               Rank

                                        Likely Top Half   Undetermined   Likely Bottom Half


Figure 26: Top Panel for each CZ we plot the standard error ("SE") against the rank of the CZ. Bottom
                                                                         ^                      ^ k
Panel for each CZ we compute the difference in estimated mobility (y     ¯c25 ) between the CZ (y
                                                                                                ¯c 25 ) and the
           ^k +1
next CZ (y ¯c25 ) in the estimated ranking. Next, we plot these differences against the estimated ranks of
CZs. Each dot on both panels represents a CZ. The CZ is assigned to a high mobility group (light color) if
the upper endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the top half of the national ranking. The CZ is
assigned to a low mobility group (red color) if the lower endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the
bottom half of the national ranking. Grey colors represent the CZs with simultaneous confidence sets such
that the places cannot be assigned to either the high or the low mobility group. We emphasize two points:
1) the middle of the ranking does not have particularly large SEs; 2) in the middle of the ranking estimates
of mobility are more similar.


                                                          73
                                                                            A




                                                                             B
                                                                                                 Rank




                                                                            C




Figure 27: Ranking of counties by point estimates and lower and upper endpoints of simultaneous confidence
sets. The heat maps are based on estimates of y   ¯c25 , the mean percentile rank of child's average household
income for 2014-2015, for the full set of counties. Panel A: the map is constructed by dividing the counties
into deciles based on the estimated values of y ¯c25 , and shading the areas so that lighter colors correspond
to higher absolute mobility. Panel B: each county is re-assigned to one of the ten groups used in Panel A
according to the lower endpoint of its 95% simultaneous confidence set. Panel C: each county is re-assigned
to one of the ten groups used in Panel A according to the upper endpoint of its 95% simultaneous confidence
set.
                                                        74
                                  1.00
Upper Endpoint - Lower Endpoint




                                  0.75
      Number of Counties




                                  0.50




                                  0.25




                                  0.00

                                         0       1000                         2000                    3000
                                                                    Rank

                                             Likely Top Half   Undetermined      Likely Bottom Half



Figure 28: For each county, we compute the difference between the upper and the lower endpoint of the 95%
simultaneous confidence set. Next, we plot these differences against the estimated ranks of the counties. To
ease interpretation, we normalize the differences by the number of counties. Thus, a difference of 1 means
one cannot tell whether a county has the highest or the lowest income mobility in the United States. By
comparison, a difference of 0 means we can be confident in the exact rank of the county. Each dot in the
graph represents a county. The county is assigned to a high mobility group (light color) if the upper endpoint
of its simultaneous confidence set is in the top half of the national ranking. The county is assigned to a
low mobility group (red color) if the lower endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the bottom half
of the national ranking. Grey colors represent the counties with simultaneous confidence sets such that the
places cannot be assigned to either the high or the low mobility group.




                                                               75
                       0.075
       Pointwise SE




                       0.050




                       0.025




                       0.000
                               0          1000                         2000                    3000
                                                             Rank


                      0.0020




                      0.0015
           ^k+1
            c25
     ^k - y




                      0.0010
     y c25




                      0.0005




                      0.0000
                               0          1000                         2000                    3000
                                                             Rank

                                      Likely Top Half   Undetermined      Likely Bottom Half


Figure 29: Top Panel for each county we plot the standard error ("SE") against the rank of the county.
Bottom Panel for each county we compute the difference in estimated mobility (y    ^
                                                                                   ¯c25 ) between the county
 ^ k                          ^k+1
 ¯c25 ) and the next county (y
(y                            ¯c25 ) in the estimated ranking. Next, we plot these differences against the
estimated ranks of the counties. Each dot on both panels represents a county. The county is assigned to a
high mobility group (light color) if the upper endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the top half
of the national ranking. The county is assigned to a low mobility group (red color) if the lower endpoint
of its simultaneous confidence set is in the bottom half of the national ranking. Grey colors represent the
counties with simultaneous confidence sets such that the places cannot be assigned to either the high or the
low mobility group. We emphasize two points: 1) the middle of the ranking does not have particularly large
SEs; 2) in the middle of the ranking estimates of mobility are more similar.

                                                        76
                                                                                               A




                                                                                        Likely Top Half
                                                                                        Likely Bottom Half
                                                                                        Undetermined




                                                                                               B




                                                                                        Likely Top Quartile
                                                                                        Likely Bottom Quartile
                                                                                        Undetermined




Figure 30: The heat map in Panel A is constructed by assigning the counties to groups depending on the
lower and upper endpoints of the simultaneous confidence sets. A county is assigned to a high mobility
group, Likely Top Half, if the upper endpoint of its simultaneous confidence set is in the top half of the
national ranking of counties, i.e. when the confidence set lies entirely in the top half of the ranking, indicating
high mobility. A county is assigned to a low mobility group, Likely Bottom Half, if the lower endpoint
of its simultaneous confidence set is in the bottom half of the national ranking of counties, i.e. when the
confidence set lies entirely in the bottom half of the ranking, indicating low mobility. Grey colors represent
the counties with simultaneous confidence sets such that the places cannot be assigned to either the high or
the low mobility group, i.e. the Undetermined counties. The heat map in Panel B is constructed in the
same way, except the high and low mobility groups are now defined in terms of top and bottom quartiles in
the national ranking of the counties. Thus, we refer to these groups as Likely Top Quartile and Likely
Bottom Quartile.

                                                        77
F.4    Heat Maps for the Movers Estimates of the Exposure Effects


                                                                              A




                                                                              B            Rank




                                                                              C




Figure 31: Ranking of Commuting Zones by point estimates and lower and upper endpoints of simultaneous
confidence sets. The heat maps are based on movers estimates of the exposure effects µc25 . Panel A: the
map is constructed by dividing the CZs into deciles based on the estimated values of µc25 , and shading the
areas so that lighter colors correspond to higher values of exposure effects. Panel B: each CZ is re-assigned
to one of the ten groups used in Panel A according to the lower endpoint of its 95% simultaneous confidence
set. Panel C: each CZ is re-assigned to one of the ten groups used in Panel A according to the upper
endpoint of its 95% simultaneous confidence set.


                                                     78
                                                                             A




                                                                             B
                                                                                         Rank




                                                                             C




Figure 32: Ranking of counties by point estimates and lower and upper endpoints of simultaneous confidence
sets. The heat maps are based on movers estimates of the exposure effects µc25 . Panel A: the map is
constructed by dividing the counties into deciles based on the estimated values of µc25 , and shading the
areas so that lighter colors correspond to higher values of exposure effects. Panel B: each county is re-
assigned to one of the ten groups used in Panel A according to the lower endpoint of its 95% simultaneous
confidence set. Panel C: each county is re-assigned to one of the ten groups used in Panel A according to
the upper endpoint of its 95% simultaneous confidence set.



                                                   79
References
Andrews, I., Kitagawa, T. and McCloskey, A. (2018). Inference on winners. Working Paper CWP
 31/18, CeMMAP.

Bai, Y., Santos, A. and Shaikh, A. (2019). A practical method for testing many moment inequalities.
 University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper.

Bauer, P., Hackl, P., Hommel, G. and Sonnemann, E. (1986). Multiple testing of pairs of one-sided
 hypotheses. Metrika, 33 121­127.

Bergman, P., Chetty, R., DeLuca, S., Hendren, N., Katz, L. F. and Palmer, C. (2019). Creating
 moves to opportunity: Experimental evidence on barriers to neighborhood choice. Working Paper 26164,
 NBER.

Breakspear, S. (2012). The policy impact of pisa: An exploration of the normative effects of international
 benchmarking in school system performance. OECD Education Working Papers.

Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D. and Kato, K. (2013). Gaussian approximations and multiplier
 bootstrap for maxima of sums of high-dimensional random vectors. The Annals of Statistics, 41 2786­2819.

Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D. and Kato, K. (2017). Central limit theorems and bootstrap in
 high dimensions. Annals of Probability, 45 2309­2352.

Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Kato, K. and Koike, Y. (2019). Improved central limit theorem
 and bootstrap approximations in high-dimensions. Tech. rep.

Chetty, R. (April 1, 2014). Improving opportunities for economic mobility in the united states. Budget
 Committee United States Senate.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hendren, N., Jones, M. R. and Porter, S. R. (2018). The opportunity
 atlas: Mapping the childhood roots of social mobility. Working Paper 25147, NBER.

Chetty, R. and Hendren, N. (2018). The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility ii:
 County-level estimates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133 1163­1228.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P. and Saez, E. (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? the
 geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129
 1553­1624.

Dunnett, C. W. (1955). A multiple comparison procedure for comparing several treatments with a control.
 Journal of the American Statistical Association, 50 1096­1121.

Goldstein, H. and Spiegelhalter, D. J. (1996). League tables and their limitations: Statistical issues
 in comparisons of institutional performance. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics
 in Society), 159 385­443.

Guo, W. and Romano, J. P. (2015). On stepwise control of directional errors under independence and
 some dependence. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 163 21 ­ 33.




                                                    80
Gupta, S. S. (1956). On a decision rule for a problem in ranking means. Ph.D. thesis, Institute of Statistics,
 University of North Carolina, Chape Hill.

Gupta, S. S. and Panchapakesan, S. (1979). Multiple Decision Procedures: Theory and Methodology of
 Selecting and Ranking Populations. John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Hall, P. and Miller, H. (2009). Using the bootstrap to quantify the authority of an empirical ranking.
 The Annals of Statistics, 37 3929­3959.

Hubert, E. (2006). Educational standards and the changing discourse on education: the reception and
 consequences of the pisa study in germany. Oxford Review of Education, 32 619­634.

Klein, M., Wright, T. and Wieczorek, J. (2018). A simple joint confidence region for a ranking of
 k populations: Application to american community survey's travel time to work data. Research Report
 Series Statistics #2018-04, U.S. Census Bureau.

Lehmann, E. L. and Romano, J. P. (2005). Testing Statistical Hypotheses. Springer, New York.

OECD (2017). Pisa 2015 technical report. Tech. rep., OECD.

OECD (2019). PISA 2018 Results (Volume I): What Students Know and Can Do. OECD Publishing, Paris.

Romano, J. P. and Shaikh, A. M. (2012). On the uniform asymptotic validity of subsampling and the
 bootstrap. Annals of Statistics, 40 2798­2822.

Romano, J. P. and Wolf, M. (2005). Stepwise multiple testing as formalized data snooping. Econometrica,
 73 1237­1282.

Tukey, J. (1953). The problem of multiple comparisons. Mimeographed notes, Princeton University.

Westfall, P., Tobias, R., Rom, D., Wolfinger, R. and Hochberg, Y. (1999). Multiple Comparisons
 and Multiple Tests. SAS Institute, Cary, NC.

Xie, M., Singh, K. and Zhang, C.-H. (2009). Confidence intervals for population ranks in the presence
  of ties and near ties. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 104 775­788.




                                                     81
