                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PAYING OUTSOURCED LABOR:
     DIRECT EVIDENCE FROM LINKED TEMP AGENCY-WORKER-CLIENT DATA

                                      Andres Drenik
                                       Simon Jäger
                                   Miguel Pascuel Plotkin
                                    Benjamin Schoefer

                                     Working Paper 26891
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26891


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




We thank David Autor and Raffaele Saggio for useful comments. We also thank participants at
the ASSA 2020 Meeting, Stanford SIEPR, and the University of British Columbia for feedback.
We thank Nikhil Basavappa and Jonathan Cohen for research assistance and the Good
Companies, Good Jobs Initiative at MIT Sloan for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andres Drenik, Simon Jäger, Miguel Pascuel Plotkin, and Benjamin Schoefer. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Paying Outsourced Labor: Direct Evidence from Linked Temp Agency-Worker-Client Data
Andres Drenik, Simon Jäger, Miguel Pascuel Plotkin, and Benjamin Schoefer
NBER Working Paper No. 26891
March 2020
JEL No. J31,J53,K31,L24,M52,M54

                                       ABSTRACT

We estimate how much firms differentiate pay premia between regular and outsourced workers.
We study temp agency work arrangements where pay setting has previously escaped
measurement because existing datasets do not report links between user firms (the workplaces
where temp workers perform their labor) and temp agencies (their formal employers). We
overcome this measurement challenge by leveraging unique administrative data from Argentina
with such links. We estimate that temp agency workers receive 49% of the workplace-specific
pay premia earned by regular workers in user firms: the midpoint between the benchmark for
insiders (one) and the competitive spot-labor market benchmark (zero).


Andres Drenik                                Miguel Pascuel Plotkin
Department of Economics                      6000 Iona Dr
Columbia University                          Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
420 West 118th Street                        Canada
New York, NY 10027                           pascuelplotkin@alumni.ubc.ca
ad3376@columbia.edu
                                             Benjamin Schoefer
Simon Jäger                                  Department of Economics
Department of Economics                      University of California at Berkeley
MIT                                          530 Evans Hall #3880
50 Memorial Drive                            Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Cambridge, MA 02142                          schoefer@berkeley.edu
and NBER
sjaeger@mit.edu
1     Introduction
We shed direct light on wage setting for outsourced workers. We study employment
mediated by temporary employment agencies ("temp agencies"), where the workplace is at
a user firm even though the temp agency serves as the formal employer. Temp agency work
is a facet of outsourcing and, more broadly, nonstandard work arrangements, which have
been associated with lower wages and increased inequality (Weil, 2014). Specifically, we
focus on firms' wage policies in the form of pay premia. The between-firm wage dispersion
arising from pay premia constitutes a deviation from the law of one price that would arise
in spot labor markets (see, e.g., Slichter, 1950; Lester, 1967). These premia can arise in
imperfectly competitive labor markets through bargaining, search frictions, or monopsony
(see, e.g., Mortensen, 2003; Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante, 2011; Card et al., 2018).
A long-standing hypothesis is that nonstandard work arrangements--and specifically,
outsourced, temp agency work--erode such pay premia by plausibly operating closer to
a spot labor market or by lowering workers' bargaining power. However, forces such as
equity concerns (Card et al., 2012; Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani, 2017; Dube, Giuliano,
and Leonard, 2019; Saez, Schoefer, and Seim, 2019) or the imperfect observability of effort
(Akerlof and Yellen, 1986; Katz, 1986) may lead firms to extend firm-specific pay premia
even to outsourced labor.
    User firms' wage setting for outsourced labor has so far largely escaped measurement
because typical datasets exclusively associate outsourced workers with their formal em-
ployer, in our case the temp agency, rather than the workplace, the user firm. This is
true for surveys (in addition to the inherent challenges of measuring nonstandard work
arrangements based on snapshot survey data, which has recently been documented by
Abraham and Amaya, 2018; Abraham et al., 2018; Katz and Krueger, 2018, 2019). But the
challenge extends to typical administrative matched employer-employee datasets, which
generally do not show links between temp agency workers and user firms. We illus-
trate this issue in Figure 1. This difficulty has prevented investigation of the relationship
between the pay policies of the user firm's regular workers and its temp workers. An
important exception is Goldschmidt and Schmieder (2017), who use outsourcing events
of clusters of workers in low-skilled service occupations to measure wage changes in the
     For instance, Katz (2017) describes this view as follows: "When janitors work at Goldman Sachs as
Goldman Sachs employees, they tend to share in the firm's huge productivity benefits and huge rents. But
if they work for Joe's Janitorial Services, they no longer share in those rents." Similarly, Autor (2008) argues
that labor market intermediaries more broadly and specifically including temp agencies, "share a common
function, which is to redress--and in some cases exploit--a set of endemic departures of labor market
operation from the efficient neoclassical benchmark." Empirically, Abraham (1990); Dube and Kaplan (2010)
and Goldschmidt and Schmieder (2017) present evidence on the wage penalty associated with nonstandard
work arrangements and outsourcing.

                                                       1
affected occupations. In addition, they find evidence that this outsourcing effect is larger
in firms with initially higher pay premia. This is consistent, for example, with lower rent
sharing with outsourced workers.
     Our paper overcomes this fundamental measurement challenge by drawing on unique
administrative matched employer-employee data on the universe of workers in temporary
work arrangements that contain information on both their temp agency and user firms.
This linkage permits us to directly study the differentiation of pay premia between regular
and temp agency workers within a workplace.
     Our research design identifies pay premia by means of the wage changes that accom-
pany worker moves across employers (Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis, 1999, henceforth
AKM). Such workplace pay premia for regular workers are associated with higher pro-
ductivity (as documented by, e.g., Card et al., 2018) and can hence be interpreted as facets
of rent sharing that are directly observable in matched employer-employee data. We also
document that worker tenure is longer in firms with higher AKM firm effects, consistent
with higher rents and higher-quality jobs. We ask whether these pay premia, whatever
their source, are shared with outsourced labor.
     In a first step, we compare cross-sectional dispersion measures of workplace-level pay
premia separately for regular and temp agency workers. The competitive benchmark for
temp workers and the associated law of one price would imply little dispersion among
temp workers. Though somewhat smaller compared with regular work arrangements,
the dispersion of pay premia of temp agency workers is substantial. Specifically, user
firm pay premia for temp workers have a standard deviation of 17.2 log points, but this
rises to 20.7 log points in regular work arrangements for the same sample of user firms.
These dispersion measures are robust to a split-sample measurement error correction,
which shrinks the standard deviations to 15.2 log points for pay policies for temp work
arrangements, whereas it leaves the regular work arrangements largely unaffected, at
20.5 log points. Hence, the large degree of wage dispersion that characterizes regular
work arrangements extends to the market for temporary agency work, even though it is
plausibly less subject to standard labor search frictions (consistent with Hornstein, Krusell,
and Violante, 2011).
     We also show that temp agency workers are negatively selected in terms of their AKM
worker fixed effects. Overall, we estimate a penalty from temp labor of about 14%. More-
     Our work thus complements growing evidence documenting that firms may not set pay premia policies
equally for all worker types. Using an AKM approach, Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2015) link the gender pay
gap with differential rent sharing in Portugal. Gerard et al. (2018) link the racial wage gap with AKM premia
differentials and sorting across employers in Brazil. Daruich, Di Addario, and Saggio (2017) document
differential rent sharing with workers on fixed-term contracts and open-ended contracts in Italy.



                                                     2
over, firms that hire temp agency workers tend to have higher regular worker AKM work-
place effects, consistent with high-wage firms' use of outsourcing to save on labor costs.
Alternatively, more productive firms both pay higher wages and engage in more complex
modes of production.
    In a second step, we compare workplace pay premia estimates (AKM firm effects)
for temp agency and regular work arrangements within firms. We therefore measure
the degree to which high-wage firms for regular work arrangements are also high-wage
firms for outsourced labor. Here, a view of temp workers treated as insiders in wage
setting would predict a slope of one. By contrast, either the competitive spot labor market
benchmark or the treatment of temp workers as a separate class of workers would predict
a flat line. We find a reduced-form slope of 0.490 for temp agency work arrangements.
Our estimates thus imply that temp agency workers receive 49% of the workplace-specific
pay premia earned by regular workers in user firms--a substantial markdown and the half
point between the benchmark for insiders (one) and the competitive spot-labor market
benchmark (zero).
    Along another dimension, we find that the market for temp agency labor is subject to
similar forces that generate between-firm dispersion in the pay premia in regular labor
markets. Specifically, we find that assortative matching between temp workers and client
firms is substantial: Just as high-wage regular workers sort into high-wage firms, we find
that high-wage temp workers sort into high-paying workplaces. We estimate an elasticity of
the worker AKM fixed effect to the firm fixed effects of 0.27 for regular workers, compared
with a 0.22 effect for temp workers. This result is robust to considering sorting between
temp agencies and client firms, for which we find a precisely estimated zero.
    We discuss interpretations and implications of our findings in the conclusion section.


2    Institutions and Data
Temporary Work Agencies and Regulation The Argentinian labor market for tempo-
rary work shares characteristics with those of other countries along various dimensions.
First, temp agencies in Argentina pay below-average wages (Beccaria and Maurizio, 2017).
Second, their business model and regulatory environment are similar to those of OECD
countries (OECD/IDB EPL Database, 2015). Finally, about 1.5% of employees were em-
    We also nonparametrically correct for measurement error in the pay premia by splitting regular workers
into two groups and taking the slope for these groups as benchmarks (as in Goldschmidt and Schmieder,
2017; Gerard et al., 2018), which slightly flattens the benchmark of the slope of one to 0.974. In the split-
sample procedure, we find a reduced-form slope of 0.480 so that the IV analysis implies a 49.3% (0.480/0.974)
relative slope.


                                                     3
ployed through a temp agency in 2005 (source: own calculations, SIPA, described below),
compared with 0.9% in temp agencies and 1.4% through contract firms in the US (calcula-
tions based on February-2005 CPS, see Table 2 in Katz and Krueger, 2018).
    Temp workers' labor earnings and payroll taxes are paid by the temp agency (typically
monthly, the frequency at which we see administrative earnings). We draw on a represen-
tative labor force survey (Encuesta Permanente de Hogares) to compare weekly hours of work
of temp agency and regular workers and find that they are similar (36.18 hrs/week, SD
12.15, vs. 34.61 hrs/week, SD 13.16, respectively; see Appendix Figure A.1 Panel (b)). As
in many countries, there are a number of formal regulations for temp agency pay. De jure,
the temp agency ought to pay the worker the wage specified by the collective bargaining
agreement corresponding to the actual job, or the wage effectively paid in the user com-
pany. An open question is the degree to which such common regulations are binding and
complied with, or whether firms find ways to circumvent the policies (as with potential
gender or racial wage gaps, even in the presence of anti-discrimination laws). For exam-
ple, temp wage penalties and associated cost savings may point to imperfect compliance.
In our study, partial compliance may be a formal institutional factor that contributes to
similar pay policies across types within a firm, although we cannot definitely distinguish
this channel from others, as we discuss in Section 5.

Administrative Social Security Records (SIPA) We use monthly administrative employer-
employee matched data from 1996 to 2018 from the national social security system (Sistema
Integrado Previsional Argentino, or SIPA). The dataset (described in further detail in, e.g.,
Tortarolo, 2019) covers the universe of formal workers employed in all regions, industries,
and types of contracts. This corresponds to more than 15 million workers and 40 million
job spells. The dataset includes information on workers (gender and age) and their jobs
(type of contract, part-time/full-time indicator, compensation components), as well as
some characteristics of the firm (sector and province). SIPA also provides firm and worker
tax identifiers, and reports total wages earned in each month, which include all forms
of payment that are taxable or subject to social security contributions. These measures
are not top-coded. We CPI-deflate all payments to correspond to January 2008 Argentine
Pesos.

Administrative Worker-Client-Agency Linkage (SR) In addition, we exploit adminis-
trative data linking the temp agency employing the worker and the user firms via tax
identifiers of the temp workers, temp agencies, and clients (Simplificacion Registral, or SR),
which is available since 2008. This unique data source stems from a 2006 reform of temp


                                              4
agency work, which required that temp agencies register temp workers with the Ministry
of Labor, at a bimonthly frequency, and submit information on the worker, user company,
position type, remuneration, and contract start and end dates. These filings are sworn
statements and audited, and hence are of administrative quality.

Defining Earnings Concepts We use SIPA for earnings data, in which we observe the
monthly nominal pretax compensation paid by formal employers. For temp workers,
compensation is paid by the temp agency. To remove ambiguity about earnings sources
(workplaces) and hours and days worked, we restrict our sample of temp workers to
those providing services to a single user firm in a given month, and drop temp spells
with simultaneous user firms or partial-month spells. We winsorize earnings at the 1%
level on both sides. We also drop earnings with real income less than half the real 2008
minimum wage (in 2008, the real minimum earnings were USD340 per month) adjusted
by the average annual growth rate (1.4%) of real income for the entire sample.


3    Wages for Temp Agency Work in Argentina
Summary Statistics In Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2, we provide descriptive evidence
on the types of workers in regular and temp agency arrangements, along with the char-
acteristics of user firms. Overall, we find that temp agency workers tend to be younger
(mean age of 28 vs. 38), and are more likely to be men (79% vs. 70%). For each industry,
Appendix Figure A.1 Panel (a) plots temp agency employment as a share of total national
temp agency employment against its share in national regular employment. Deviations
from the 45-degree line indicate that a firm accounts for more or less temp employment
than predicted by its regular employment share. We find, e.g., that manufacturing relies
particularly strongly on temp agency employment, while education and health services
and professional business services draw relatively less on such outsourced labor.

Estimating the Average Temp Agency Work Pay Penalty We next estimate the pay effect
associated with temp agency work. We regress log wages earned by worker i in period t
on an indicator for temp work, TempAgencyArrangementit :

              ln wit = i + Ji,t +  × TempAgencyArrangementit + Xit  +
                                                                     
                                                                           it .          (1)

As basic controls, Xit , we include gender and a cubic polynomial in worker's age as well as
industry and year, or industry-by-year effects. Due to the panel nature of the data, we can


                                             5
also include worker effects, i , which address selection based on permanent differences
between workers. As a novel feature of our dataset, we also include workplace J fixed
effects, Ji,t , which allows us to estimate the temp agency work penalty by comparing
temp workers with regular workers in the same workplace. We estimate (1) based on the
procedure in Correia (2017) and cluster standard errors at the worker level.
    We report results for the main specifications of (1) in Table 1. Column (1) reports the raw
temp effect of -0.133 (SE 0.0005) with only year effects. This effect is reduced substantially to
-0.075 (SE 0.001) once we include gender and age controls, particularly since temp agency
workers tend to be younger than regular workers (see Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2). We
next report specifications with industry or industry-by-year effects, which increases the
temp penalty to -0.191 (SE 0.001). When we include worker effects in the next column, we
find a point estimate for the penalty of -0.0795 (SE 0.0005), consistent with the previous
specification's overestimation of the temp penalty due to negative worker selection. Next,
we add firm effects, foreshadowing our AKM specifications below, and find a larger temp
penalty of -0.140 (SE 0.0005). We study the implied selection patterns below.
    One possibility beyond the scope of our paper is the degree to which temp agency
work may serve as a stepping stone or point of entry (Autor and Houseman, 2010; Autor,
Houseman, and Kerr, 2017). The dataset we have introduced will uniquely lend itself to
such analyses.

Estimating Workplace Premia for Regular and Temp Agency Workers We next estimate
modified AKM specifications, in which we allow for separate workplace effects for regular
and temp agency workers, which we will then juxtapose in Section 4. Formally, we estimate
the following specification:

                             ln wit = i + Ji,t   + T Ai,t         + Xit  +
                                             W
                                             i,t     TempAgency       
                                                                             it ,                        (2)

                                           i,t   W
where i are worker fixed effects and Ji,t      are work-arrangement-specific workplace ef-
fects. The superscript Wi,t  R, T indicates whether worker i is employed through a temp
agency (T ) or a regular employment relationship (R) in period t, and Ji,t denotes the
                                                            TempAgency
workplace. In addition, we include temp agency effects, T Ai,t         , for the temp agency
T Ai,t at which a temp agency worker i is formally employed in period t. We include as
control variables, Xit , a cubic term in worker age and year fixed effects. Intuitively, the
    This specification mirrors analogous specifications in Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2015), Daruich, Di Ad-
dario, and Saggio (2017), and Gerard et al. (2018), who allow for separate firm effects by gender, contract
modality, and race, respectively. Such a specification can emerge in a model with wage posting and labor
supply elasticities to the firm that differ by work arrangement (Card et al., 2018), or in a bargaining model
with work-arrangement-specific bargaining powers (Card, Cardoso, and Kline, 2015).

                                                     6
wage changes of movers between different workplaces and work arrangements identify
the fixed effects. We estimate (2) in the largest connected set, which captures 60.8% of
firms and 95.9% of worker-year-spell observations.

Which Workers Select into Temp Work? We plot the estimated fixed effects in the
histogram in Figure 2. In Panel (a), we plot AKM worker effects separately for those
ever and never employed by a temp agency between 2008 and 2017. The histograms look
strikingly similar, although we find a mean difference of 9 log points, which indicates that
workers ever employed in a temp agency arrangement were negatively selected, on average,
in terms of their person fixed effect. Since our design controls for work arrangements, this
effect is not mechanically driven by a higher frequency of temp work.

Which Firms Hire Temp Workers? In Panel (b) of Figure 2, we plot the distribution
of regular firm effects separately for those firms that ever or never hired temp workers
(weighting observations by the number of workers). The histograms show that user firms'
pay policies are shifted to the right, with a mean difference in the firm effect of 0.27. Our
results thus indicate that firms that outsource labor are positively selected in terms of their
pay policies for regular workers, i.e., high-paying firms are more likely to have outsourced
labor. This pattern is consistent with cost-saving theories of outsourcing, by which high-
wage firms seek to lower their wage bill by hiring temp workers. Alternatively, it could
reflect selection by which more productive firms pay higher wages and engage in more
complex modes of production. Lastly, it could reflect industry composition or firm size
effects.

Assortative Matching We further investigate the assortative matching of regular and
temp agency workers to firms by relating average AKM worker effects for the two types of
workers to firms' AKM pay premia (for regular workers) in Appendix Figure A.2. We find
positive slopes of 0.27 for regular and 0.22 for temp agency workers, respectively. Hence,
the degree of sorting is similar but somewhat less pronounced for temp workers. This
is consistent with, for instance, temp agencies assigning their most productive workers
to their most productive clients, or with high-wage temp workers managing to obtain
the best-paying assignments. The large degree of assortative matching also implies that
     Since we include temp agency fixed effects and workplace effects, these effects are not separately iden-
tified in cases in which a user firm only hires temp workers from one temp agency and the temp agency, in
turn, only provides workers to one user firm. Thus, our estimates will be identified off firms with multiple
connections within a connected set.




                                                     7
the temp labor market appears to be subject to similar forces that are known to amplify
between-firm wage dispersion.
    In addition, we investigate the sourcing strategies of user firms by comparing the
average temp agency premium to their regular worker workplace premium, i.e., asking
whether high-wage firms hire from high-wage temp agencies. This additional analysis
complements the worker-based analysis above, recognizing that the market for temp labor
is intermediated by agencies. If, for example, high-wage temp agencies provide services
to high-wage client firms, then the total assortative matching may be even larger. Here, we
find a flat slope of -0.007, rejecting the hypothesis of assortative matching between temp
agencies and client firms on the basis of AKM pay premia (Appendix Figure A.3). Overall,
we therefore find considerable sorting of high-wage workers into high-wage firms even
among temp workers, but little sorting between temp agencies and client firms in terms of
their respective wage premia.

Between-firm Dispersion in Pay Policies for Regular and Temp Workers Most impor-
tantly for our goal of understanding intra-firm pay policy differences, in Panel (c) of Figure
2, we plot the distribution of workplace effects for regular and temp work arrangements
in the sample of user firms. These firms relying on temp labor are larger, as they make up
30.6% (1%) of our original sample of firm-month (total firms) observations. Here, we find
a downward shift in workplace effects for temp compared to regular work arrangements.
The average difference of the mean pay premium is 17 log points lower for temp work
arrangements compared with regular ones. This difference reflects the average temp work
arrangement effect, holding the workplace fixed, in this sample.
    Importantly, the dispersion of the workplace effects is nearly as high for temp agency
workers' user firms as for the workplaces of regular workers--a stark rejection of the law
of one price for temp agency workers. Specifically, the raw standard deviation in the pay
premia is 17.2 log points for temp workers and 20.7 log points for regular workers.
    We also implement a measurement error correction based on a split-sample IV proce-
dure, leading us to scale down the standard deviation for the pay premia of temp agency
workers to 15.2 and that of regular workers to 20.5 log points. The large remaining degree
of dispersion following this simple split-sample approach also validates our AKM fixed
     Specifically, we split our sample of workers into two random groups S1 and S0 and estimate the AKM
specification (2) separately in both samples. We then calculate the covariance of the two separate sets of
fixed effects within each work arrangement. Let       R,S1 =  R +    R,S1 denote the estimate of the firm fixed
                                                       J        J    J
effect for regular work arrangements, equaling the true firm effect plus estimation error. We then have
cov(  R,S1 , R,S0 ) = cov( R +   R,S1 ,  R + R,S0 ) = var( R ) as long as cov(R,S1 , R,S0 ) = 0, and analogously
       J      J              J    J     J     J           J                   J       J
          T
for var(J ). The measurement error correction leads us to shrink the standard deviation of regular work
arrangement workplace effects by 0.97% and the one for temp agency work arrangements by 11.6%.


                                                       8
effect as a measure of heterogeneous firms' pay policies.
     Overall, the standard deviation for temp workers is therefore around a quarter below
that of regular workers, indicating that temp labor markets appear somewhat closer to--but
still considerably far from--complying with the law of one price that would be predicted
to prevail in a competitive spot labor market.


4    Do High-Wage Firms Share Pay Premia With Temp Agency
     Workers?
Our core specification relates to the workplace pay premia between temp agency and
regular workers in the same workplace. These patterns could, for example, reflect the
relative degree of rent sharing and/or the degree to which employers can differentiate the
pay of outsourced labor.

Strategy: Comparing Temp and Regular Pay Premia Within Client Firms Building on
(2), we use the estimated workplace pay premia received by temp agency workers, JT , and

compare them with those of their peers in regular employment relationships at the same
workplace, J  R:

                                    JT
                                       =  + J R
                                                 + J .                                (3)

Our coefficient of interest is  , the slope that captures the elasticity of temp pay premia to
regular pay premia. We estimate (3) with OLS.

Polar Benchmarks: Law of One Price vs. Insiders We highlight two polar benchmarks
for the slope  . First, if firms' pay policies for outsourced workers mirror those for insiders
in regular work arrangements, we would expect  = 1. This benchmark would arise in the
presence of similar degrees of rent sharing and rents to be shared, or institutional norms,
formal or informal, preventing firms from differentiating pay within the firm across work
arrangements. Second, if firms pay a market price for temp agency workers, or if temp pay
premia are unrelated to regular premia, then we would expect  = 0.

Results We report binned scatter plots of J     T plotted against  R in Figure 3. Panel (a)
                                                                   J
does so for levels, and Panel (b) repeats the analysis but considers changes in pay premia
(based on splitting our sample period in half). Here, we weight firm observations by total
   In our notation, we simply denote  R as  R and analogously T as  T . Below, we also correct for
                                       J     J                J    J
                      R
measurement error in J with a split-sample IV procedure.


                                                9
monthly observations. Panel (a) indicates that the empirical pay premia trace out a slope
of  OLS = 0.490 (SE 5.73  10-5 ). That is, comparing two firms, A and B, with B offering a
10% pay premium for its regular workers compared with firm A, the corresponding pay
premium for temp agency workers at B vs. A would be predicted to be 4.9%. Hence,
firms do appear to extend their pay premia to outsourced labor, but only pass on half the
amount.

Measurement Error Correction: Split Sample IV We now probe the robustness of our
findings. First, we account for the fact that measurement error may lead to a downward
bias in  OLS . The effects J  R are generated regressors such that the variance of  R captures
                                                                                          J
both true variation in regular workers' pay premia across workplaces and noise due to
sampling variability (Andrews et al., 2008; Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten, 2019).
    To gauge the quantitative importance of measurement error, we implement a simple
split-sample procedure (see, e.g., Goldschmidt and Schmieder, 2017; Gerard et al., 2018,
for similar resolutions). We find a corrected coefficient of  IV = 0.493 (SE 5.87  10-5 ).
Specifically, we split the universe of workers into two randomly drawn groups and sepa-
rately estimate regular workplace effects in AKM specifications for the two samples, which
                                                               R,S1                 R,S0
we label S1 and S0 . We then regress the estimates of J              on those of J       . If there is
no sampling variability or measurement error, we would expect a coefficient of one for
this regression; if the workplace pay premia dispersion only reflects noise, then we would
expect a coefficient of zero. In Figure 4 Panel (a), we plot this first stage relationship be-
tween J  R,S1
              and J  R,S0
                          , and find a coefficient of 0.974 (SE 2.2  10-5 , R2 = 0.9348) among our
sample of user firms. In the split-sample setting, we find a quantitatively nearly identical
reduced-form slope of 0.480 compared to our OLS coefficient of 0.490. Our estimates thus
lead to an IV estimate of  IV = 0.480 0.974 = 0.493 (SE 5.87  10-5 ) from a specification
             R,S0                                   R,S1
in which J        serves as an instrument for J           (with a first-stage coefficient of 0.974).
Hence, the measurement error correction has essentially no effect on our findings.
    Our design finds an intermediate degree of pay policy alignment, even though it
sidesteps the fact that temp agency workers only have a temporary attachment to a partic-
ular user firm. If pay premia only accrue to new hires once they become stably employed
incumbents (as in Kline et al., 2019, who document differential rent sharing with new hires
and incumbents), or if pay compression works within comparable jobs, then it may not
be only the work arrangement but also the limited attachment that drive our attenuated
alignment of pay policies. We hypothesize that an alternative benchmark based on sep-
arately estimated AKM effects for regular workers with lower attachment--such as with,
e.g., shorter tenure or on fixed-term contracts--could hence yield higher implied IV effects.


                                                 10
Do High-Wage Firms Offer Better Jobs? We finally assess whether high-wage firms offer
better jobs by studying the cross-sectional relationship between tenure and pay premia.
This line of analysis follows the revealed-preference approach, whereby good jobs last
longer (see, e.g., Krueger and Summers, 1988). If, for example, higher pay premia reflected
only compensating differentials, workers would be indifferent between jobs with higher
or lower pay premia. However, we find a strong positive relationship between tenure
and pay premia, as shown in Figure 4 Panel (b). Quantitatively, a 10% higher AKM pay
premium for regular workers is associated with a 4 months longer tenure. Our evidence is
thus consistent with high-wage firms offering better, higher-surplus jobs and sharing rents
with their regular workers, rather than merely reflecting, e.g., compensating differentials
or hours differences.


5    Interpretation and Implications
Overall, our findings suggest that a labor market that is moving away from regular work
arrangements and closer to a spot market, such as one mediated by temp agencies, does
appear to lower wage dispersion to a limited degree: Firms appear to pay only half of the
workplace-specific pay premium to temp workers. We close with interpretations of our
findings and a discussion of potential implications.

Why Do Firms Compress Pay Premia for Temp Workers? One reading of the estimate
is that the glass is half empty: Workers in temporary work arrangements do not appear
to share in the rents, as proxied for by AKM pay premia, of a firm as much as workers
who are formally and directly employed at their place of work. One explanation draws on
bargaining, with temp workers having lower bargaining power (analogous to the gender
wage gap and rent sharing in Card, Cardoso, and Kline, 2015). Alternatively, three-
party bargaining--between the temp workers, user firm, and temp agency--may lead the
temp agency to appropriate some of the rents; similarly, double marginalization may be
occurring. Alternatively, temp agency labor supply to specific firms may simply be more
elastic (as in the model in Card et al., 2018, which gives rise to an AKM specification).
The attenuated slope is also consistent with findings by Daruich, Di Addario, and Saggio
(2017) that lower firing costs (in fixed-duration jobs) are associated with lower rent sharing.
    The attenuation of pay policy premia may also contribute to the ongoing debate re-
garding the forces that motivate firms to outsource labor (see, e.g., Abraham and Taylor,
    A 4-month increase corresponds to about a 10% increase in tenure, so that the elasticity of tenure w.r.t.
pay premia is about one. Our evidence is consistent with more recent work by Bassier, Dube, and Naidu
(2019) based on matched employer-employee data from Oregon.

                                                     11
1996; Houseman, Kalleberg, and Erickcek, 2003; Autor, 2003; Mas and Pallais, forthcoming,
for existing evidence). Here, our findings suggest that in particular, high-wage firms can
moderately cut labor costs by relying on temp workers--but to a lesser degree than the
competitive benchmark would have suggested, as they still appear to pay a premium even
to outsourced labor.

Why Do Firms Pass on Such a Large Share of Pay Premia to Temp Workers? Alterna-
tively, the glass is half full: Our estimates reveal considerable evidence that pay premia are
shared with temp workers, compared with the competitive spot labor market benchmark
for temp agency labor with wages equalized across employers. The considerable degree of
pay premia sharing is consistent with theories of fairness norms in the workplace reflected
in workers' dislike for pay differences that lead to pay compression (see, e.g., Bewley,
2009; Card et al., 2012; Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani, 2017; Saez, Schoefer, and Seim, 2019;
Dube, Giuliano, and Leonard, 2019). Alternatively, efficiency wage theories based on moral
hazard would imply that incentive compensation would pass through into pay for both
regular and temp workers performing the same job. Finally, temp agencies themselves
may have incentives to increase rent sharing with temp workers. Temp agencies' revenues
stem from fees charged to user firms, which are typically computed as a fraction of a temp
worker's wage (e.g., about 1.5 to 2% based on conversations with leading temp agencies).
    Viewed through the lens of labor market monopsony, the alignment of pay premia
would imply that the firm-specific supply of temp labor is far from perfectly elastic and
far from a competitively supplied intermediate service. Sources of imperfectly elastic
supply include heterogeneity in workers' preferences for certain employers or mobility
costs, factors that also plausibly guide temp labor supply. It may also reflect monopolistic
behavior by the temp agency itself, which intermediates temp labor supply.
    Another interpretation is partial but considerable compliance with the standard reg-
ulatory framework, which would de jure mandate firms to pay equal wages across work
arrangements for the same job. It is beyond the scope of our paper to isolate the role of this
channel. Yet, Argentina's relatively large informal sector suggests that our setting plausi-
bly leaves some room for noncompliance compared with other countries. We also point to
analogous evidence on differential rent sharing between men and women (Black and Stra-
han, 2001; Card, Cardoso, and Kline, 2015) despite laws that purport to ban discrimination
based on gender.




                                             12
References
Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. "High Wage Workers and High
 Wage Firms." Econometrica 67 (2):251­333.
Abraham, Katharine. 1990. "Restructuring the Employment Relationship: The Growth of
 Market-Mediated Work Arrangements." New Developments in the Labor Market: Toward a
 New Institutional Paradigm :85­119.
Abraham, Katharine and Ashley Amaya. 2018. "Probing for Informal Work Activity."
 NBER Working Paper No. 24880 .
Abraham, Katharine, John Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James Spletzer. 2018. "Mea-
 suring the Gig Economy: Current Knowledge and Open Issues." NBER Working Paper
 No. 24950 .
Abraham, Katharine and Susan Taylor. 1996. "Firms' Use of Outside Contractors: Theory
 and Evidence." Journal of Labor Economics 14 (3):394­424.
Akerlof, George and Janet Yellen. 1986. Efficiency Wage Models of the Labor Market. Cam-
 bridge University Press.
Andrews, Martyn, Len Gill, Thorsten Schank, and Richard Upward. 2008. "High Wage
 Workers and Low Wage Firms: Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility
 Bias?" Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 171 (3):673­697.
Autor, David. 2003. "Outsourcing at Will: The Contribution of Unjust Dismissal Doctrine
 to the Growth of Employment Outsourcing." Journal of Labor Economics 21 (1):1­42.
------. 2008. "The Economics of Labor Market Intermediation." NBER Working Paper No
  14348 .
Autor, David and Susan Houseman. 2010. "Do Temporary-Help Jobs Improve Labor
 Market Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from "Work First"." American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics :96­128.
Autor, David, Susan Houseman, and Sari Pekkala Kerr. 2017. "The Effect of Work First
 Job Placements on the Distribution of Earnings: An Instrumental Variable Quantile
 Regression Approach." Journal of Labor Economics 35 (1):149­190.
Bassier, Ihsaan, Arindrajit Dube, and Suresh Naidu. 2019. "Monopsony in Movers: The
  Elasticity of Labor Supply to Firm Wage Policies." Working Paper .
Beccaria, Luis Alberto and Roxana del Luján Maurizio. 2017. "Mercado de Trabajo y
  Desigualdad en Argentina. Un Balance de las Últimas Tres Décadas." Working Paper:
  https://ri.conicet.gov.ar/handle/11336/36645 .
Bewley, Truman. 2009. Why Wages Don't Fall During a Recession. Harvard University Press.
Black, Sandra and Philip Strahan. 2001. "The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and Dis-
  crimination in a Regulated Industry." American Economic Review 91 (4):814­831.



                                                13
Breza, Emily, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani. 2017. "The Morale Effects of Pay
  Inequality." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2):611­663.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. "Firms and Labor
  Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory." Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1):S13­
  S70.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline. 2015. "Bargaining, Sorting, and the
  Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women."
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (2):633­686.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. "Inequality
  at Work: The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction." American Economic Review
  102 (6):2981­3003.
Correia, Sergio. 2017. "Linear Models With High-Dimensional Fixed Effects: An Efficient
 and Feasible Estimator." Working Paper .
Daruich, Diego, Sabrina Di Addario, and Raffaele Saggio. 2017. "The Effects of Partial
 Employment Protection Reforms: Evidence From Italy." UBC Working Paper .
Dube, Arindrajit, Laura Giuliano, and Jonathan Leonard. 2019. "Fairness and Frictions:
 The Impact of Unequal Raises on Quit Behavior." American Economic Review 109 (2):620­
 63.
Dube, Arindrajit and Ethan Kaplan. 2010. "Does Outsourcing Reduce Wages in the Low-
 Wage Service Occupations? Evidence From Janitors and Guards." ILR Review 63 (2):287­
 306.
Gerard, François, Lorenzo Lagos, Edson Severnini, and David Card. 2018. "Assortative
 Matching or Exclusionary Hiring? The Impact of Firm Policies on Racial Wage Differ-
 ences in Brazil." NBER Working Paper No. 25176 .
Goldschmidt, Deborah and Johannes Schmieder. 2017. "The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing
 and the Evolution of the German Wage Structure." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
 132 (3):1165­1217.
Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni Violante. 2011. "Frictional Wage Dispersion
 in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment." American Economic Review 101 (7):2873­
 98.
Houseman, Susan, Arne Kalleberg, and George Erickcek. 2003. "The Role of Temporary
 Agency Employment in Tight Labor Markets." ILR Review 57 (1):105­127.
Katz, Lawrence. 1986. "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation." NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 1:235­276.
------. 2017. "Interview with Lawrence Katz." Interview by Douglas Clement, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis .
Katz, Lawrence and Alan Krueger. 2018. "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work
  Arrangements in the United States, 1995-2015." ILR Review .


                                            14
------. 2019. "Understanding Trends in Alternative Work Arrangements in the United
  States." NBER Working Paper: https://www.nber.org/papers/w25425 .
Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. 2019. "Who Profits
  From Patents? Rent-Sharing at Innovative Firms." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  134 (3):1343­1404.
Kline, Patrick, Raffaele Saggio, and Mikkel Sølvsten. 2019. "Leave-Out Estimation of
  Variance Components." NBER Working Paper No. w26244 .
Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers. 1988. "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry
  Wage Structure." Econometrica :259­293.
Lester, Richard. 1967. "Pay Differentials by Size of Establishment." Industrial Relations: A
  Journal of Economy and Society 7 (1):57­67.
Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais. forthcoming. "Alternative Work Arrangements."
 Annual Review of Economics .
Mortensen, Dale. 2003. Wage Dispersion: Why are Similar Workers Paid Differently? MIT
 press.
OECD/IDB EPL Database. 2015. "Employment Policies and Data: Argentina." .
Saez, Emmanuel, Benjamin Schoefer, and David Seim. 2019. "Payroll Taxes, Firm Behavior,
  and Rent Sharing: Evidence From a Young Workers' Tax Cut in Sweden." American
  Economic Review 109 (5):1717­63.
Slichter, Sumner. 1950. "Notes on the Structure of Wages." The Review of Economics and
   Statistics :80­91.
Tortarolo, Dario. 2019. "It Takes Two to Tango: Labor Responses to an Income Tax Holiday
  in Argentina." Working Paper .
Weil, David. 2014. The Fissured Workplace. Harvard University Press.




                                            15
6     Figures

    Figure 1: Measurement Challenges: Regular and Temp Agency Work Arrangements
                                                          (b) Temp Agency Work Arrangements
           (a) Regular Work Arrangements




                                                      (d) Measurement of Temp Agency Work
     (c) Measurement of Temp Agency Work              Arrangements in Argentinian Matched
     Arrangements in Typical Matched                  Employer-Employee Data (Dual Registra-
     Employer-Employee Data                           tion)




Note: The figure illustrates regular and temp agency work arrangements and their measurement in adminis-
trative data. Panel (a) plots regular work arrangements in which employer and workplace typically coincide.
Panel (b) illustrates the case of temp agency work arrangements in which a temp agency serves as the em-
ployer while the user firm is the actual workplace. The links between user firms are generally not observed
in matched employer-employee datasets (Panel (c)), as no direct contractual links exist between the user firm
and the temp agency worker. Panel (d) illustrates the case of Argentinian matched employer-employee data,
which allow us to observe links between user firms and temp agency workers due to dual registration.




                                                     16
Figure 2: Worker and Firm AKM Effects For Regular Workers and Temp Agency Workers,
and By Work Arrangements
                              (a) Worker Effects: Never- and Ever-Temp Agency
                              Workers

                                                                                   = 0.09
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                .04


                                                                                                                .03

                                                                                                                .02


                                                                                                                .01

                                                                                                                0
                                -4                     -2                            0                  2
                                                                  Worker FE
                                                             Ever Temporary Workers
                                                             Never Temporary Workers
                                                             Mean Ever Temporary Worker
                                                             Mean Never Temporary Worker


                              (b) Regular Work Arrangement Firm Effects of User
                              and Non-User Firms
                                                                                              = 0.27
                                                                                                                .12


                                                                                                                .09


                                                                                                                .06


                                                                                                                .03


                                                                                                                0
                                     -2                     -1                           0                  1
                                                                   Firm FE
                                                                 Ever User Firms
                                                                 Never User Firms
                                                                 Mean Ever User Firms
                                                                 Mean Never User Firms


                              (c) Firm Effects, by Regular and Temporary Agency
                              Work Arrangement (for Ever-User Firms)
                                                                     = 0.17                                     .16
                                                                    

                                                                                                                .12


                                                                                                                .08


                                                                                                                .04


                                                                                                                0
                                     -1              -.5                   0                       .5       1
                                                                   Firm FE
                                                            Firm FE for Temp Workers
                                                            Firm FE for Regular Workers
                                                            Mean Firm Fe for Temp Workers
                                                            Mean Firm FE for Regular Workers


Note: The figures report histograms of AKM worker and workplace effects. Panel (a) studies selection of workers into temp agency
work and plots histograms of AKM worker effects for workers who were ever or never employed in a temp agency work arrangement.
The histograms overlap substantially, although the mean worker effect is 9 log points lower for workers ever employed in a temp
agency arrangement, i.e., indicating negative selection into becoming a temp agency worker. Panel (b) studies selection of firms into
outsourcing labor (i.e., becoming a user firm of temp agency workers). It plots the histogram of AKM firm effects for regular work
arrangements, separately for firms that were ever or never hired through temp agency arrangements in our observation period. The
distribution for user firms is shifted to the right by 27 log points, indicating that firms with higher wage policies for regular workers
are more likely to have outsourced labor. Finally, panel (c) juxtaposes the workplace pay premia in temp agency and regular work
arrangements within the same workplace as it draws on the sample of user firms. The histograms indicate 17 log points higher workplace
pay premia in regular work arrangements.
                                                                       17
   Figure 3: Estimated Firm Effects for Temp Agency and Regular Work Arrangements
                                                       (a) Levels
                      1

                                                                            Benchmark for Insiders:
                                                                                   =1
                               .8
        Firm FE for Temp Workers
                       .6




                                                                                    = 0.49 -05
                                                                               (SE = 5.7410 )
       .2      .4




                                                                            Competitive Benchmark:
                                                                                     =0
                      0




                                     0   .2       .4               .6                   .8                  1
                                              Firm FE for Regular Workers

                                                     (b) Changes
                                                                                  Benchmark for Insiders:
                      .5




                                                                                         =1
                                .4
       Firm FE for Temp Workers
                        .3




                                                                                          = 0.37 -04
                                                                                     (SE = 1.7710 )
        .1      .2




                                                                                 Competitive Benchmark:
                                                                                          =0
                      0




                                     0   .1       .2               .3                   .4                  .5
                                              Firm FE for Regular Workers

Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot of estimated firm effects for firms acting as user firms for temp
                     T                                                                R
agency workers, J      , plotted against firm effects in regular work arrangements, J   . Panel (a) does so for
                                                                         -5
a cross-sectional comparison using all years (slope 0.490; SE 5.74  10 ); Panel (b) plots the changes in the
fixed effects, splitting the data in two period windows, from 2009 to 2013 and from 2014 to 2017 (slope
0.37; SE 1.77  10-4 ). For ease of visualization, we normalize the respective levels of the fixed effects in the
lowest respective vingtiles to zero. This normalization is inconsequential for our estimation of the slope,  ,
and would be absorbed by the intercept. Estimated firm effects are restricted to those firms in the largest
connected set that, at any point in our sampling window, served as the workplace of temp agency workers.
The red regression line corresponds to the OLS regression line following specification (3).




                                                           18
                                                           Figure 4: Average Tenure vs Regular Firm Fixed Effects
     (a) Relationship Between AKM Firm FEs for Regular Workers in Two Random Samples
     (First Stage of Split-Sample IV)           .6
          Firm FE for Reg. Workers (Rand. Group 0)
                                      .4




                                                                                                                                     = 0.97 -05
                                                                                                                                 (SE = 2.210 )
       -.2         0        .2




                                                            -.2                0                    .2                      .4                     .6
                                                                            Firm FE for Reg. Workers (Rand. Group 1)

                                                                  (b) Average Tenure vs. Regular Firm Fixed Effects
                                                60
       Average Regular Worker Tenure (Months)
                                                50
                                                40
                                                30
                                                20
                                                10




                                                     -.2                0                      .2                      .4                         .6
                                                                                   Firm FE for Regular Workers

Note: Panel (a) shows a split-sample specification with AKM firm effects for regular workers estimated based
on two different 50% samples of workers. The slope of the relationship is 0.974 (SE 2.2  10-5 , R2 = 0.9348).
Panel (b) shows a binned scatter plot of estimated firm effects for firms acting in regular work arrangements,
  R
J   , plotted against the average tenure, in months, of workers under regular work arrangements at the firm
(slope 40.7; SE 0.002). Estimated firm effects are restricted to those firms in the largest connected set that, at
any point in our sampling window, served as the workplace of temp agency workers.




                                                                                                19
7     Table

                      Table 1: Temp Agency Work Arrangement Pay Penalty
                                                             Outcome: Log Wage
                                     (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)            (5)          (6)
 Temp Agency Arrangement          -0.133***   -0.0745***    -0.191***  -0.193***      -0.0795***   -0.140***
                                 (0.000523)    (0.00132)    (0.00123)  (0.00123)      (0.000487)   (0.000485)

 Year                               Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Gender                             No           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Age Cubic                          No           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Industry FE                        No           No            Yes          Yes          Yes          No
 Industry - Year FE                 No           No            No           Yes          No           No
 Worker FE                          No           No            No           No           Yes          Yes
 Firm FE                            No           No            No           No           No           Yes

 R-Squared                         0.011         0.070         0.352        0.355        0.897        0.922
 Observations                   52,167,733    49,580,782    49,561,798   49,561,794   48,463,435   48,419,633

Note: The table reports coefficients for the temp agency arrangement pay penalty  in Mincer equations fol-
lowing regression specification (1). Standard errors clustered at the individual level reported in parentheses.

   p<0.01,  p<0.05,  p<0.1.




                                                       20
                      Online Appendix:
                 Paying Outsourced Labor:
 Direct Evidence from Linked Temp Agency-Worker-Client Data
Andres Drenik, Simon Jäger, Pascuel Plotkin, and Benjamin Schoefer




                                21
A     Appendix Figures

Figure A.1:                                                           Industry Distribution and Hours of Work of Temp Agency and Regular
Workers
                                                                     (a) Industry Distribution of Temp Agency and Regular Employment
                                                            .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Manufacturing
       Industry's Share of National Temp-Agency Employees

                                                            .4
                                                            .3
                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                Transportation Warehousing and comunication
                                                                                                                                                         Retail Trade
                                                            .1




                                                                                   Other Services (Excluding Public Administration)
                                                                                         Wholsale Trade
                                                                       Financial activities                                                               Professional and Business Services
                                                                                               Leisure and Hospitality
                                                                                 Agriculture, Foresty, Fishing and Hunting
                                                                       Utilities                                                               Education and Health Services
                                                            0




                                                                     Mining                              Construction

                                                                 0                             .05                                    .1                            .15                        .2                            .25
                                                                                                                         Industry's Share of National Regular Employees


                                                                                (b) Temporary and Regular Workers' Average Weekly Hours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cumulative density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
      0                                                                                                20                                                      40                                               60
                                                                                                                             Weekly Hours
                                                                                            (Restrictive) ==> (employer industry code + fixed term work)
                                                                                            (Non-Restrictive) ==> (employer industry code)
                                                                                            Regular Workers



Note: Panel (a) plots the share of national temp agency employment enlisted in an industry against that
industry's share of regular employment. Panel (b) plots temporary and regular workers' average weekly
hours, as reported in the continuous labor force survey (Encuesta Permanente de Hogares) for the years 2011
to 2018. We draw on two definitions of temp agency work, available based on industry codes from 2011
onward. First, we plot the CDF of weekly hours when defining temp agency workers by their 2-digit industry
code (mean 34.12; SE 13.16). Second, we show the CDF of weekly hours for temp agency workers defined
by their 2-digit industry code and declaring working for a fixed period of time (mean 36.18; SE 12.15). As
a benchmark, we also plot the CDF of hours for regular workers (mean 35.61; SE 16.50). The sample is
restricted to workers who declared working less than 80 hours per week.


                                                                                                                                                             22
Figure A.2: Sorting of Regular and Temp Agency Workers: Estimated Worker Effects
Against Firm Effects (by Work Arrangement)
                                            (a) Regular Workers




                                             (b) Temp Workers




Note: The figure shows a binned scatter plot of estimated worker effects plotted against estimated firm effects
                                 R
in regular work arrangements, J    . Panel (a) plots the estimated worker effects for workers who are never
temporary workers against firm fixed effects under regular work arrangements (slope 0.27; SE 0.002). Panel
(b) plots the estimated worker effects for workers who are, at some point in our sample, working under a
temporary agency work arrangement with firm fixed effects under regular work arrangements (slope 0.22;
SE 0.002).




                                                      23
Figure A.3: Sorting in the Temporary Agency Market: Temporary Firm Fixed Effects
Against Regular Firm Fixed Effects




                                                                                                     TempAgency
Note: This figure shows a binned scatter plot of estimated firm effects for temporary agency firms, T Ai,t        ,
                                                                            R
plotted against the estimated firm effects for regular work arrangements,   J .The slope is -0.007 (SE 0.0001).
The estimated firm effects of regular work arrangements are restricted to those firms in the largest connected
set that, at any point in our sampling window, served as the workplace of temp agency workers.




                                                      24
B     Appendix Tables

                        Table A.1: Summary Statistics: All Formal Employees
                                                                    SIPA Dataset                 US Survey (Katz & Krueger)
                                                                                               Unweight. Weight. Alt. Weight
                                                                       Years
(Average for all registered workers during each year)    2011          2014         2017                   2015
Median Age (years)                                         34            35           36          50        41        41
Mean Age (years)                                           37            38           38         48.3      42.6      42.5
Median Wage (dollars)                                     891           925          952
Mean Wage (dollars)                                      1,221         1,234        1,261
Female (percent)                                          29.7          30.4         30.9        55.5      47.1      47.1
Multiple Jobholder                                         3.0           3.1          3.3        14.3      13.2      13.1
In Labor Force (Percent of Population)                    46.3          44.9         45.9        62.8      67.5      67.5
Part-Time Employment                                      11.1          12.1         13.4        26.2      24.2      23.5
Industry (percent):
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting                5.9           5.5          5.3          1.0       1.6       1.5
Mining                                                     1.2           1.4          1.3         0.6       0.5       0.5
Utilities                                                  1.0           1.1          1.2         0.5       0.9       0.9
Construction                                               7.2           6.8          7.0         3.1       4.1       3.9
Manufacturing                                             20.6          20.5         19.3         7.3       8.6       8.8
Wholesale Trade                                            5.8           5.8          5.9         2.6       2.2       2.2
Retail Trade                                              12.1          12.4         12.7         8.7       9.6       9.6
Transportation Warehousing and communication              8.6           8.9          8.9          6.4        9        9.2
Financial activities                                       2.5           2.6          2.6         9.2       9.2       9.2
Professional and Business Services                        13.5          12.9         12.9        14.5      13.4      13.2
Education and Health Services                             10.0          10.7         11.5        26.0      22.4      22.5
Leisure and Hospitality                                    3.9           4.1          4.3         5.4       6.0       6.0
Other Services (Excluding Public Administration)          4.9           4.9          5.0          5.2       4.8       4.7
Temporary work agents                                      1.6           1.1          0.8                  1.6        1.6

Avg. Workers                                            4,225,916    4,261,083     4,296,090

Note: SIPA summary statistics are for the overall (rather than final regression) sample using SIPA administra-
tive data (described in the main text). The right columns report summary statistics for the US labor market
computed by Katz and Krueger (2018) based on survey data.




                                                             25
Table A.2: Summary Statistics: All Temporary Work Agents in User Firms (SIPA-Registro
Version)
                                                                SIPA Dataset           US Survey (Katz & Krueger)
                                                                                      CPS Weighted Alt. Weight
 (Average for workers in user firms during each year)    2011      2015     2017      2005           2015
 Median Age (years)                                        26        26      26        44      47           45
 Mean Age (years)                                          28        28      28       44.0    46.8         46.5
 Median Wage (dollars)                                    696       682     752
 Mean Wage (dollars)                                      741       745     808
 Female (percent)                                        22.6      21.2     20.6      38.6    50.4        50.8
 Multiple Jobholder                                      10.2       8.9      9.1       7.4    32.0        33.0
 Part-Time Employment                                     3.0       2.5      3.8      35.2    47.7        46.2
 Industry (percent):
 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting               0.5        0.3        0.5    1.5     4.4         4.1
 Mining                                                   0.7        0.5        0.4    0.3     0.5         0.5
 Utilities                                                0.3        0.3        0.4    0.5     0.3         0.4
 Construction                                             0.4        0.3        0.4   18.0     7.0         6.7
 Manufacturing                                           49.7       44.6       44.0    4.7     5.9         6.2
 Wholsale Trade                                           5.2        4.6        5.3    2.3     0.6         0.7
 Retail Trade                                            12.6       11.4       12.5    7.1     6.3         6.4
 Transportation Warehousing and communication            11.0       11.8       16.6    6.4     9.0         9.2
 Financial activities                                     2.6        2.2        1.8    7.8     6.4         6.2
 Professional and Business Services                       4.9        4.4        4.1   23.4    20.7        20.6
 Education and Health Services                            0.3        0.4        0.5   13.9    21.9        22.3
 Leisure and Hospitality                                  1.7        1.9        3.0    5.1     4.7         4.6
 Other Services (Excluding Public Administration)        3.7        5.8        7.9     7.7     7.4         7.1

 Avg. Workers                                           40,227     20,981   21,227

Note: SIPA summary statistics are for the overall (rather than final regression) sample using SIPA administra-
tive data (described in the main text). The right columns report summary statistics for the US labor market
computed by Katz and Krueger (2018) based on survey data.




                                                        26
