                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE EFFECTS OF STATE SCOPE OF PRACTICE LAWS ON THE LABOR SUPPLY
                OF ADVANCED PRACTICE REGISTERED NURSES

                                        Sara Markowitz
                                       E. Kathleen Adams

                                      Working Paper 26896
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26896


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




Funding for this research was provided by AHRQ grant 1R01HS024530.                We thank Mark
Votruba, Nathan Petek and seminar participants at Indiana University, Louisiana State
University, and the ASHEcon conference for extremely helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sara Markowitz and E. Kathleen Adams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of State Scope of Practice Laws on the Labor Supply of Advanced Practice Registered
Nurses
Sara Markowitz and E. Kathleen Adams
NBER Working Paper No. 26896
March 2020
JEL No. I1,J01,K0

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effects of changes in states' scope of practice laws (SOP) for advanced
practice registered nurses (APRNs) on individual labor supply decisions. Restrictive SOP impose
costs and other barriers to practice that may affect these decisions. Using survey data on APRNs,
we analyze employment in nursing, work hours, part-time work status, multiple job holding, self-
employment, wages, and migration. Results show that the level of SOP restrictions are not strong
determinants of many labor market decisions, with a few exceptions. We find that hours worked
and self-employment both increase when nurses practice in regulatory environments that are free
from physician oversight requirements.


Sara Markowitz
Department of Economics
Emory University
Rich Memorial Building
1602 Fishburne Dr.
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
sara.markowitz@emory.edu

E. Kathleen Adams
Emory School of Public Health
1518 Clifton Road, NE
Atlanta, GA 30322
eadam01@emory.edu
INTRODUCTION

       In 2017, national health care expenditures were $3.5 trillion, representing 17.9% of the

U.S. gross domestic product (Martin et al. 2019). This level of expenditure has been criticized

by many as too high, especially when compared to other developed nations where health care

spending typically ranges from 8-12% of GDP and health outcomes are no worse or better

(OECD 2018). As national efforts to reduce the growth in health care spending have stalled,

finding productivity gains within the existing system may be a viable path forward. Twenty

percent of national health care expenditures are spent on professional services making this sector

an important area to explore for efficiency gains (Martin et al. 2019).

       This paper focuses on scope of practice (SOP) laws and the labor market for advanced

practice registered nurses (APRNs). APRNs are nurses with advanced degrees, usually a

master's degree, who practice in one of four roles: certified nurse anesthetists (CNA), certified

nurse-midwives (CNM), clinical nurse specialists (CNS) and nurse practitioners (NP). APRNs

are currently a small proportion of the health care workforce but serve in important roles. APRNs

are trained to perform many of the same tasks as certain types of physicians including

examinations, diagnoses, providing treatments and prescribing medicine. They may serve as

complements to or substitutes for physicians.

       The labor markets for APRNs are influenced by barriers in the form of licensing

requirements prior to entry, and scope of practice laws post entry. Licensing provisions ensure

that health care practitioners are well-trained and serve to protect the public from harm. These

requirements are generally not controversial. However, the same cannot be said for scope of

practice laws. Scope of practice laws are the legal authority given to licensed health care

professionals to provide medical services once in practice. These laws specifically define the

                                                 1
practitioners' roles, articulate oversight requirements (if any), and govern practice and

prescriptive authorities. The practice environment established by SOP laws can vary

dramatically based on the state in which the APRN practices. In many states, the scope of

practice laws can be considered as highly restrictive and certain aspects of these laws can impose

significant costs on practitioners. These costs have the potential to affect the functioning and

efficiency of APRN labor markets.

       Over time, restrictive SOP laws have become controversial and their utility placed in

question. The oversight provisions of SOP laws are justified as a way to further protect the

public health and ensure quality of care. However, research has shown no evidence of better

health outcomes achieved under a strict oversight environment, rather, evidence is mounting that

these laws instead raise costs and restrict access to care. See Adams and Markowitz (2018) for a

review of this literature. Given the evidence that less restrictive laws do not affect the quality of

care, the remaining questions include what inefficiencies are created and what types of market

distortions do these laws impose.

       The purpose of this paper is to analyze the effects of changes in certain aspects and of the

restrictiveness of states' scope of practice laws on individual labor supply decisions of APRNs.

We use pooled cross sections of individual-level data and state-level data on SOP laws to

analyze a number of different APRN labor market outcomes that may be affected by the costs

and barriers imposed by restrictive SOP laws. Specifically, we analyze the probability of

employment in nursing, number of hours worked, part-time versus full-time work, the

probability of working multiple jobs, the probability of self-employment, wages, commuting

across state lines for work, and changing job location to a different state. We show that on

average, APRNs do not alter many aspects of their labor supply decisions in response to changes

                                                  2
in the state SOP environment with the exception of work hours. We also find that nurses

working in states without oversight requirements are much more likely to be self-employed.

These results have implications for the functionality of local labor markets which in turn may

affect patient access to these health care providers.



SOP LAWS AND LABOR SUPPLY DECISIONS

       Scope of practice laws are the legal authority given to health care providers to provide

medical services, and for APRNs, the laws govern both practice and prescriptive authorities.

The practice environment for APRNs located in different states can vary dramatically based on

these laws. In some states, APRNs are required to practice and prescribe under physician

oversight. This oversight may be supervisory, delegative, or collaborative in nature, however all

require a formal agreement to practice with physicians. These oversight laws effectively tie the

APRN practice to physicians and can set up significant barriers to practice, described in detail

below. Other states have moved to "full practice authority" (FPA) where APRNs practice

without any legal requirements for a formal relationship with physicians.

       Although states vary widely in the provisions detailed by their SOP laws, many of the

restrictive SOP laws share common features including collaborative practice agreements and

protocols. A collaborative practice agreement (CPA) is a written statement that defines the joint

practice of an APRN and a physician. The CPA specifies the rights and responsibilities of each

party along with the requirements for physician consultation. Some states require written

protocols as part of the CPA. These outline the specific details of the APRN practice such as the

medical conditions the APRN may treat, the treatments that may be provided, and the drug

therapies that may be prescribed.

                                                  3
       The oversight requirements present in the SOP laws can impose different types of costs

on APRNs, potentially altering labor supply decisions. These costs can be analyzed within the

standard labor-leisure framework. Note that the following discussion pertains only to the

decisions that correspond to the individual-level data we analyze. Other researchers have

presented theoretical and empirical analyses of the effects of SOP laws on market-based

outcomes including labor substitution and provider mix, measures of productivity, and prices

(see for example, Wing and Marier's 2014 study on dental services and Richards and Polsky's

2016 study on Medicaid patients).

       For states with SOP laws requiring some form of formal relationship between the APRN

and physician, APRNs will face costs associated with setting up and maintaining a collaborative

practice agreement. First, the APRNs will face time and money search costs to find a

collaborating physician. These search costs may be higher in states with articulated restrictions

on the physician-to-nurse ratio for oversight. For example, states such as Alabama and

California allow each physician to oversee at most four APRNs. Search costs can be viewed as

one-time fixed costs that affect reservation wages, discourage entry into the APRN labor market,

and may encourage migration to states with lower entry barriers. These search costs may also

promote job-lock among employed APRNs.

       Upon finding a collaborating physician, APRNs may face monetary costs in the form of

fees to set up and maintain the CPA. In a 2017 survey of APRNs working in states that require

CPAs, Martin and Alexander (2019) find that 22 percent of APRNs reported paying a fee to

establish a CPA and 24 percent reported paying a fee to maintain the CPA. The median

establishment fee was $650, but ranged from $10 to $50,000 across individuals. The median

maintenance fee was lower at $500 per month, with a range of $4 to $4,167 per month. Since

                                                4
these fees typically do not vary with wages, they induce pure income effects that alter reservation

wages and entry and exit decisions. In addition, APRNs already in the labor market would have

an incentive to increase the hours supplied of work if leisure is a normal good. APRNs who

work multiple jobs are required to have separate CPAs with each physician, imposing additional

search and monetary costs for these workers.

       Psychic costs are another consideration. The oversight requirements mandated by SOP

laws can generate greater disutility from work for APRNs as some will dislike working under

strict oversight conditions. Having to stick within the strict protocols or not having prescriptive

authority may contribute to disutility as well. Conversely, some workers may feel more

comfortable with such oversight and not face these costs. In general, psychic costs result in

differently shaped or placed utility functions, and APRNs who face psychic costs will make

consumption and leisure decisions differently from those who do not. This could result in either a

reduction in the hours supplied or an exit from the state's labor market.

       Compliance costs are the fourth class of costs we consider. Compliance with SOP

regulations means APRNs have to spend work time away from seeing patients to consult

physicians and secure their approvals. This issue may be particularly burdensome under the

supervisory type of SOP. This can lower the marginal productivity of APRN labor and hence,

lower the wage rate. Reductions in wages will discourage labor force participation, but have an

ambiguous effect on hours worked that depends on the strength of the income and substitution

effects and whether leisure is a normal or inferior good.

       To summarize, we expect high search costs and monetary fees resulting from restrictive

SOP laws to discourage work and increase the likelihood of migration toward a state with lower

costs. Psychic costs and compliance costs will further discourage labor force participation and

                                                 5
increase migration. Predictions on hours supplied are ambiguous. We cannot disentangle the

effects of each different type of costs since workers in states with restrictive SOP face all of

these costs simultaneously. Our empirical results will therefore reflect the net effects of changes

in these combined costs on the outcomes studied.

       The effect of SOP laws on wages warrants further discussion. The relationship between

wages and SOP is important to this story since equilibrium wages may also be affected via SOP-

induced changes in both the supply of APRNs and the demand for their labor, with the result that

the changes in equilibrium market wages are indeterminate. Generally speaking, eliminating

regulation increases profitability, and under a FPA environment, demand will increase if the

elimination of restrictions on tasks and administrative burdens increases the marginal

productivity of APRNs (e.g. the compliance costs story). Demand may also increase if patient

tastes for APRN-provided care increase by creating a "seal of approval" from the state. New

clinics may open as a result, although it is not clear if this would expand the market or simply

generate a substitution from physician-based care. The market-level predictions are complicated

by the degree of substitutability among health care professionals, which may vary based on the

service under consideration, and by the presence of insurance and reimbursement rules. In

particular, the practice of incident-to billing allows office-based services provided by some

APRNs to be billed under a physician's national provider identification number and paid

according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services physician fee schedule. This

practice is governed by strict supervisory rules which may render the state legislated SOP

irrelevant. See Markowitz and Adams (2018) for details. Overall, the effects on wages of

moving from an oversight-based SOP to FPA is theoretically indeterminate.



                                                  6
       In the models described below, we analyze wages and earnings as outcomes along with

the other labor market outcomes. The models are all reduced form models and show the total

effects of the SOP laws on the outcomes. For the measures of labor supply such as labor force

participation and hours worked, the interpretation of the coefficients on the SOP laws should be

thought of as working through the direct costs imposed by restrictive SOPs and through any

resulting changes in wages.



PREVIOUS LITERATURE

       Only a handful of papers exist that analyze the effects of SOP on labor market outcomes

for nurses. Kleiner et al. (2016) is the most closely related paper to ours. The authors use

individual-level data on NPs from the American Community Survey (ACS) to analyze the effects

of SOP on nurse hourly earnings and hours worked. They analyze practice authority and

prescription authority separately in their models, and show that independence in practice

authority has no statistically significant effects on NP hours worked, while independent

prescription authority is associated with small increases in NP hours worked in the range of 65-

79 hours per year or 3-4 percent. By contrast, they find that independence in practice authority

is associated with an increase in hourly earnings of about 5 percent while finding no effect on

earnings associated with independent prescription authority.

       Other studies use aggregate data to study the supply of nurses. McMichael (2018) and

Xue et al. (2018) both use data from the National Plan and Provider Enumeration System

(NPPES), as provided by the Area Health Resource File, to generate county level-rates of NPs

supply. McMichael (2018) includes an analysis of the effects of state SOP laws on the number

                                                 7
of NPs per county with consideration of the level of physician supply. Xue et al (2018) focus

their study on the relationship between SOP laws and NP supply in rural and primary care

Healthcare Professional Shortage Areas. Both authors find that supply is greater in states with

full practice authority. However, the results must be interpreted with caution. Their measure of

supply counts NPs with a national provider identification number and includes nurses who are

employed, unemployed, and out-of-the-labor force. Since the NPPES does not have a system in

place to assure that the provider information is up-to-date and accurate, it is likely that provider

counts by state or county are misreported, and the problem worsens as practitioners age

(Bindman 2013). It is unknown whether this measurement error is random or correlated with the

SOP laws. These issues put in question the usefulness of this data as an accurate measure of

nurse employment.

       Aggregate data on the number of licensed APRNs is also provided by The Nurse

Practitioner. Reagan and Salsberry (2013) use this data to study the association between SOP

laws and licensed NPs for the year 2008. Markowitz et al. (2017) also use this source for data

on licensed CNMs. Reagan and Salsberry (2013) find that restrictive SOP is associated with

lower numbers of NPs and lower growth rates, although the cross-sectional nature of the data

limits the ability to draw causal inference. Markowitz et al. (2017) find no relationship between

changes in SOP laws and the number of licensed CNMs in an analysis that spans 1999-2013.

       Another related paper is that by Perry (2012). While not measuring a labor market

outcome directly, Perry studies the effects of SOP laws on the probability of moving residences.

This proxies for NPs "voting with their feet" in regards to laws that affect work environment.

The measure of SOP used is an indicator of whether a state allows NPs some level of controlled

substance prescriptive authority. He concludes that NPs are 3 percentage points less likely to

                                                  8
move away from a state with some level of controlled substance prescriptive authority,

regardless of oversight requirements.

       While the existing literature points to the general conclusion that restrictive SOP hinders

the market for NP labor in a variety of ways, there is room for improvement. The individual-

level papers by Kleiner et al. (2016) and Perry (2012) focus on limited definitions of SOP.

Perry's focus on only prescriptive authority may not adequately summarize the practice

environment faced by NPs. Kleiner et al. include measures of practice and prescriptive authority

separately which makes interpreting the laws difficult as these authorities may change

simultaneously, for example, when states adopt full practice authority. The aggregate-level

papers by McMichael (2018) and Xue et al. (2018) avoid this issue and consider both practice

and prescriptive authority jointly, however, these papers utilize a measure of supply that may not

well reflect the actual labor force. Aggregate-level analyses present the additional problem of

policy endogeneity when current supply is regressed on current laws. It is possible that the

observed positive relationship is a result of a large presence of nurses with a strong lobbying

effort influencing the SOP laws. Individual-level data does not suffer from this policy

endogeneity problem.

       We advance this literature by using individual-level data on nurses to analyze a number

of different labor market outcomes that may be affected by the costs and barriers imposed by

restrictive scope of practice laws. Specifically, we analyze the probability of employment in

nursing, number of hours worked, part-time versus full-time work, the probability of working

multiple jobs, the probability of self-employment, wages, commuting across state lines for work

and changing job location to a different state. The SOP laws are defined to consider practice and

prescriptive authority simultaneously since both of these are important components of nurses'

                                                 9
jobs and often change at the same time. The law categories are defined in terms of a range of

potential barriers to care and the costs imposed on nurses. Our conclusions diverge from those

presented above. In general, we find that the level of SOP restrictions are not strong

determinants of many labor market decisions, with a few exceptions. We find that hours worked

and self-employment both increase when nurses practice in regulatory environments free from

oversight requirements.



DATA

       Our primary data source is the National Sample Survey of Registered Nurses (NSSRN).

This survey is conducted approximately every four years between 1977 and 2008 and includes in

each iteration nationally representative samples of RNs with active licenses in the United States.

We limit the sample to the subset of RNs who are identified by the survey designers as APRNs,

based on questions regarding advanced practice education. We use the most recent five years of

the data--1992, 1996, 2000, 2004 and 2008. We begin in 1992 since SOP laws at that time are

restrictive in most states and there is not much legislative activity prior to then. The survey

conducted in 2008 was the last year of this particular survey. While the data are somewhat old,

the surveys were conducted during a time when states began moving towards full practice

authority, and therefore we observe a lot of variation in the SOP laws during this time (discussed

more below). Since APRNs in many states still face restrictions on practice, the lessons from

past experiences are relevant for today. An advantage of the NSSRN survey is availability of

geographic information on the respondents' state and county of residence and state and county of

work. This allows us to identify the proper SOP environment(s) faced by respondents, especially

when border crossing is an option.

                                                 10
       Dependent variables: The NSSRN asks a variety of questions regarding nurses' current

and past employment situation and location. From these questions we generate a number of

dependent variables designed to match closely with the decisions for labor force participation,

hours worked, and migration. Table 1 shows means of the dependent variables for the estimation

samples of APRNs and NPs, and Table 2 shows the means by SOP law classifications. These

laws classifications are described in detail below.

       We first examine employment, defined as the probability of currently working as a nurse

versus working in another occupation or not working. The survey asks about working status and

location in the current survey year (1992, 1996, 2000, 2004 and 2008) and in the past year (1991,

1995, 1999, 2004 and 2007), thus, we can generate probability of working in up to ten years of

survey data along with changes in employment status.

       Next, we examine the number of hours worked including overtime and on-call work in a

typical week in the APRN's principal job, among those currently employed. We also evaluate

part-time versus full-time status in primary job. Annual (but not weekly) hours worked in

secondary nursing jobs are also collected so we examine total annual hours worked in primary

and secondary jobs.

       Two additional outcomes of interest among those currently employed are the probability

of currently working multiple jobs and the probability of self-employment. SOP requirements

for entering into CPAs and the associated fees may make it more costly for APRN to work in

multiple jobs or to be self-employed.

       The survey asks respondents who are currently employed in nursing for an estimate of

gross annual salary/earnings in their principle position. We use responses to this question to

reflect earnings. We also generate an estimate of hourly wages by dividing annual earnings by

                                                 11
the reported number of usual scheduled work hours and the number of weeks normally worked

per year in the principle position. There are a few cases where this calculation resulted in

extremely low wages that are likely results of reporting or recording errors. To correct for this,

we treat wages as missing for the nineteen observations where the calculated hourly wage is less

than the federal minimum wage for that year. Wages will also be missing in cases where

earnings, hours, or weeks are not reported. Wages and earnings are expressed as real (1982-

1984) dollars. Log real wages and log real earnings are also used, and show similar results as the

unlogged values.

       The geographic and past-year questions allow us to delve into some types of migration

decisions. First, since we know the counties in which the APRN lives and works, we can

analyze whether or not an APRN commutes across state lines for work. To do this, we compare

the SOP of the resident and border counties to see if living in a more restrictive SOP encourages

commuting to a less restrictive environment. When we conduct this analysis, we limit the

sample to respondents who live in counties that border counties in another state. County border

information comes from the U.S. Census Bureau's County Adjacency File. Second, the past-

year questions allow us to measure the probability of working in a different state in adjacent

years. This migration measure reflects attachment to the local labor force and allows us to test

whether the type of SOP in the work location in the past year encourages respondents to change

job locations in the subsequent year.

       APRN Characteristics: The NSSRN reports a limited number of demographic and

personal characteristics. We generate indicator variables for gender, age, race, marital status,

and the presence of children in the home. Indicator variables for missing value on these

indicators are also included in order to preserve observations. Indicator variables for the

                                                12
different types of APRN are also included. An APRN may be trained as a CNA, CNM, CNS or

NP, either alone or in combination. In the models based on the employed sample, we also

include indicator variables for the employment setting: hospital, nursing home/extended care,

nursing education program, public or community health, school health service, occupation

health, ambulatory care, all other settings.

       SOP Laws: SOP laws are described in state statutes and various years of The Nurse

Practitioner. There are a variety of ways to classify the SOP laws with the result that many

different researchers have utilized different schemes. It is common in the academic literature to

separate practice and prescription authorities (see for example Kleiner et al. 2016; Kurtzman et

al. 2017) or to study only one of the authorities (Stange 2014; Timmons 2017). The problem

with the first approach is that the laws can be highly collinear since the two authorities are often

changed at the same time. The problem with the second approach is that independence in one

authority may still be limiting in terms of the day-to-day practice if the other authority is not

granted. In the past, a number of states have granted independence in practice authority yet

required some form of physician oversight if prescription authority is desired. These states

include Hawaii, Michigan, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, Utah, and West Virginia. In

cases like these, the APRN is effectively under an oversight regime since she cannot practice up

to the level of her training. For this reason, practitioner groups such as the American Association

of Nurse Practitioners (AANP) consider both authorities when describing in their classifications

of the laws. We do the same in our classification as described below.

       Our classification of the laws is designed to reflect the potential costs imposed on an

APRN to keep the discussion in line with the labor supply decisions. Before describing our

classification scheme, some definitions are helpful here. Recall that a CPA is a written statement

                                                 13
signed by the APRN and physician that specifies the rights and responsibilities of each party

along with the requirements for physician consultation. Written protocols may be part of the

CPA and outline the specific details of the APRN practice. Search costs and practice agreement

fees will be relevant for any state law that requires a CPA. CPAs and protocols may affect

productivity and impose compliance costs that rise as the degree of required physician

involvement rises. Psychic costs can also vary along the different practice and authority

limitations. Regarding prescription authority, state law may limit the types of drug therapies

included in this authority. Prescription drugs are classified into two main groups of controlled

and non-controlled substances. Controlled substances are further classified into schedules that

range from Schedule I to Schedule V in declining order of the potential for abuse. Other non-

controlled substances that still require a prescription have a low potential for abuse and include

drugs such as antibiotics, asthma medications, insulin, and blood pressure medications. As with

CPAs and protocols, limits on prescribing may increase psychic costs and compliance costs.

       Given these considerations, we define five categories of SOP laws as follows:

       1) Full practice authority (FPA) -- states that grant full practice and prescription

           authorities and may encourage collaboration in statute but neither require

           collaborative practice agreements nor articulate practice protocols.

       2) Collaborative Practice Agreement (CPA) -- states that require CPAs but no written

           protocols and have full prescription authority for non-controlled drugs and controlled

           substances up to schedule II or III.

       3) Protocols -- states that require CPAs and written practice protocols. APRNs can

           prescribe non-controlled drugs and controlled substances up to schedules II or III.



                                                  14
       4) Protocols, limited RX ­ states that require CPAs and written practice protocols.

           APRNs are allowed to prescribe non-controlled drugs and may be allowed to

           prescribe schedule IV or V drugs but no schedule II or III controlled substances.

       5) Supervision, no RX ­ states require APRNs practice under physician supervision or

           delegation with no prescribing privileges. Any prescribing is done via order or

           delegation from a physician.

       Over time, states have generally followed a progression of changes in the restrictiveness

of the laws. In the early 1990s when our data collection begins, many states required APRNs to

practice under the supervision of a physician and did not allow prescription authority. Since

then, states have adopted new SOP laws that both expand prescription authority and loosen or

eliminate the supervisory requirements. Table 3 shows the number of states in each category by

survey year and Figure 1 shows maps of these states for each year in our sample. It is evident

that the states in our sample time period became less restrictive over time and yet, only twelve

states were classified as FPA by 2008. As of January 2020, 27 states can be classified as such

(Phillips 2020). Even though the current policy debate surrounds the movement to FPA, our

main models will examine the movements across all five categories of SOP laws in order to

show whether the degree of restrictiveness matters. These analyses are instructive as many states

still have rather restrictive SOP in effect today.

       There are a few limitations of our classifications of the SOP laws. First, while APRNs

who are required to have a CPA will face the search and money costs associated with finding a

collaborating physician, the actual dollar amounts of any fee would be determined on an

individual basis. Martin and Alexander (2019) find that the type of employer matters for these

fees. APRNs who work for large health care facilities or for privately owned physician practices

                                                     15
are much less likely to have to pay CPA fees as compared to APRNs working in private practices

run by APRNs. Unfortunately, we cannot determine facility ownership from the survey data.

Second, the SOP laws generally pertain to all types of APRNs, however, it is not uncommon for

states to have separate SOP for CNMs, CNSs and/or CRNAs. NPs are consistently covered by

the laws as coded, and therefore all models are estimated for the full sample of APRNs and for a

separate subsample of only NPs. Limiting the sample to NPs reduces sample size but will ensure

that the respondent is covered by the law.

       State and County characteristics: The models described below include the number of

MDs per 1,000 population in the county, defined as the total number of non-Federal MDs in

patient care. This variable will help account for the availability of collaborating/supervising

physicians in each county. We include the county unemployment rate to account for local labor

market conditions. These data are from the Area Health Resource File, and are merged

according to either the county of residence or county of work, depending on the outcome being

evaluated. All models also include an indicator variable for whether or not the APRN's state of

residence is part of the Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC). This compact is an agreement among

member states to honor the Registered Nurse (RN) or licensed practical nurse (LPN) license of

the home state. This indicator varies over time, with enactment dates taken from DePasquale

and Stange (2016). This agreement does not apply to APRN practice, and APRNs must be

licensed in each state in which they practice. We include this indicator to help capture some of

the potentially unobserved state sentiment towards nurse licensure and regulation in general.



EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATIONS



                                                16
       The general empirical specification models the labor market outcomes as a function of

state SOP laws (SOP), individual characteristics (X), employment setting among those employed

(W), state/county characteristics (Z), and state () and year () fixed effects. In the models

described below SOP is a vector of the state laws, with the least restrictive law, full practice

authority, serving as the omitted reference category. All models are estimated first among all

APRNs and again for NPs only;

       The probability of employment in nursing (Emp) for individual (i) in state of residence (r)

at time (t) is estimated as follows:

        (1a)   Pr(Emp)irt = 1SOPrt + 2Xit + 3Zrt + r + t + jt

        (1b)   Pr(Emp)irt = 1SOPrt + 2BorderLessRestrictivert + 3BorderSame/MoreRestrictivert +

                             3Xit + 4Zrt + r + t + jt

       In Equation 1a, we include indicator variables for the scope of practice laws pertaining to

the state of residence, which may or may not overlap with the state in which an APRN works.

To account for the SOP work environment options and for the possibility that a respondent

works and lives in different states, in Equation 1b we include indicator variables for the SOP law

of border counties. Specifically, we include indicator variables for 1) living in a border county

with SOP in the neighboring county less restrictive than the home county (17 percent of the

APRN sample); and 2) living in a border county with SOP in the neighboring county the same or

more restrictive than the home county (24 percent of the APRN sample). The omitted reference

category reflects living in a county that does not border another state (55 percent of the APRN

sample). Models estimating the probability of employment are shown using the five years of

current survey data and using the full ten years of available data, that is, the five main survey

years plus the questions regarding employment status in the previous year.

                                                 17
       Next, we estimate other labor market outcomes (L) among workers:

        (2)    Liwt = 1SOPwt + 2Xit + 3Wit + 4Zwt + w + t + jt

        Here, L represents hours worked, part-time versus full-time work, probability of holding

multiple jobs, probability of self-employment, annual earnings, or hourly wages. The SOP laws

in these analyses pertain to the state in which the APRN or NP holds her primary job (w).

Border laws are not relevant here since the APRN has already chosen her work environment.

The vector W represents the seven indicator variables for the different employment settings.

County characteristics and state fixed effects also pertain to the state of work rather than

residence.

       The equations for estimating commuting across state lines for work are as follows:

       (3a) Pr(commuting)irwt = 1BorderLessRestrictivert + 2Xit + 3Wit + 4Zrt + r + t + jt

       (3b) Pr(commuting)irwt = 1(SOPrt*BorderLessRestrictivert )+ 2Xit + 3Wit + 4Zrt + r + t + jt

Here, we limit the sample to those currently employed in nursing and examine whether or not the

APRN or NP currently works in a different state than her residence. This equation is estimated

only among nurses who live in border counties since this is the group most likely to border cross

for work. (Only 2.25 percent of the sample report not living on a border and working across

state lines.) Equation 3a shows the effects of living in a county that borders a state with less

restrictive SOP. Equation 3b expands on 3a and uses interactions between the SOP of the state

of residence and the less restrictive border county indicator. Specifically, these categories are as

follows: 1) lives in CPA and borders a less restrictive state (i.e. FPA); 2) lives in Protocol and

borders a less restrictive state (i.e. either FPA or CPA); 3) lives in Protocol with limited RX and

borders a less restrictive state; and 4) lives in Supervisory with no RX and borders a less

restrictive state. The omitted reference category includes individuals living in the same SOP

                                                 18
environment as the border and individuals living in SOP environments that border more

restrictive states. Also included are the individual characteristics, employment setting,

county/state characteristics pertaining to the residence, and state and year fixed effects.

       The last labor market outcome is migration defined as the probability of working in

different states in adjacent years, conditional on working in nursing in both years. This is

estimated with the following equation:

(4) Pr(change work state)iwt = 1SOPw(t-1) + 2Xit + 3Wi(t-1) + 4Zw(t-1) + w(t-1) + (t-1)+ jt

where the subscript w indicates the state of work rather than residence, and SOP laws pertain to

the previous year's SOP in the state in which the APRN or NP worked. This equation analyzes

the "push" factor and shows whether the SOP environment in the state of work last year is

associated with working in a different state in the current year. We do not include border

indicators here since the respondents may move to any state for this migration decision.

       The above models are all estimated with OLS/LPM with state-clustered standard errors.

Where relevant, probit models yield very similar results and are available upon request.



THREATS TO VALIDITY

       Policy endogeneity is one potential threat to validity to this type of difference-in-

difference analysis. However, we argue that this not an issue here since decisions at the

individual-level should not affect the current state laws. The changes in SOP laws often arise

from intense lobbying efforts from practitioner groups and the timing of the change in the laws

may have more to do with political power and campaign contributions than actual market

conditions. Moreover, previous work on SOP laws has found no evidence of policy endogeneity

(Kleiner et al. 2016; Markowitz et al. 2017; McMichael 2018; Traczynski and Udalova 2018).

                                                 19
       Another potential threat to validity is the violation of the assumption of parallel trends

that underlies difference-in-differences models. The issue in question is whether in the absence

of the treatment, the difference in the treatment and control groups follows the same trend over

time. The pooled cross-sectional nature of this data along with the three-year gaps between the

five survey waves means that we have very few data points with which to examine pre-policy

trends. Nevertheless, we present evidence that there is no systematic trend leading up to the

states' policy changes. Details are provided below in the "Event Study" section.



RESULTS

       Results from estimating the above equations are presented in Tables 4 through 7. Table 4

shows the results for the probability of employment in nursing as compared to working in a non-

nursing occupation or not working. Eighty-nine percent of the sample is employed in nursing,

with eight percent not working and the rest working in a non-nursing profession. Some nurses

report holding multiple jobs that may include a mix of nursing and non-nursing work. These

respondents are coded as employed in nursing. Even though the proportion of nurses employed

is 89 percent in both the five year and the 10 year samples, it is useful to analyze both samples

since it is different nurses that are employed in each year, as a nurse can change employment

status from past to present. About 5.5 percent of the sample changes employment status, and the

number who change from employed to not employed (2.8 percent) and vice versa (2.7 percent) is

very similar.

       Table 4 includes eight columns with the first four using data for all APRNs and the

second four using data for NPs. The odd numbered columns show results using the five years of

main data, whereas the even numbered show the full ten years of available data based on the

                                                20
past-year recall question. Columns 3, 4, 7 and 8 include the indicators for living on the border of

a less restrictive state and bordering states that are the same or more restrictive. The omitted

reference category is not living on a border. The results are consistent across all these models

and show small and statistically insignificant coefficients for the various levels of SOP laws. A

similar statement hold for the border indicators.

       Interestingly, the indicator variable for the state of residence in the Nurse Licensure

Compact is positive and significant in all models. Since this compact pertains only to RN and

LPN licenses, this result should be interpreted as reflecting a state environment that generally

promotes nurse employment. Another interesting result that arise is that being male increases the

probability of employment by about 4 percentage points. Divorced and single respondents are

more likely to be employed than married respondents.

       Results for hours worked, multiple job holding and self-employment are show in Panel A

of Table 5 for all APRNs and Panel B of Table 5 for NPs only. Only the coefficients on the SOP

laws, Nurse Licensure Compact, and county characteristics are shown for brevity. The results

indicate that respondents living in some of the more restrictive SOP environments work fewer

hours. This statement pertains to weekly hours in the primary job and to yearly hours in all jobs

combined. Among all APRNs living under supervisory SOP, the magnitude is 2 fewer hours per

week and 135 fewer hours per year. The magnitudes are slightly larger for NPs only with a 3

hour weekly reduction for the supervisory SOP and 148 annual reduction. These results are

consistent with the findings of Kleiner et al. (2016) who find a reduction in work hours

associated with legislated restrictions on prescription authority.

       While the SOP laws have no statistically significant effects on the probability of part-

time work, nor on the probability of holding multiple jobs, the restrictive SOP laws are

                                                 21
negatively related to the probability of self-employment. That is, APRNs and NPs who work in

restrictive SOP states of any level are less likely to be self-employed than those working in FPA

environments. The magnitude of the effect is around 6-7 percentage points for APRNs and

ranges from 7 to 10 percentage points for NPs. The proportion of APRNs (NPs) who are self-

employed is 15.6 percent (12.6 percent). The magnitudes of these results are large but are not

surprising given that the restrictive SOP laws tie the APRN practice to MDs, making it much

more difficult to be self-employed.

       Table 6 shows results for real annual earnings and calculated real hourly wages. While

almost none of the coefficients show are statistically significant at conventional levels, the

coefficients on the four levels of oversight are almost uniformly negative and three of the SOP

coefficients in the NP models are significant at the 15 percent significance level. Note that the

negative sign on earnings may simply reflect the negative sign estimated for hours worked, but

using the calculated wages should isolate the wage effect. Despite the statistical insignificance,

the magnitudes are informative. Among all APRNs, wages under oversight environments are

reduced by about 2 percent relative to FPA. For NPs only, however, this magnitude rises to a 8-

10 percent difference, or about $2.00 per hour. A negative sign here is consistent with the

compliance costs story where oversight SOP reduces the marginal productivity of APRN labor

and lowers the equilibrium wage rate when any supply response is less than the demand

response. While we are not examining aggregate supply in this paper, we do find no meaningful

effects of the SOP laws on the probability of employment making the compliance costs story

plausible.

       Turning to the outcomes related to migration, Table 7 shows results for the probability of

commuting, that is, working and living in different states in a given year. The sample is limited

                                                 22
to only those nurses who live in a border county and includes the results for the main five year

sample (columns 1 and 3) and the 10 year sample (columns 2 and 4). The results show that

options matter. APRNs living in restrictive SOP environments who border a less restrictive state

are more likely to cross the border for work (columns 1 and 2). Results in columns 3 and 4 show

that the effect is dominated by APRNs who live in CPA states and border FPA, and by APRNs

who live in state with protocols and border either CPA or FPA. These respondents are 8-9

percentage points more likely to commute than respondents living on borders with the same or

greater level of restriction. However, these results are sensitive to the sample used (APRNs vs

NPs) with the coefficients for NPs generally insignificant, but of similar sign and magnitudes.

       Lastly, we estimate the effects of changes in the SOP laws on the probability of working

in different states in adjacent years. Here we find that the SOP laws have no statistically

significant effects on this migration measure, whether APRNs or just NPs are examined. These

results are not shown in a table but are available upon request. Only 562 respondents (5 percent)

move work locations, and of the total movers, 163 (29 percent) moved to a work location with

the same level of SOP restrictions, 203 (36 percent) moved to a more restrictive SOP and 196

(35 percent) moved to less restrictive SOP. Interestingly, 35 percent keep their residence in the

same state and move their jobs to another state, while 65 percent move both jobs and residence.

Within these two categories, workers are moving to the same, more, and less restrictive SOP

environments in roughly equal proportions. The overall conclusion here is that SOP does not

seem to be a factor in moving decisions.

       The results in Tables 4, 5, and 6 show the effects of the level of restriction in SOP laws

relative to a FPA environment. However, over time there is a lot of movement among the states

from a highly restrictive category to a less restrictive category that is not FPA. For example, a

                                                23
common move among states is from the category of supervision with no RX to the category of

protocols, with sixteen states making this switch. In order to clearly show whether these types of

law changes have effects on the outcomes, we rerun select models from Tables 4, 5 and 6, each

time changing the omitted reference category. While the magnitudes of these differences could

be calculated from the main tables, in Table 8 we present the results using these iterations in

order to provide the reader with more easily interpretable comparisons.

       Table 8 shows the results from changing the omitted reference category for all APRNs.

Results for NPs are similar and available upon request. The outcomes shown are: the

probability of employment in nursing (using the current year sample from column 1 in Table 4),

hours per week of work in primary job, and the probability of self-employment. The coefficients

on the laws for part-time employment, multiple job holding, and real wages are all statistically

insignificant, regardless of the omitted category, and are therefore not shown.

       A few differences are shown in Table 8 that are not apparent from the main tables.

Regarding employment in nursing, APRNs living in CPA states are more likely to be employed

than those in protocol states. Similarly, nurses in states with protocols and limited RX are more

likely to be employed than those in supervision states. However, an unexpected result is that

nurses in states with protocols and limited RX are more likely to be employed than nurses in

protocol states. The magnitude of these effects are all fairly small, ranging from 2 to 3

percentage points.

       The results for hours of work tend to be concentrated among the categories of supervision

and full practice authority, yielding no differences among the intermediate law categories. The

results for self-employment are among full practice authority only, with no effects being seen for

among the other categories. This result makes a lot of sense in that we would only expect to see

                                                24
an increase in self-employment once the nurse practices is untethered to the physician's practice.

Overall, the results of this exercise show that not only is the movement to full practice authority

important but intermediate steps that move the practice environment away from supervision is

also important. The response to switching among the intermediate categories of protocols with

limited RX, protocols only, and CPA is fairly limited.



EVENT STUDY

       This section addresses the possible violation of the assumption of parallel trends that

underlies the above models. The issue in question is whether in the absence of the treatment, the

difference in the treatment and control groups follows the same trend over time. We check for

this in two ways: First, we show visual evidence that the trends in the average outcomes of the

two group are very similar throughout the time period studied. Second, we conduct a regression-

based event study analysis.

       For both of these exercises, we define the treatment group as APRNs in states that

experience any change in SOP law between 1992 and 2008, while the control group includes

APRNs in states that experience no changes. There are 8 states that change laws twice during

the sample period so these states are excluded so that there is no overlap in the pre and post

categories. The event time is classified into surveys waves (not years) before and after the law

change. For example, for states that experience a law change in the 1993, 1994, or 1995 the data

from the 1992 survey comprise the pre-period and event time is coded as "1 wave prior", while

data from survey years 1996, 2000, 2004 and 2008 are the post-periods and are coded as event

times 1, 2, 3, and 4 waves post, respectively. The models show a range of three pre-waves to

four post-waves. We combine the event year and the first post wave into one reference category

                                                 25
termed "0/1 wave post". We do this because of the mix of law changes in survey and non-survey

years. Laws are matched to the data as of the beginning of the year so the outcomes are all

observed after the law changes.

        One issue with these analyses is that a lot of the states change their laws in the earlier

years of the data and therefore the number of states that contribute to the pre-period trends is

small. Only seven states have a third pre-wave. These are states that passed laws between 2001

and 2007, so there is at least a 9 year gap between the third pre-wave (1992 survey data) and first

post-wave. The length of time between each wave should be kept in mind when interpreting

these results.

        Figure 2 shows visual evidence that the trends in the average outcomes of the two groups

are very similar throughout the time period studied. The trends for the control states shown are

based on randomly assigned dates of the event. Overall, the trends in the outcomes for the two

groups track very closely, with no strong apparent divergence before the events, especially for

the first and second pre-waves. The data used to generate Figure 2 pertains to all APRNs. The

figures for NPs are very similar and are available upon request.

        Figure 3 contains results from the regression-based event analyses for APRNs. Again,

results for NPs are similar and are available upon request. The regression models are similar to

those in the regression tables, except that the policy indicator is replaced with indicators for the

waves before and after any law change as described above. The coefficients and confidence

intervals plotted are shown relative to the first post wave. In all models, the coefficients for 1

and 2 waves prior are statistically insignificant, indicating a lack of evidence of confounding pre-

trends in the recent waves leading up to a law change. However, going back further in time

generates a few statistically significant coefficients for two of the ten outcomes: working and

                                                  26
living in different states and annual hours of work. This is not cause for concern since the third

wave prior is measured many years prior to the law change and pertain to very few states. In

addition, the average trends shown in Figure 2 for these outcomes do not indicate a problem.

Lastly, the insignificant coefficients shown on the post-waves corroborate the insignificant

results presented above for many of the outcomes studied.



CONCLUSIONS

       The results of this study show that APRNs do not alter many aspects of their labor supply

decisions in response to changes in states' SOP practice environments. The results show no

effects of the different levels of restrictiveness in the SOP laws in determining the probability of

part-time work, the probability of holding multiple jobs, nor the probability of moving to a

different state for work. The probability of nursing employment is also not very responsive to

changes in SOP, with only small effects found from switching among some of the more

restrictive SOP environments and no effect for the move to FPA. The effects of SOP on wages

and earnings are uniformly negative but mostly statistically insignificant. There is evidence that

weekly hours of work in the primary job and total hours of work across all jobs are higher in full

practice authority states. In addition, SOP matters significantly for self-employment status, with

nurses in full practice authority states much more likely to be self-employed by a range of 6-7

percentage points for APRNs and 7 to 10 percentage points for NPs. There is also some

evidence that outside options are important with APRNs who live on the border of less restrictive

states being more likely to cross a state border for work.

       These results are in agreement with Kleiner et al. (2016) for work hours and wages,

although our findings are not in support of the results by Perry (2012) on residence migration.

                                                 27
And while not directly comparable, our results for probability of employment are also not in

support of that of McMichael (2018) and Xue et al. (2018) for aggregate employment levels. We

caution that some of these previous studies use different classifications of the SOP laws which

makes comparison of results challenging. We argue that practice authority and prescription

authority should be used in conjunction with each other in order to best reflect the overall

practice environment under which APRNs practice.

       The labor market effects are only one aspect of the debate surrounding the movement

towards full practice authority and policy makers need to consider the effects on health

outcomes, access to care, and costs in their deliberations. A growing body of research shows

that allowing APRNs to practice to the full extent of their training without legislated oversight

restrictions results in health outcomes that are either no different or slightly better than

physicians' care, with lower costs, and more patient access (Adams and Markowitz, 2018). The

primary conclusion from this paper is that changing the restrictiveness of SOP laws will not be

disruptive to local labor markets, but can increase hours of work and self-employment, and may

even increase the local workforce if the change to full practice authority reduces cross-state

commuting as evidenced here (although while potentially decreasing the corresponding cross-

border workforce in the process). Combined, these effects can have implications for patient

access to providers. Yet, there is still more to be learned. The possible spill-over effects of full

practice authority for APRNs on the labor supplies of physicians and physician assistants (PAs)

are unknown at this point. More research is needed on the substitutability/complementarity

between APRNs, PAs, and primary care physicians, and how the restrictiveness of SOP laws for

APRNs and PAs affect these relationships. This is certainly an important direction for future

research.

                                                  28
                                             References

Adams, E. K., & Markowitz, S. (2018). Improving efficiency in the health-care system:
Removing anticompetitive barriers for advanced practice registered nurses and physician
assistants. Policy Proposal, 8, 9-13.
Bindman, A. B. (2013). Using the National Provider Identifier for health care workforce
evaluation. Medicare & Medicaid Research Review, 3(3).
DePasquale, C., & Stange, K. (2016). Labor supply effects of occupational regulation: Evidence
from the nurse licensure compact (No. w22344). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kleiner, M. M., Marier, A., Park, K. W., & Wing, C. (2016). Relaxing occupational licensing
requirements: Analyzing wages and prices for a medical service. The Journal of Law and
Economics, 59(2), 261-291.
Kurtzman, E. T., Barnow, B. S., Johnson, J. E., Simmens, S. J., Infeld, D. L., & Mullan, F.
(2017). Does the regulatory environment affect nurse practitioners' patterns of practice or quality
of care in health centers?. Health services research, 52, 437-458.
Markowitz, S., Adams, E. K., Lewitt, M. J., & Dunlop, A. L. (2017). Competitive effects of
scope of practice restrictions: Public health or public harm?. Journal of Health Economics, 55,
201-218.
Martin, B., & Alexander, M. (2019). The economic burden and practice restrictions associated
with collaborative practice agreements: A national survey of advanced practice registered
nurses. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 9(4), 22-30.
Martin, A. B., Hartman, M., Washington, B., Catlin, A., & National Health Expenditure
Accounts Team. National Health Expenditure Accounts Team. (2019). National Health Care
Spending In 2017: Growth Slows To Post­Great Recession Rates; Share Of GDP
Stabilizes. Health Affairs, 38(1):96-106.
McMichael, B. J. (2018). Beyond Physicians: The effect of licensing and liability laws on the
supply of nurse practitioners and physician assistants. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 15(4),
732-771.
OECD (2018). Spending on Health: Latest Trends. Available at
http://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/Health-Spending-Latest-Trends-Brief.pdf.
Perry, J. J. (2012). State-granted practice authority: Do nurse practitioners vote with their
feet?. Nursing research and practice, 2012. PMCID: PMC3512315.
Phillips, S. J. (2020). Annual APRN Legislative Update. The Nurse Practitioner.
Reagan, P. B., & Salsberry, P. J. (2013). The effects of state-level scope-of-practice regulations
on the number and growth of nurse practitioners. Nursing Outlook, 61(6), 392-399.



                                                 29
Richards, M. R., & Polsky, D. (2016). Influence of provider mix and regulation on primary care
services supplied to US patients. Health Economics, Policy and Law, 11(2), 193-213.
Stange K. "How does provider supply and regulation influence health care markets? Evidence
from nurse practitioners and physician assistants." Journal of Health Economics. 2014; 33:1­
27.
Timmons, Edward J. "The effects of expanded nurse practitioner and physician assistant scope of
practice on the cost of Medicaid patient care." Health Policy 121.2 (2017): 189-196.
Traczynski, J., & Udalova, V. (2018). Nurse practitioner independence, health care utilization,
and health outcomes. Journal of Health Economics, 58, 90-109.
Wing, C., & Marier, A. (2014). Effects of occupational regulations on the cost of dental services:
evidence from dental insurance claims. Journal of Health Economics, 34, 131-143.
Xue, Y., Kannan, V., Greener, E., Smith, J. A., Brasch, J., Johnson, B. A., & Spetz, J. (2018).
Full scope-of-practice regulation is associated with higher supply of nurse practitioners in rural
and primary care health professional shortage counties. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 8(4), 5-
13.




                                                30
Figure 1: Scope of Practice Laws Over Time




                   31
                                         Figure 2: Trends in Average Outcomes




                                                Treatment                     Control                           32

Note: Means and standard errors presented. Trends for the control states are based on randomly assigned dates of the event.
Three year gap between waves. Event reflects any change in SOP law. The number of states contributing data to each wave
from 3th wave prior to 4th wave post is 7, 16, 28, 28, 27, 21, and 12 respectively.
                                                        Figure 3: Event Study




                                                                                                                          33

Note: Three year gap between waves. Regressions include individual characteristics, employment setting, county characteristics,
state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state of work/residence. Event reflects any change in SOP law. The
number of states contributing data to each wave from 3th wave prior to 4th wave post is 7, 16, 28, 28, 27, 21, and 12, respectively.
                                     Table 1: Means
                                                                   APRNs   NPs
Dependent Variables
Employed--current year sample                                       0.89    0.90
Employed--current and past year sample                              0.89    0.90
Weekly hours of work, primary job                                  38.19   37.23
Annual hours of work, all jobs                                      1980    1970
Works part-time                                                     0.24    0.27
Holds multiple jobs                                                 0.23    0.25
Self-employed                                                       0.16    0.13
Real hourly wages                                                  19.11   17.78
Real annual earnings                                               34349   30914
Commute across state line for work--current year sample             0.14    0.14
Commute across state line for work--current and past year sample    0.14    0.14
Change work states in adjacent years                                0.05    0.05

State and County Variables
Full practice authority                                             0.16   0.20
CPA                                                                 0.14   0.14
Protocols                                                           0.41   0.42
Protocols, limited RX                                               0.14   0.13
Supervision, no RX                                                  0.15   0.10
Nurse Licensure Compact state                                       0.17   0.20
MDs per 1000 county pop                                             2.88   2.87
County unemployment                                                 5.33   5.27

Individual Characteristics
Nurse Practitioner                                                  0.50    --
Clinical Nurse Specialist                                           0.34    --
Nurse Anesthetist                                                   0.17    --
Nurse Midwife                                                       0.06    --
Male                                                                0.11   0.06
Non-white race                                                      0.10   0.11
Married                                                             0.71   0.72
Divorced                                                            0.17   0.16
Single                                                              0.12   0.11
Young children in house                                             0.15   0.15
Older children in house                                             0.34   0.35
                                           34
 Age <30                                                                    0.04       0.04
 Age 30-39                                                                  0.22       0.22
 Age 40-49                                                                  0.37       0.37
 Age 50-59                                                                  0.29       0.29
 Age 60 and up                                                              0.09       0.07
 Age missing                                                               0.005      0.005
 Race missing                                                               0.02       0.02
 Children in house missing                                                  0.01       0.01
 Marital status missing                                                     0.01       0.01

  Employment Setting
  Hospital                                                                     0.46   0.32
  Nursing Home/Extended Care                                                   0.03   0.03
  Nursing Education                                                            0.09   0.07
  Community and Public Health                                                  0.11   0.14
  School Health                                                                0.04   0.06
  Occupation Health                                                            0.01   0.02
  Ambulatory Care                                                              0.22   0.32
  All other settings                                                           0.04   0.04
 Note: N=11,917 for APRNs and N=5,929 for NPs for all state, county, individual and
employment variables. Ns for the dependent variables are shown in the tables below.




                                            35
           Table 2: Means of Dependent Variables by SOP Law Classification
                                   Full     CPA     Protocols   Protocols,   Supervision,
                                 practice                        limited       no RX
                                authority                          RX
Employed--current year
sample                            0.89      0.90      0.89        0.89          0.87
Employed--current and past
year sample                       0.90      0.90      0.89        0.89          0.87
Weekly hours of work,
primary job                      38.10      38.43    38.57        38.32         36.95
Annual hours of work, all
jobs                              1977       1994     2011        1972           1905
Works part-time                   0.27       0.25     0.24        0.20           0.23
Holds multiple jobs               0.22       0.22     0.24        0.23           0.25
Self-employed                     0.20       0.14     0.16        0.16           0.12
Real hourly wages                18.86      19.03    19.92       18.73          17.61
Real annual earnings             33650      34205    36147       33780          30931
Commute across state line for
work--current year sample         0.11      0.09      0.16        0.13          0.14
Commute across state line for
work--current and past year
sample                            0.11      0.09      0.16        0.15          0.14
Change work states in
adjacent years                    0.06      0.04      0.04        0.07          0.06




                                            36
    Table 3: Number of States in Scope of Practice Laws Categories, by Survey Date

                                1992          1996     2000        2004       2008
Full practice authority           7            10       11          11         12
CPA                               1            6        10          11         11
Protocols                        12            14       16          22         26
Protocols, limited RX             8            10       10           6          2
Supervision, no RX               23            11        4           1          0




                                         37
                     Table 4: Effect of SOP laws on Probability of Employment in Nursing

                                All        All         All         All         NPs         NPs         NPs         NPs
                               APRNs      APRNs       APRNs       APRNs        Only        Only        Only        Only

                               Current    Current     Current     Current Current Current Current Current
                                year        and        year         and      year     and      year     and
                               sample       past      sample        past   sample     past   sample     past
                                            year                    year              year              year
                                          sample                  sample            sample            sample
Reside: CPA                     0.029      0.027       0.031       0.026    0.004    0.011    -0.001   0.007
                               (0.032)    (0.027)     (0.031)     (0.027) (0.030) (0.026) (0.031) (0.026)
Reside: Protocols               0.007      0.014       0.010       0.014    0.003    0.022    -0.006   0.015
                               (0.034)    (0.027)     (0.033)     (0.026) (0.034) (0.026) (0.034) (0.026)
Reside: Protocols, limited      0.042      0.039       0.045       0.039    0.052   0.058**   0.044    0.051*
 RX                            (0.037)    (0.029)     (0.036)     (0.029) (0.038) (0.028) (0.039) (0.029)
Reside: Supervision, no RX      0.010      0.010       0.014       0.011    -0.007   0.011    -0.020   0.001
                               (0.036)    (0.029)     (0.035)     (0.029) (0.038) (0.029) (0.040) (0.030)
Border less restrictive                                0.009       0.013                      0.019    0.015
                                                      (0.010)     (0.009)                    (0.013) (0.011)
Border same or more                                    0.013       0.015                      -0.002   0.001
 restrictive                                          (0.011)     (0.010)                    (0.011) (0.009)
Nurse Licensure Compact        0.018*   0.014*        0.019**      0.015* 0.047*** 0.033*** 0.048*** 0.033***
 state                        (0.009) (0.008)         (0.009)     (0.008) (0.013) (0.011) (0.013) (0.011)
MDs per 1000 county pop        -0.001   -0.002         -0.001      -0.001   -0.000   -0.001   -0.000   -0.001
                              (0.001) (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)
County unemployment            0.002    0.001          0.002       0.001   0.006**   0.004   0.006**   0.003
                              (0.002) (0.002)         (0.002)     (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002)
Clinical Nurse Specialist      -0.004   -0.004         -0.004      -0.004
                              (0.005) (0.005)         (0.005)     (0.005)
Nurse Anesthetist              0.011    0.002          0.012       0.002
                              (0.008) (0.008)         (0.009)     (0.008)
Nurse Midwife                  0.000    -0.011         0.002       -0.008
                              (0.009) (0.008)         (0.010)     (0.008)
Male                          0.044*** 0.039***       0.043***    0.038*** 0.044*** 0.033*** 0.042*** 0.031***
                              (0.008) (0.007)         (0.008)     (0.007) (0.013) (0.010) (0.013) (0.011)
Non-white race                 0.004    -0.002         0.004       -0.003   -0.008   -0.014   -0.006   -0.013
                              (0.011) (0.010)         (0.011)     (0.011) (0.011) (0.010) (0.012) (0.011)
Divorced                      0.033*** 0.033***       0.033***    0.034*** 0.031*** 0.033*** 0.032*** 0.034***
                              (0.009) (0.009)         (0.009)     (0.009) (0.010) (0.009) (0.010) (0.009)
Single                        0.025*** 0.026***       0.026***    0.026*** 0.034** 0.030** 0.035** 0.032**
                              (0.008) (0.008)         (0.008)     (0.008) (0.013) (0.012) (0.014) (0.012)
Young children in house       -0.038***   -0.037***   -0.038***   -0.038***   -0.055***   -0.056***   -0.057***   -0.058***
                               (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.013)
Older children in house        0.009       0.009       0.009       0.008       0.011       0.009       0.010       0.008

                                                         38
                                  (0.007) (0.006) (0.007) (0.006) (0.008) (0.007) (0.008)                  (0.007)
Age <30                          0.302*** 0.261*** 0.302*** 0.261*** 0.299*** 0.268*** 0.299***            0.269***
                                  (0.025) (0.023) (0.025) (0.023) (0.028) (0.024) (0.028)                  (0.024)
Age 30-39                        0.297*** 0.269*** 0.299*** 0.272*** 0.290*** 0.261*** 0.293***            0.265***
                                  (0.019) (0.017) (0.018) (0.017) (0.023) (0.020) (0.023)                  (0.021)
Age 40-49                        0.287*** 0.263*** 0.289*** 0.265*** 0.284*** 0.260*** 0.287***            0.262***
                                  (0.018) (0.016) (0.017) (0.016) (0.022) (0.020) (0.023)                  (0.020)
Age 50-59                        0.253*** 0.236*** 0.256*** 0.239*** 0.260*** 0.236*** 0.262***            0.238***
                                  (0.016) (0.016) (0.016) (0.015) (0.021) (0.019) (0.021)                  (0.019)
N                                  13457   26729      13337      26462       6614       13139       6551    12998
  Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses based on state of residence. All models also include
  indicator variables for missing values for age, race, marital status and children, state of residence
  fixed effects and year fixed effects.
  *
    p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                       39
    Table 5: Effect of SOP laws on Work Hours, Multiple Jobs, and Self-Employment Among
                                          Workers

Panel A: All APRNs            Hours per        Annual       Part-time,        Holds          Self-
                                 week,       hours, all    primary job      multiple       employed
                             primary job         jobs                          jobs
Work: CPA                      -1.649**     -106.755***       0.002           0.031        -0.063***
                                (0.790)       (37.707)       (0.048)         (0.029)        (0.023)
Work: Protocols                  -1.150        -67.393        0.002           0.028        -0.065***
                                (0.826)       (41.034)       (0.043)         (0.033)        (0.023)
Work: Protocols, limited         -1.075      -99.796**        -0.012          0.031        -0.071***
  RX                            (0.876)       (43.016)       (0.045)         (0.036)        (0.022)
Work: Supervision, no          -2.005**     -134.895**        0.007           0.015        -0.069**
  RX                            (0.954)       (52.818)       (0.047)         (0.042)        (0.027)
Nurse licensure compact,         0.676          7.007         -0.007          0.009          -0.001
  state of work                 (0.404)       (24.131)       (0.017)         (0.015)        (0.013)
MDs per 1000 pop,                0.044         6.712**        -0.001        -0.004**         -0.005
  county of work                (0.051)        (2.866)       (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)
Unemployment, county             0.139          3.903        -0.007*         -0.004*         -0.001
  of work                       (0.087)        (5.482)       (0.004)         (0.002)        (0.002)
N                                11854          11168         11912           11879          11917

Panel B: NPs Only               Hours per       Annual      Part-time,         Holds           Self-
                                  week,        hours, all  primary job       multiple      employed
                               primary job        jobs                          jobs
Work: CPA                         -1.599       -80.924*        0.025           -0.039       -0.103***
                                 (1.448)       (45.041)       (0.073)         (0.040)        (0.023)
Work: Protocols                   -1.947        -83.973        0.096           0.015        -0.074***
                                 (1.465)       (53.803)       (0.064)         (0.052)        (0.022)
Work: Protocols, limited          -0.661        -24.014        0.030           -0.012       -0.106***
   RX                            (1.498)       (53.205)       (0.064)         (0.052)        (0.028)
                                        *               **
Work: Supervision, no            -2.790       -147.779         0.074           -0.020        -0.073*
   RX                            (1.554)       (69.547)       (0.069)         (0.064)        (0.037)
Nurse licensure compact,          0.104         -16.673        0.008           -0.007         0.009
   state of work                 (0.702)       (36.490)       (0.026)         (0.023)        (0.021)
MDs per 1000 pop,                 0.147          5.567         0.000           -0.003         -0.003
   county of work                (0.105)        (6.344)       (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.004)
Unemployment, county              0.167          6.368        -0.008*          -0.005         -0.002
   of work                       (0.132)        (6.144)       (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.002)
N                                  5913          5541          5927             5910           5929
 Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses based on state of work. All models also include
 the individual characteristics shown in Table 2, indicator variables for missing values for age,
 race, marital status and children, indicators for employment setting, state of work fixed effects
 and year fixed effects.
 *
   p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
                                                  40
                      Table 6: Effect of SOP laws on Wages and Earnings

  Panel A: All APRNs                  Real Wages       Ln Real           Real        Ln Real
                                                       Wages           Earnings      Earnings
  Work: CPA                              0.280          -0.022        -2453.248        -0.075
                                        (1.286)        (0.052)       (2203.200)       (0.071)
  Work: Protocols                        -0.271         -0.035        -1951.837        -0.064
                                        (1.084)        (0.051)       (2233.838)       (0.072)
  Work: Protocols, limited RX            -0.021         -0.023        -2103.806        -0.062
                                        (1.121)        (0.056)       (2423.544)       (0.078)
  Work: Supervision, no RX               0.213          -0.021        -2367.068        -0.081
                                        (1.221)        (0.056)       (2401.848)       (0.080)
  Nurse licensure compact, state         0.654          0.008          850.390         0.019
    of work                             (0.515)        (0.015)        (580.826)       (0.021)
  MDs per 1000 pop, county of            0.037          0.004          242.968        0.012**
    work                                (0.089)        (0.004)        (172.934)       (0.005)
  Unemployment, county of work           0.069          0.002          156.731*       0.008**
                                        (0.086)        (0.003)         (87.390)       (0.003)
  N                                      11201          11201           11327          11327

  Panel B: NPs Only                   Real Wages        Ln Real           Real         Ln Real
                                                        Wages           Earnings       Earnings
   Work: CPA                               -1.941        -0.098        -3718.472         -0.076
                                          (1.227)       (0.071)       (2840.407)        (0.126)
   Work: Protocols                         -2.111        -0.101        -4086.995         -0.115
                                          (1.392)       (0.076)       (2851.739)        (0.123)
   Work: Protocols, limited RX            -2.398*        -0.092        -2422.726         -0.056
                                          (1.422)       (0.079)       (3034.760)        (0.130)
   Work: Supervision, no RX                -2.003        -0.086        -3491.051         -0.099
                                          (1.637)       (0.083)       (3076.669)        (0.134)
   Nurse licensure compact, state          0.427         -0.008         -159.463         -0.001
      of work                             (0.709)       (0.023)        (657.670)        (0.033)
   MDs per 1000 pop, county of             0.060         0.005         359.006**        0.014**
      work                                (0.085)       (0.003)        (168.891)        (0.006)
   Unemployment, county of work            0.039         0.003         228.194**        0.011**
                                          (0.133)       (0.004)        (101.123)        (0.005)
   N                                        5637          5637            5691            5691
Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses based on state of work. All models also include
the individual characteristics shown in Table 2, indicator variables for missing values for age,
race, marital status and children, indicators for employment setting, state of work fixed effects
and year fixed effects.
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                  41
Table 7: Effect of SOP laws on Probability of Commuting Across State Lines, Border Residents
Panel A: All APRNs                          Current year     Current and     Current year      Current and
                                              sample          past year        sample           past year
                                                               sample                            sample
Border less restrictive                         0.054*         0.058**
                                               (0.030)         (0.029)
Reside: CPA and border less                                                    0.094***         0.093***
   restrictive                                                                  (0.033)          (0.033)
Reside: Protocols and border less                                                0.089*           0.078*
   restrictive                                                                  (0.048)          (0.045)
Reside: Protocols, limited RX and                                                0.034            0.078
   border less restrictive                                                      (0.032)          (0.047)
Reside: Supervision, no RX and                                                   0.002            0.017
   border less restrictive                                                      (0.017)          (0.016)
Nurse licensure compact state                   -0.009          -0.009           -0.004           -0.006
                                               (0.022)         (0.023)          (0.022)          (0.023)
MDs per 1000 pop                              -0.016***       -0.016***        -0.016***        -0.016***
                                               (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.005)          (0.006)
County unemployment                             -0.006          -0.005           -0.005           -0.005
                                               (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.004)
N                                                5343           10534             5343            10534

Panel B: NPs Only
Border less restrictive                         0.045           0.046
                                               (0.044)         (0.040)
Reside: CPA and border less                                                      0.053             0.072
   restrictive                                                                  (0.045)           (0.047)
Reside: Protocols and border less                                                0.081             0.060
   restrictive                                                                  (0.059)           (0.053)
Reside: Protocols, limited RX and                                                -0.024            0.043
   border less restrictive                                                      (0.050)           (0.070)
Reside: Supervision, no RX and                                                   -0.015            0.004
   border less restrictive                                                      (0.038)           (0.037)
Nurse licensure compact, state of               -0.017           -0.026          -0.011            -0.022
   work                                        (0.034)          (0.033)         (0.034)           (0.033)
MDs per 1000 pop, county of work              -0.022***        -0.020**        -0.022***         -0.020**
                                               (0.007)          (0.008)         (0.007)           (0.008)
Unemployment, county of work                   -0.009*         -0.011**         -0.009*          -0.011**
                                               (0.005)          (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)
N                                                2624             5172            2624              5172
Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses based on state of work. All models also include the
individual characteristics shown in Table 2, indicator variables for missing values for age, race, marital
status and children, indicators for employment setting, state of work fixed effects and year fixed effects.
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
                                                     42
             Table 8: Effect of SOP laws on Outcomes, Changing the Omitted Law Category

                                        FPA              CPA            Protocols        Protocols,     Supervision,
Employment in nursing                  omitted          omitted          omitted        limited RX         no RX
                                                                                           omitted        omitted
Reside: Full practice authority                          -0.029           -0.007            -0.042         -0.010
                                                        (0.032)          (0.034)           (0.037)        (0.036)
Reside: CPA                             0.029                             0.022*            -0.013         0.020
                                       (0.032)                           (0.012)           (0.013)        (0.013)
Reside: Protocols                       0.007           -0.022*                           -0.035***        -0.002
                                       (0.034)          (0.012)                            (0.010)        (0.009)
Reside: Protocols, limited RX           0.042            0.013          0.035***                          0.032***
                                       (0.037)          (0.013)         (0.010)                           (0.012)
Reside: Supervision, no RX              0.010            -0.020          0.002           -0.032***
                                       (0.036)          (0.013)         (0.009)           (0.012)
Hours per week, primary
job
Work: Full practice authority                           1.649**           1.150            1.075           2.005**
                                                        (0.790)          (0.826)          (0.876)          (0.954)
Work: CPA                             -1.649**                            -0.499           -0.574           0.356
                                       (0.790)                           (0.425)          (0.464)          (0.550)
Work: Protocols                         -1.150           0.499                             -0.074           0.856*
                                       (0.826)          (0.425)                           (0.427)          (0.441)
Work: Protocols, limited RX             -1.075           0.574            0.074                             0.930*
                                       (0.876)          (0.464)          (0.427)                           (0.554)
Work: Supervision, no RX              -2.005**           -0.356          -0.856*          -0.930*
                                       (0.954)          (0.550)          (0.441)          (0.554)
Self -employed
Work: Full practice authority                          0.063***         0.065***          0.071***         0.069**
                                                       (0.023)          (0.023)           (0.022)          (0.027)
Work: CPA                             -0.063***                          0.001             0.008            0.006
                                       (0.023)                          (0.015)           (0.014)          (0.019)
Work: Protocols                       -0.065***          -0.001                            0.006            0.004
                                       (0.023)          (0.015)                           (0.012)          (0.014)
Work: Protocols, limited RX           -0.071***          -0.008           -0.006                            -0.002
                                       (0.022)          (0.014)          (0.012)                           (0.014)
Work: Supervision, no RX              -0.069**           -0.006           -0.004           0.002
                                       (0.027)          (0.019)          (0.014)          (0.014)
    Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses based on either state of residence or work. All models
    also include the county and individual characteristics shown in Table 2, indicator variables for missing
    values for age, race, marital status and children, indicators for employment setting (if applicable), state
    fixed effects and year fixed effects. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



                                                          43
