                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SELF-CITATION, CUMULATIVE ADVANTAGE, AND GENDER INEQUALITY
                              IN SCIENCE

                                       Pierre Azoulay
                                       Freda B. Lynn

                                     Working Paper 26893
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26893


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2020




Address all correspondence to freda-lynn@uiowa.edu. Azoulay acknowledges the financial
support of the National Science Foundation through its SciSIP Program (Award SBE-1460344).
Soomi Kim provided exceptional research assistance. We thank Ezra Zuckerman for useful
discussions. All errors are our own.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pierre Azoulay and Freda B. Lynn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Self-Citation, Cumulative Advantage, and Gender Inequality in Science
Pierre Azoulay and Freda B. Lynn
NBER Working Paper No. 26893
March 2020
JEL No. I23,J16,O31

                                            ABSTRACT

In science, self-citation is often interpreted as an act of self-promotion that (artificially) boosts the
visibility of one's prior work in the short term, which could then inflate professional authority in
the long term. Recently, in light of research on the gender gap in self-promotion, two, large-scale
studies of publications examine if women self-cite less than men. But they arrive at conflicting
conclusions; one concludes yes whereas the other, no. We join the debate with an original study
of 36 cohorts of life scientists (1970­2005) followed through 2015 (or death or retirement). We
track not only the rate of self-citation per unit of past productivity, but also the likelihood of self-
citing intellectually distant material and the rate of return on self-citations with respect to a host
of major career outcomes, including grants, future citations, and job changes. With
comprehensive, longitudinal data, we find no evidence whatsoever of a gender gap in self-citation
practices or returns. Men may very well be more aggressive self-promoters than women, but this
dynamic does not manifest in our sample with respect to self-citation practices. Implications of
our null findings are discussed, particularly with respect to gender inequality in scientific careers
more broadly.


Pierre Azoulay
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-487
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pazoulay@mit.edu

Freda B. Lynn
University of Iowa
Department of Sociology
W143 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52242
USA
freda-lynn@uiowa.edu
Introduction
Scientists thrive in their disciplines when they produce work that is widely read. But like any other
competitive market, producers must vie for attention from consumers overwhelmed with options.
That scientists engage in self-promotion to sell their goods has long been acknowledged (e.g.,
Nelkin 1987; Garfield 1987a; Azoulay et al. 2019b) and is viewed by some as part and parcel of
`getting ahead' in the business (e.g., Reis 1999; Fiske 2018). For example, self-citing--whether
intellectually relevant or not--is often interpreted as a strategy that authors use to boost the
visibility of their prior work, which could in turn build professional authority (Fowler and Asknes
2007; but see Medoff 2006).

One strand of research on self-citation focuses specifically on whether this promotional practice
varies by gender (see King et al. 2017; Mishra et al. 2018). A growing area of research on gender,
self-assessment, and self-promotion gives reason to believe that women may be less likely to
pounce on the opportunity to self-cite (Exley and Kessler 2019; Lerchenmueller, Sorenson, and Jena
2019). First, researchers show that women evaluate their performances more critically than men
even when they perform objectively as well (Correll 2001, 2004; Exley and Kessler 2019). For
example, Reuben and colleagues (2012, 2014) find that, in the context of mathematics
performance, women tend to retrospectively characterize themselves as having performed worse
than their actual score whereas men tend to remember themselves as having performed better than
their actual score.

Second, women are more likely to be sanctioned for engaging in behaviors interpreted as self-
promotion. Prescriptive gender norms are dominant role expectations (i.e., cultural beliefs)
regarding what men and women `should' or `should not' be (Eagly and Karau 2002), and a long
line of research shows that men are expected to behave in an agentic manner (assertive and self-
reliant) whereas women are expected to behave in a communal manner (caring and other-
oriented) (see Auster and Ohm 2000). Self-promotion for women is thus considered counter-
stereotypical behavior, which can lead to backlash. For example, in an experimental hiring study,
Rudman (1998) shows that women who highlight their accomplishments are penalized in terms of
their likability and hireability.

King et al. (2017) argue that these same socialization processes may result in men self-citing
publications at a greater rate than women (see p. 2 and p. 15), which in turn could partially explain
why women on average lose out to men in the career `game' in science (see pp. 2-3). This argument
could be distilled into three related but distinct empirical questions: (1) are men compared to
women, ceteris paribus, more likely to engage in self-citation per unit of past productivity, (2) are
men compared to women, ceteris paribus, more likely to engage in self-citation as a means of
gratuitous self-promotion, and (3) do men's self-citations relative to women's generate greater
returns with respect to future citations? That is, do the self-promotional efforts of men pay off
more for men than for women authors?


                                                 1
The purpose of this study is to provide an empirical test of each of these arguments using a novel,
longitudinal dataset of life scientists and their career trajectories. Currently, there are two large-
scale studies (King et al. 2017, Mishra et al. 2018) that address the first hypothesis regarding gender
and (direct) self-citation patterns but neither one addresses the second and third hypotheses. Yet
all three, we argue, are needed to understand the role of self-citation in producing career inequality
in science. Furthermore, although our sample includes only a select group of researchers from one
domain in science, the comprehensive career data employed in this study provide an important
contrast to the publication samples employed by both King et al. (2017) and Mishra et al. (2018).
Their samples contain a large number of articles published in multiple decades but these
publications are analyzed in light of very limited information (or none in the case of King et al.
2017) regarding the scientist, such as career age. For example, if 50% publications in the sample
belong to young women scientists with nothing to self-cite and 50% of publications in the sample
belong to elderly men with many publications to self-cite, the rate of self-citation will appear to be
higher for men even if gender has zero correlation with self-citation rate. We sidestep these
potential composition effects by instead comparing men and women (and some transgendered
individuals) at specific points in their career course.



Background
Self-Citation in Science. Self-citations can be construed from different perspectives. The focus of
this study are direct self-citations, which occur when an author publishes a paper that references
one of their past publications or working papers. Self-citations can also occur through
collaborators. For example, when one subset of a large group of collaborators references papers
produced by another non-overlapping subset of collaborators from the same umbrella project, this
constitutes a team-based form of self-citation even though there are no direct, individual-level self-
citations (Ioannidis 2014). Finally, self-citation can come in the form of "coercive induced
citation," wherein author A pressures author B to cite publications authored by A (Ioannidis 2014).
This pressure can come, for example, from reviewers and editors during the peer review process
(Thombs et al. 2015).1

Overall, the practice of direct self-citation is quite common. A large-scale analysis of synchronous
(outgoing) citations suggests that roughly 9% of all citations are direct self-citations (King et al.
2017), although the percentage is higher in some disciplines (e.g., physical sciences) than others
(e.g., humanities) (see Mishra et al. 2018; Synder and Bonzi 1998; Lawani 1982; Tagliacozzo 1977).
Diachronous (incoming) self-citation rates are generally even higher if using a short observation
window, such as the first three or five years after publication. For example, for a large sample of
papers published in the natural sciences, Asknes (2003) finds 36% of incoming citations to be direct


                                                            
1
    See also Franck (1999) on `citation cartels'.

                                                               2
self-citations using a three-year citation window, and that multi-authored papers have more self-
citations.

While self-citations can indeed be intellectually relevant (Hyland 2003, see also Bonzi and Synder
1991) and hence appropriate and "even necessary" (Ioannidis 2015), the practice of self-citing on
balance is still construed in a negative light and as a practice that requires correction (Fowler and
Asknes 2007; MacRoberts and MacRoberts 1989). The disdain comes from the fact that at least
some self-citations can be interpreted as gratuitous acts of self-promotion, which is antithetical to
the deeply rooted assumption that science is supposed to be governed by the norms of universalism
and disinterestedness (Merton 1942, Garfield 1987b). Not surprisingly, it is recommended that
self-citations be removed from the calculation of career citation metrics as a way of discounting
self-promotional efforts (e.g., Fowler and Asknes 2007). Of course, such a fix only addresses the
direct effect of self-citations and cannot magically reveal scientists "true" career citation trajectory
had self-citations never entered the trajectory. Perhaps because of the difficulty of estimating the
true causal effect of self-citations on career citation accumulation, the practice of self-citing
continues to be associated with "gaming the system" (Ioannidis 2015):

      So, here is a recipe for `success': coauthor more papers (salami slicing, elimination of
      quality checks, undeserved coauthorship and acceptance of gifts from ghosts can all
      help); ignore unfavourable reviewer comments; keep submitting until you find a hole
      in the peerreview system; selfcite; and expect random citations. While the recipe will
      probably not earn its practitioners a Nobel Prize, it can still open many doors
      unfortunately (Ioannidis et al. 2010: p. 286).

Gender and Self-Citation Rate. King et al. (2017) make a compelling argument for why gender
patterns in self-citation need to be examined. Because self-citation can "seriously affect the
appearance of scholarly influence" (2017: p. 2), a gender difference in self-citation aggressiveness
could lead to a "non-merit" based gender gap in scholarly influence over the career course, which
could in turn, generate other forms of career inequality. The underlying concern is that men could
potentially be `getting ahead' faster than women because they are (consciously or not) more
comfortable puffing themselves up and are more aggressive about selling their work relative to
women, who may anticipate backlash from self-promotional efforts and hence not engage. In
addition, as we argue in more depth below, men who engage in self-citation might see greater
returns to self-promotional efforts compared to women.

To date, two major studies have been conducted on gender and rate of direct self-citation. In a
large-scale study of 1.5 million papers from the JSTOR corpus, King et al. (2017) find that men
self-cite at a much higher than women. For example, they calculate that the rate of self-citation for
their 1970-2011 sample to be 70% higher for men than women. The magnitude of this aggregate
difference is shocking. They title their paper, "Men set their own cites high."



                                                   3
While such evidence is consistent at face value with the conjecture that men are more aggressive
salesman than women, King et al. (2017) are careful to note that multiple mechanisms could
produce such a finding. On the one hand, their finding could reflect that men, ceteris paribus, are
more aggressive about promoting their work through self-citation (perhaps because they evaluate
themselves more positively than women), and this difference in salesmanship is what leads directly
to the marked gender gap in self-citation they observe in their sample. On the other, the observed
difference in self-promotion could be a simple artifact of some authors having a greater number of
previous publications (or working papers) to self-cite (see King et al. 2017: pp. 15-16).2

Following their lead, Mishra et al. (2018) examine a large corpus of biomedical papers in PubMed
and similarly unpack gender patterns of outgoing self-citations. They find that once the number
of past publications is accounted for, men and women self-cite at the same rate. That is, women
and men with the same opportunity to self-cite appear to self-cite as the same rate. They title their
study: "Self-citation is the hallmark of productive authors, of any gender."

Together, these two studies significantly advance our empirical understanding of one of the three
main questions at stake. Are men compared to women more likely to engage in self-citation per
unit of past productivity? The answer appears to be "No"; when accounting for the number of
articles published prior to the focal article, there is strong evidence to suggest that men and women
self-cite at the same rate (Mishra et al. 2018, see also King et al. 2017: p. 17). We can thus deduce
that the large gender gap in self-citations observed by King et al. (2017) is most likely the byproduct
of past productivity; men publish a notably larger number of more articles than women (West et
al. 2013) and thus have far greater opportunity to self-cite.

Gender and Self-Citation Type. But even if men tend to self-cite at the same rate as women after
adjusting for opportunity, it remains possible that men and women self-cite in a qualitatively
different manner. For example, in line with past research showing that women are more self-
critical than men about their performances (e.g., Correll 2001, Reuben et al. 2014), it could be that
men might use more boastful or authoritative language when citing their past work. In a similar
vein, women might have higher standards than men in terms of what constitutes intellectual
relevance when self-citing past work. For example, men might feel more comfortable drawing on
their authority derived in one area of research when attempting to branch out to new areas of
research,3 which could further career development in the long-term. In contrast, it could be that
women only self-cite when intellectual relevance is very high. Bottom line: the average self-citation
rate between men and women could be similar but the nature or intent of self-citation could differ.


                                                            
2
  To this point, in a supplementary analysis of a sample of over 400,000 SSRN papers, King et al. (2017: p. 17) find no gender gap
in self-citation when controlling for an author's total number of SSRN research papers. In other words, women and men authors
in the SSRN self-cite at the same once accounting for past productivity.
3
  That said, empirical studies of research specialization suggest that men may be more likely than women to specialize (Leahy 2006,
2007).

                                                                4
Gender and the Long-term Impact of Self-Citations. Moreover, what if men and women self-cite at
the same rate but the downstream impact of each self-citation varies by gender? As King et al.
(2017: p. 2) remind us, the importance of studying self-citations is rooted in their potential to shape
the long game:
      "Certainly, a scholar must write a reasonable number of papers for self-citation to have an effect
      early in his or her career; but in fields such as a biology, self-citations can have an effect on career
      outcomes as early as first job search, and certainly by tenure stage. The cumulative record of
      citations (or lack thereof) from other scholars' citations that results from an authors' self-citation
      patterns can seriously affect the appearance of scholarly influence."

Fowler and Aksnes (2007: p. 433), for example, find that every additional self-citation nets an
author an additional 3.65 other-citations within ten years, leading them to conclude that "self-
citation advertises not only the article in question, but the authors in question."

What is unclear, however, is if all authors benefit equally when self-citing. Marketing efforts, after
all, can vary in their effectiveness and sometimes even backfire. A self-citation is a successful sales
pitch to the extent that it persuades readers of the author's authority and expertise and compels
the reader to pay attention to or track down the self-cited work. In contrast, a self-citation would
be (1) ineffective if it mobilizes no interest in the referenced work, or worse, (2) potentially harmful
if negatively interpreted as boastful or gratuitous.

Past research makes a case for why men's self-citations relative to women's might have a more
positive impact on career growth. First, there are still strong normative prescriptions that men are
supposed to be assertive and women communal (Auster and Ohm 2000, Koenig 2018). Second,
men continue to be judged as more competent than women (see Ridgeway 2011; Moss-Rascusin
et al. 2012; Thébaud 2015, Leslie et al. 2015; Bian et al. 2017), and third, research demonstrates that
women face backlash for highlighting accomplishments (Rudman 1998; Moss-Racusin and
Rudman 2010). Taken together, past research suggests that readers will respond differently to self-
citations made by men versus women. If women's self-citations are more likely to fall on deaf ears
or be viewed in a negative light, early self-citations for women would not convert to gains in
scholarly influence or career achievement in the same way as it would for men.


Career and Research Productivity Data for 3,667 Life Scientists
We address all three questions regarding rate, type, and impact of self-citation by conducting a
longitudinal study of the winners of postdoctoral fellowships awarded by four US-based private
philanthropic foundations: the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation (1970-2005), the
Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund for Medical Research (1970-2005), the Helen Hay Whitney
Foundation (1970-2005), and the Life Sciences Research Foundation (1983-2005)--a total of 3,667
life scientists.


                                                         5
These fellowships confer on their winners an early marker of success, and are prestigious accolades
ambitious graduate students in the life sciences can receive as they contemplate the next phase of
their careers--a postdoctoral experience. Of note, these four foundations select their recipients
from identical pools in very similar ways: a dossier that includes papers published, letters of
recommendation, and the outline of an independent research agenda, followed by an evaluation
by a panel of distinguished scientists, typically composed of former recipients. In summary, our
sample is composed of "star" graduate students. Of course, at such an early career stage, these
individuals have not stepped out of the shadow cast by their graduate school mentor, and as a result
there is no guarantee that this early success will endure.

We track the careers of each individual from the receipt of their MD or PhD degree forward until
retirement, death, or 2015.4 Through CVs, NIH biosketches, web searches, and publicly-available
databases, we collect and disambiguate publications, references, citations, NIH grants, and patents.
In addition, we record the year in which each scientist exits science, exits academia, or in the
subsample of academics, exits from a "stable" to a "marginal" position--i.e., one where they can
no longer control the direction of their investigations.

Although this group of scientists is not a random sample of the postdoctoral population, these
cohort data provide an important counterpoint to the JSTOR and PubMed samples used by King
et al. (2017) and Mishra et al. (2018), respectively. These samples contained an impressively large
number of articles but little to no background information on the men and women scientists
themselves. In contrast, our cohort sample consists of graduate students similarly poised to succeed
in their field with all the major components of their careers tracked across several stages.

This approach, we argue, is critical to producing interpretable results with respect to our three
research questions. This is particularly a challenge for our third question, which pertains to how
self-citation behavior may or may not convert to other career rewards over time. The difficulty
with studying cumulative advantage is being able to confidently locate it in a sea of unobserved
heterogeneity (DiPrete and Eirich 2006). We argue that this type of rich, longitudinal cohort data
may be the best method of isolating supply-side factors short of running an actual experiment. In
sum, we cannot make generalizations about self-referencing behavior that apply to the universe of
scientists, but we can at least draw crisp conclusions for some.



Data
Our data collection starts with 3,713 fellowship winners between 1970 and 2005 for the four private
foundations mentioned above. Despite exhaustive efforts to track their career history, we lose 28
scientists (0.75%) to follow up, yielding a sample of 3,685 scientists for whom we have complete
                                                            
4
  For a handful of fellows in the most recent cohorts who had not started an independent career as of 2015, we track their
institutional affiliations again in early 2020. By that time, every individual in the sample had either completed training or exited
science.

                                                                 6
information. We lose a further six individuals who died during training, two who exited science
the year after starting their fellowship, and ten who have either no original publications, or no
citations at all. The final analytic sample contains information about 3,667 scientists (98.76% of
the original sample, 2,546 [69.4%] men scientists vs. 1,014 women scientists [27.6%]).

Scientific careers can be fragile, especially for novices (Hill 2018). Only a small fraction of all
scientists who complete a postdoctoral fellowship secure a full-time academic position (McGinnnis
et al. 1982; Mantovani et al. 2006; Levitt 2010; Silva et al. 2016). The biomedical research setting is
interesting since the biopharmaceutical industry is a reliable employer for the scientists we study,
and individuals who transition to industry often conduct scientific investigations using methods,
techniques, and materials similar to those used by academic scientists (Zucker et al. 2002).

Even though members of each cohort are starting their careers in very similar positions because of
our research design, career pathways within cohorts can diverge considerably over time. The
unique strength of our longitudinal dataset is that we account for every career transition for the
scientists in the data. A full 73.0% of the scientists in the sample begins their career as principal
investigators in traditional academic positions within a university, academic medical center, or
research institute (67.6% end their career in such a position, or at least remain in one at the end of
the observation period). This prevalence of traditional tenure-track positions underscores the
extent to which scientists enter our sample only if they show extraordinary promise in graduate
school.

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics at the individual level, broken down by gender. Women
scientists are almost three years younger on average, relative to men, reflecting a doubling of
women's share of fellowships between the early part of the sample (15.5%, 1970-1974) and the later
part (32.0%, 2001-2005). Large gender disparities are evident in these univariate comparisons. On
average, women scientists in the sample publish less (34 vs. 56), receive less citations (2,032 vs.
3,819), and receive less NIH funding ($4.3 million vs. $8.0 million) than men in the sample. They
spend a year longer in training on average, and are less likely to begin their career as PI in academia
(64.7% vs. 76.4%), and more likely to find themselves in a "marginal" scientific position (e.g.,
employed as a technician in someone else's laboratory, adjunct teaching position, etc.). They also
appear less prone to self-reference5 their work when they do publish--their self-reference share is
5.2%, vs. 7.0% for men scientists, which dovetails with the raw comparisons provided by King et
al. (2017) and Mishra et al. (2018). Univariate comparisons can only go so far, however. Since the
proportion of fellowships awarded to women increases over time, it is possible that gender gaps in
productivity merely reflect compositional changes, with women scientists having fewer career
years on average to accumulate publications, citations, and funding. Our statistical models will


                                                            
5
 Throughout the data and results sections, we use the term self-reference rather than self-citation to underscore that our analyses
pertain to reference lists within publications (backward or outgoing references to previously published works) and not citations
accruing to publications (incoming references), which we were refer to below as forward citations.

                                                                7
fully account for compositional shifts including a full suite of calendar year effects in all
specifications.

Figure 1 depicts the gender gap in publication rates graphically by first decomposing every
scientist's career in nine distinct temporal sequences: graduate school, postdoctoral training, the
first five years of the "independent" (i.e., post-training) career, years 5 through 10, years 10 through
15,..., and a residual category corresponding to those in their 30th career year or later (Panel A). A
disparity in publication rates is apparent at every career stage, even graduate school--the period
that directly led each individual in the sample to be selected for one of these four elite fellowships.6
Panel B displays the same information by individual career year, with the career clock starting in
the year of PhD receipt. These decompositions hint that gender disparities in publication rates in
this sample are not a mere artefact of composition effects. 7

Figure 2 unpacks the self-reference share further. Panel A displays the histogram for its
distribution. Women scientists are more represented than men scientists below the median (0.05).
In the top two quartiles, the gender differences are less pronounced. Panel 1B displays the average
self-reference share by year of career (year zero corresponds to the year of PhD receipt) for men
and women scientists. It grows monotonically for the first 20 years of the career, with the gap
between men and women remaining quite stable until at least 20 years post-PhD. Thereafter, we
find some evidence of convergence, with women scientists "catching up" in their propensity to
reference their own work. Panel C performs a similar exercise, but breaks down the career into
distinct sequences: graduate school, postdoctoral fellowship, and the independent career in five
year increments. Our first observation is that the gender differences, though clearly noticeable, are
not especially stark, and certainly smaller in magnitude than those documented by King et al.
(2017) and Mishra et al. (2018). Second, the gap is present "at birth" (in graduate school) even
though these individuals have presumably little work to self-reference at that stage, and
subsequently grows until mid-career. After that point, the gap appears to shrink, and even
seemingly reverses after 30 or more years of active career. This last result needs to be interpreted
with caution, since only those in the early fellowship years get observed for thirty years or more,
and this portion of the sample is dominated by men.

Table 2 displays descriptive statistics for the individual articles published by Men (N=144,185) and
Women (N=35,131) scientists. Gender differences at this level of analysis are much less apparent
than at the individual level. On average, articles written by men receive 68.96 citations versus 62.1
for those authored by women, but the medians are closer (26 vs. 27, respectively). The self-
reference share continues to be lower for women's articles (8.9%), relative to men's (10.8%).

                                                            
6
  T-tests reveal that the gaps are statistically significant in each stage, though the magnitude varies: initially small, the gap grows in
the early- and mid-independent career, before leveling of somewhat after year 25 (relatively few observations identify the spike at
career age 30 or later).
7
  The longitudinal structure of the data will allow us to attend to calendar time effects separately from cohort effects below (this is
true in general, but for publication rates in particular, see Table A4 in the Appendix).

                                                                    8
Appendix Tables A1 and A2 provide a detailed breakdown of position "type" at the start of the
career (i.e., immediately after the end of scientific training) and at the end of the observation
period.8

Publication and citation information. The source of our publication data is PubMed, an online
resource from the National Library of Medicine that provides fast, free, and reliable access to the
biomedical research literature, with more than 40,000 journals indexed. We match PubMed
records with those contained in the Web of Science, whose coverage is slightly less deep but
provides comprehensive citation information.9

To distinguish between intellectually related and unrelated citations, we leverage the PubMed
Related Citations Algorithm [PMRA] (Lin and Wilbur 2007) which relies on Medical Subject
Headings (MeSH), but not in any way on citation or collaboration linkages. MeSH terms constitute
a controlled vocabulary maintained by the National Library of Medicine that provides a very fine-
grained partition of the intellectual space spanned by the biomedical research literature.
Importantly for our purposes, MeSH keywords are assigned to each publication by professional
indexers who focus solely on their scientific content.

We rely on PMRA to tag every reference to each of the source articles in the data as related (i.e.,
the article is one of the intellectual neighbors associated with the source according to PMRA) or
unrelated.10 Turning back to Table 2, it appears that men and women scientists are as likely to cite
"within field" as "outside the field."



Methodological Considerations
Mishra et al. (2018) studied the population of articles indexed by PubMed between 2002 and 2005
with algorithmically disambiguated publication. The essence of the exercise they performed was
predicting the likelihood that a given reference corresponds to a previous article by at least one of
the authors on a focal article, using a large set of covariates and machine learning techniques. Their
work inspired our analysis, but our data and methodological approach differ in several ways.



                                                            
8
  The "Other industry" category denotes positions in a variety of pursuits unrelated to education or research in the life sciences,
typically in industrial firms, but also including two individuals serving time in a federal penitentiary, a paramedic fireman, a
cheesemaker, as well as a "shamanic practitioner and sacred artist."
9
  This means that we will only capture a reference if it appears in PubMed, which will exclude books as well as articles appearing in
important journals in fields adjacent to the life sciences, but not indexed by PubMed (inorganic chemistry and materials science
come to mind as examples of such domains). In practice, this is not a large concern, as the correlation between citations with and
without the PubMed restriction in Web of Science is 0.99.
10
   To facilitate the harvesting of intellectually related records on a large scale, we have developed an open-source software tool that
queries PubMed and PMRA and stores the retrieved data in a MySQL database. The software is available for download at
http://www.stellman-greene.com/FindRelated/. Appendix C in Azoulay et al. (2019a) provides much more detail on the algorithm
and its use.

                                                                  9
First, the scientist populations differ. An obvious limitation of our dataset, relative to theirs, is that
it pertains to a narrower population along two dimensions. As prestigious fellowship recipients,
they are on average, more accomplished at baseline than would be the case for a random sample
of PhD graduates, or even the population of academic scientists. The content of their research is
also more restricted--molecular and cell biology and its applications to biomedicine--whereas
Mishra et al. (2018) include all authors regardless of biomedical subfield. This narrow focus can be
thought of as a threat to external validity, but it is more than compensated in our mind by our
ability to follow scientists over-time regardless of output (as opposed to sampling scientists on the
basis of productivity in a narrow window of time) and to capture individual-level characteristics
which maybe important to understand the phenomenon of interest, but require an intimate
knowledge of scientists' career trajectories. Such covariates include degree received (i.e., MD in
addition to PhD), year of PhD degree receipt (which starts the career clock in our empirical
specifications), length of post-graduate training period, and position "type" (e.g., tenure-track
academic vs. "marginal" academic vs. industry, etc.).

Second, our measure of self-reference is more specific, as it pertains to a particular author on the
authorship list of each of the 179,316 source articles in our sample. The mean level of self-reference
in our data (10.4%) is therefore lower than in their work, or that a broad measure of self-reference
based on any overlap in author, as opposed to a focal author. We likely measure self-reference with
less error since our disambiguation of each author's bibliome is based an individual dossier for
each fellow, whereas theirs relies on a large-scale disambiguation effort (Torvik and Smalheiser
2009) which necessarily performs less well for frequent names.

Third, whereas their measure of gender is imputed algorithmically based on first name, we measure
gender based on a host of contextual cues--including name, photographs, and pronoun usage, all
of which are embedded in the rich information compiled for each scientist.11 This is preferable
because our sample includes a high proportion of foreign-born scientists for whom gender
imputation might perform less well.

Fourth, because our objective is not prediction, but an assessment of the magnitudes of gender
disparities in self-reference behavior, we saturate our models with a battery of control covariates
that help us provide an "apples-to-apples" comparison between the behavior of men and women
scientists while preserving our ability to interpret the empirical magnitude of the effect. These
include a full suite of journal indicator variables, authorship length effects, author position effects,
indicator variables for different reference vintages and age, as well indicator variables for each


                                                            
11
  The value of rich contextual information about the identities of these scientists allow us to detect that three of them had changed
gender mid-career. In the analyses below, these trans-identified individuals are coded as their sex assigned at birth. In addition,
because our dataset is based on detailed dossiers of individual scientists, we also identified 89 individuals in the sample (2.42%)
who change their names or publish under different names over the course of their careers. The majority of name changers are
women (86.52%).

                                                                10
source article's forward citation impact. In other words, the estimates we present below correspond
to the following notional experiment:
        Consider two articles that appeared in the same journal, in the same year, with the same
        number of authors, and that will go on to be equally well-cited (excluding self-citations) in
        the future, but differ in the gender of the fellowship recipient that appears on the authorship
        roster (although the men and women authors of interest appear on the same position on the
        list, i.e., first, middle, or last position). Consider now the backward references in each article
        (with the additional proviso that only references of the same vintage are being compared).
        What is the expected probability that such a reference corresponds to a self-reference if the
        article is authored by a man versus woman?

In practice, in a dataset composed of all citation linkages between a focal article and their
references, we estimate specifications of the following type:




For each paper i published by fellow k(i) in year t(i) and referencing article j, we use a linear
probability model to specify the conditional mean of the probability of self-reference selfij as a
function of the focal author's gender (WOMANk(i)), an intellectual relatedness indicator variable
(RELATEDNESSij defined in more detail below), the log of the number of citable items for author
k(i) in year t(i), and (i) (respectively (j)), a high-dimensional vector of fixed effects corresponding
to characteristics of articles i (respectively j)--e.g., the journal in which i appeared, the age of article
j in year t(i), the number of authors for i, etc. Xij is a vector of predetermined covariate (e.g.,
fellowship sponsor and fellowship award year for each scientist i).

Our choice of a linear probability model (LPM) deserves mention given its lack of popularity in
empirical sociological research. Since LPM may generate fitted values outside of the interval [0;1],
its use would not be appropriate for a predictive type of analysis. However, our objective here is
not prediction, but the estimation of the marginal effects from the conditional expectation
function. For this purpose, the LPM is typically more appropriate (Angrist and Pischke 2008: pp.
94-106). Moreover, non-linear models such as the probit and logit are not well-suited to the use of
fixed effects because of the incidental parameter problem (Neyman and Scott 1948).

An additional analysis explores whether the rate of self-reference changes over the career course,
something neither King et al. nor Mishra et al. attended to in their analyses. For example, there
could be no aggregate difference between men and women scientists in the rate of self-referencing
controlling for past productivity, and yet men could be much more likely to self-reference at early
career stages while women's self-references disproportionately occur in later career stages. In a
similar vein, as suggested by King et al. (2017), the rate of self-reference (as well as the gender


                                                       11
differential in self-reference) possibly changes over time. Therefore, we will also examine whether
self-reference patterns differ between earlier and later cohorts.

From self-reference to self-promotion. Across multiple domains, there has been an accumulation
of empirical evidence that self-promotional behavior is more frequent among men than women
(e.g., Correll 2001, 2004; Reuben 2012; Exley and Kessler 2019; Lerchenmueller, Sorenson, and Jena
2019). But a case can be made that self-reference is a relatively crude proxy for self-promotion in
the context of scientific research, since reasons to reference one's past work exist even in the
absence of a self-aggrandizing motivation.12 We argue that a citation is more likely to reflect self-
promotional behavior when the intellectual connection between the citing and cited items is more
tenuous. In contrast, citation linkages between intellectually related articles are more likely to
denote that one article builds on the ideas of the other. To capture relatedness, we make use of the
PubMed Related Citation Algorithm (PMRA), which helps distinguish between references coming
from within the same narrow subfield, as opposed to outside this subfield. An interaction term
between the woman scientist indicator variable and the relatedness indicator will shed light on
whether men are more likely than women scientists to engage in self-reference as a means of
gratuitous self-promotion, ceteris paribus.

Returns to self-references. Finally, we use individual-level panel data models to examine whether
men and women differ in the career- and productivity-returns to self-references. This type of
analysis cannot tease out the underlying mechanism that might cause self-references to be more
impactful, but at the very least we can estimate if a gender gap exists with respect to the conversion
of self-references into publications, future citations, research grants, and career stability. We
estimate the following OLS specifications:




Where yit is a suitably-transformed13 outcome variable (such as publications, or forward citations,
or NIH R01 grants) for scientist i in year t, WOMAN is a gender indicator variable, STOCK_PUBS

                                                            
12
   For instance, cumulativeness is important in science, and one would expect researchers who specialize and consolidate lines of
research, which we refer to as "hedgehog" researchers (Berlin 1953) will self-reference more often relative to "fox" researchers who
have more diverse interests (Leahey 2006, 2007).
13
   In most cases, we transform the outcome using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation to accommodate the large number of
zero observations (Burbidge et al. 1988), while maintaining the ability to interpret the magnitude of coefficient estimates as
elasticities (Bellemare and Wichman 2020).

                                                                12
is the cumulative number of publications for scientist i up to year t-1, and FRACSELF is the
proportion of all references in the articles published by scientist i up to year t-1 that are self-
references, X corresponds to a vector of control covariates (degree, investigator age and its squared,
etc.), and t denotes a full suite of year effects. Specification (2b) includes scientist-level fixed effects
i , which will absorb the main effect of gender.

We also want to shed light on whether self-reference behavior shapes scientific careers at the
extensive margin, i.e., whether it influences the decision to exit science, or patterns of transition
from stable careers (where scientists control the direction of their investigations) to marginal
positions (where they have much less autonomy). Estimating the determinants of exit requires a
statistical framework that accommodates the discrete nature of the event. Using the cross-section
of 3,667 scientists (with covariates set at their terminal value--the year of exit or the year of
censoring, whichever comes earlier), we employ discrete-time hazard rate models (Myers et al.,
1973; Allison 1982). The use of discrete-time models (as opposed to continuous-time models such
as the Cox) is motivated by the lumpiness of the failure time information in our data: we observe
exit only at an annual frequency, which results in the heaping of failure times. We use a logistic
regression function to link the hazard rate with time and the explanatory covariates. In practice,
we estimate a simple logit of the "decision" to transition out of academia or stable employment,
where the observations corresponding to years subsequent to the mobility event have been
dropped from the estimation sample (see Azoulay et al. (2017) for an example of the same
technique used to analyze mobility patterns in a sample of elite scientists).14



Results
Table 3 presents the results of the analysis of self-reference at the citing/cited article pair level.
Columns 1, 2, and 3 include only one effect of interest, that of the gender indicator variable.
Column 1 includes a relatively parsimonious set of fixed effects (e.g., publication years for citing
and cited articles, etc.); column 2 adds a comprehensive set of fixed effects for 3,031 journals; and
column 3 corresponds to our most saturated model, also including 99 dummies corresponding to
the percentile of the distribution of long-run forward citations for the citing articles,15 implicitly
comparing self-reference behavior holding "scientific fertility" constant.16

Across columns, the gender effect is negative and statistically significant, consistent with prior
research. Its magnitude is rather tiny, however, corresponding to between 3 and 4% of the standard

                                                            
14
   We use quotes around the word decision because, although some of these transitions might be voluntary (such as leaving
academia for industry in quest of a new challenge or more tangible "impact"), many will not be (such as falling out of the tenure
track after losing in NIH funding competition). Our coding of stable versus marginal positions is motivated in part by this
distinction, since few scientists would prefer them over less precarious (and more prestigious) positions.
15
   These distributions are vintage-specific (allowing us to compare the citation impact of articles published in different years), and
are based on citation counts that exclude (forward) self-citations.
16
   Specifically, columns 3 through 7 include a total of 107,726 indicator variables to estimate the gap in self-citation behavior.

                                                                 13
deviation of the outcome. Column 4 adds to the covariates included in column 3 our indicator of
intellectual relatedness between citing and cited articles (i.e., the two articles are intellectual
neighbors according to PMRA). The effect is both large in magnitude and precisely estimated, but
interestingly does not affect the coefficient estimate for the gender effect.

Column 5 adds to the specification with the count of citable items published to date by the focal
scientist, in logged form. As in the results presented by Mishra et al. (2018), the effect of gender
disappears in these specifications--a precisely estimated zero. Column 6 augments the
specification with an interaction term between gender and the stock of citable items. The gender
effect remains very small in magnitude, and is only marginally significant. Across their entire
career, men and women scientists in our sample do not differ much in their relative propensity to
reference their own work; and they appear not to differ at all after one adjusts the effect for the
opportunity to self-cite.

Figure 3 and Table 4 leverage the longitudinal structure of our dataset to explore the stability of
the gender effect over calendar time, career stage, and career type. We begin by estimating the
specification in Table 5, column 5 on 26 subsamples corresponding to all the publication years for
citing articles between 1970 and 2005. We then graph each coefficient estimate for the gender effect
in Figure 3, Panel A. Although the effects in the early years appear less precisely estimated (recall
that relatively few scientists contribute articles during these years), the picture that emerges is one
of "precisely estimated zeros" throughout the period: the "gender non-effect" is stable over time.

The next step is to break down the overall dataset into subsample corresponding to different career
stages: graduate school, postdoctoral phase, the first five years of the "independent" (i.e., post-
training) career, years 5 through 10, 10 through 15, and so on in five year increments, with a last
category absorbing career years 30 and above for the scientists who reached this "advanced" career
age. Figure 3, Panel B displays the coefficient estimates for the gender effect (the underlying
specification corresponds as above to that displayed in column 5 of Table 3). We find evidence of
a negative and statistically significant gender effect in the very early career, which becomes
undistinguishable from zero at the five year post-training mark. Though more precisely estimated
early on, the effect's magnitude is trivial.

Finally, Table 4 breaks apart the sample by initial post-training sorting patterns into different types
of jobs: fellows who start in a standard tenure-track type academic position, fellows who join a
biopharmaceutical firm after completion of their training, and fellows who convert their training
into a "marginal" academic position, i.e., full-time "research associate" in an another scientist's lab,
adjunct teaching, etc. A final category includes all scientists who pursue research after training,
regardless of setting (academia or industry). For each type of initial position, we compare two sets
of estimates, the first based on the specification in Table 3, column 4--which does not control for
the stock of citable items--the second based on the specification in Table 3, column 5--which does.
As in Table 3, we typically find precisely estimated, negative gender effects of very modest


                                                  14
magnitudes without controlling for citing opportunities, which completely disappear once these
opportunities are controlled for.

From all these analyses at the citing-cited article pair level, we conclude that men and women
scientists do not appear to differ much in their propensity to self-cite, especially when focusing on
self-references per unit of past productivity. Moreover, these equal propensities exhibit striking
stability across time, type of initial position, and career stage.

From self-citation to self-promotion. The above exercise is informative with respect to the debate
regarding disparities in self-promotional behavior across genders only to the extent that self-
reference is accepted as a proxy for self-aggrandizement. Although a natural first step, below we
seek to distinguish between "gratuitous" and "legitimate" self-referencing behavior by attending
to the intellectual closeness between each citing and cited article. Recall that from columns (4), (5),
and (6) in Table 3, we already established that the scientists in our sample are more likely to self-
reference an intellectually related article than an unrelated one. In column (7) of Table 3, we
augment the specification with an interaction term between relatedness and gender. A positive
coefficient for this covariate would support the claim that, although men and women scientists
self-cite at similar rates, men scientists are less reluctant to do so in situations where the connection
between the two pieces of research is intellectually tenuous.

We do not find evidence for this claim. If anything, we find that women scientists appear slightly
more likely to self-reference unrelated work than men. However, the magnitude of the effect is
extremely modest (about 5% of the magnitude for the main effect of relatedness). Figure 4 pushes
this analysis further. Intellectual relatedness exists on a spectrum, a fact recognized by the PubMed
Related Citations Algorithm (PMRA). For any source article, PMRA returns a ranked list of
intellectual neighbors (the cut-off rules for PMRA are explored at length in Azoulay et al. (2019a),
Appendix C). Every citation link in our dataset can correspond to a particular relatedness rank,
from completely unrelated (80.0% of the sample), to relatedness rank 1, 2, 3... until about 10,000.
We create 111 gender by relatedness rank interaction effects, which we include in the specification
(the main effects of gender and the relatedness dummies are of course included as well). Figure 4
displays the coefficient estimates for these interaction terms. Although the majority have a negative
sign, they are invariably small in magnitude, and it is hard to discern any monotonic trend in the
effect. From these analyses, we conclude that men and women do not differ in their propensity to
self-cite gratuitously, any more than they differ in their overall self-reference propensity.17

Returns to self-references. We conclude the study by examining whether scientists can parlay self-
references into future productivity and career rewards, and whether the returns to self-reference
differ across genders. To do so, we shift the level of analysis away from the citing/cited article pair

                                                            
17
  In the present manuscript, the number of self-references by the male coauthor is three, versus only one for the female coauthor.
We leave it as an exercise for the reader to figure out whether this disparity reflects self-aggrandizement on the part of one member
of our mixed-gender team, a tragic lack of self-awareness on the part of both coauthors, or something more benign.

                                                                 15
to the individual scientist. A necessary note of caution is that we do not have at our disposal
exogenous shifters of the propensity to self-cite. As such, the effects we estimate below could suffer
from omitted variable bias--they correspond to conditional correlations, not causal effects.

Table 5 focuses on the forward citation returns to self-referencing behavior. The dependent
variable in all specifications is the inverse hyperbolic sine of the flow of citations received to the
articles published up to the current year by each scientist, purged of self-citations. All independent
variables are lagged one year. As seen in equation (2a) and (2b) above, all specifications include a
full suite of calendar year effects. The models are estimated by OLS, and standard errors are
clustered at the level of the scientist in all cases.

The first model (column 1) estimates the gender gap in forward citations (purged of self-citations)
in the sample, net of cohort effects (eight indicator variables corresponding to years of highest
degree, in five year increments), a full suite of calendar year effects, and age effects (the
investigator's career age and its square). The results imply that women scientists accumulate about
5% less citations than men every year, on average.

The remaining specifications are presented in pairs, the first corresponding to the pooled cross-
section, while the second includes scientist fixed effects, which cause the main effect of gender to
drop out.

From column 2a, after controlling for the stock of publications (lagged one year), the evidence of
gender disparity in citations vanishes. An additional publication is associated with about 1.5
forward citations on average, or slightly lower (1.3) in the within-scientist dimension of the data
(in column 2b). Columns 3a and 3b also demonstrate the absence of gender disparities in the ability
to covert publications into future citations. Columns 4a and 4b include the proportion of self-
references in the body of work of the investigator to date. Interestingly, scientists appear to suffer
a penalty, not a discount, for self-promotional behavior, although it is of small magnitude. At the
mean of the data, the estimate in column 4a implies that an additional 1% in the fraction of self-
references (roughly a 20% increase) is associated with a 0.08% decrease in the number of forward
citations. The estimate is twice as large in column 4b--the implied elasticity is 0.145--but this
remains a relatively modest effect. Finally, columns 5a and 5b introduce an interaction effect
between gender and the proportion of self-references in past work. The estimate in column 5a is
positive in statistically significant, indicating that relative to men, women earn a citation return on
self-referencing behavior. However, computing the implied elasticities using the delta method
leads to the conclusion that this differential effect is small: while men lose one forward citation on
average for a 1% increase in the fraction of self-references, women scientists lose "only" 0.8




                                                  16
citations. Further, the differences between men and women vanish altogether when adding
scientist fixed effects to the specification (column 5b).18

Table 6 provides an analysis in the same spirit, but focusing on career transitions rather that
scientific output. We do not discuss these results in the same amount of detail, because they paint
a similar picture. The first batch of columns reports discrete-time hazard estimates (with a logit
link function) in the cross-section corresponding to the last year before exit from academia or
2015, whichever comes earlier. Here we do find evidence of a small gender gap, with women
scientists about 5% more likely than men to leave academia (column 1a). But the effect's sign is
reversed after controlling for the publication stock (column 1b): women scientists are now 5% less
likely than men to leave academia. Unsurprisingly, lower amounts of publications contribute to an
elevated risk of transitioning out, but this appears equally true for men and women (column 1c).
Self-referencing behavior appears associated with a slightly higher probability of exit (column 1d),
but not differentially so for men and women (column 1e).

The second batch of four columns defines career exit differently, by focusing on the "marginality"
of the position. This is somewhat arbitrary, but our coding attempts to capture the timing of entry
into a phase of the career where the scientist would lose her scientific autonomy. In practice, a
tenure-track academic, a venture capitalist, a patent lawyer, and an industry scientist all have a
stable position using this coding, whereas a lab technician, an adjunct faculty member, a medical
professional (with purely clinical duties), or a high-school science teacher all have marginal
positions. Here we do find evidence that women scientists are more likely to exit (column 2a), but
the effect is quite small in magnitude once past publication output is added as a covariate (column
2b). We also find evidence of a positive association between rates of self-referencing and exit, but
again it does not differ along gender lines (columns 2c and 2d).

To summarize, we find no support for the notion that the long-term impact of self-referencing is
more positive for men than for women. In fact, we find that aggressive self-referencing, as
operationalized by fraction of total backward references to self, is not even positively correlated
with `good' career outcomes, such as future citations and career stability. The lesson here is that,
contrary to initial expectations, neither Pierre nor Pierrette should expect their self-referencing
behavior to generate a boost to their long-term visibility.




                                                            
18
  Appendix Tables A3 and A4 reproduce this analysis using two additional outcomes: receipt of an R01 grant from the National
Institute of Health, and number of publications. The magnitudes differ, but the qualitative conclusions of the analysis above remain
unchanged.

                                                                17
Discussion
Considering the results in their totality, we feel confident in stating that, in our sample at least,
men and women scientists do not meaningfully differ in their propensity to self-reference once the
stock of citable publications is taken into account. This aligns with Mishra et al. (2018) declaration
that self-references are simply the "hallmark of productive authors." Importantly, our analyses can
further show that this conclusion holds even when focusing on self-citations of intellectually
unrelated articles--the type of self-citation most likely to reflect self-aggrandizement instead of
cumulativeness. Finally, we find no evidence of a differential ability to convert self-citations into
favorable outcomes across men and women. In fact, contrary to the popular view that self-citations
are an important self-marketing tool, both genders--in the long game--appear to be penalized
rather than rewarded for self-referencing behavior, although the magnitude of the penalty is
modest.

Of course, we had expected, extrapolating from previous literature on gender and self-promotion
and self-assessment, that women scientists compared to men would self-reference less, self-
reference less gratuitously, and net less for their promotional efforts. Our evidence, therefore,
support none of these hypotheses. Instead, we find no systematic gap--statistical or practical--
between men and women in our sample with respect to self-reference practices or returns. So,
where does this leave us?

First, it is important to note that while our results do contradict our expectations regarding self-
referencing behavior, they cannot be used to adjudicate whether men and women differentially
self-promote, which is clearly a much broader statement about human agency. We were motivated
to study self-citation because of the literature on gender and self-promotion, but our empirical
study only assesses the behavioral act of self-referencing. For example, it could be that men are
indeed more aggressive self-promoters than women in science (see Lerchenmueller, Sorenson, and
Jena 2019), but that the act of self-citing is not interpreted by most scientists as particularly
promotional. Researchers often regard self-referencing as a form of bragging, but it could be that
self-referencing "on the ground" is merely the byproduct of satisficing, such as when authors
search their own personal "garbage cans" (Cohen, March, Olsen 1972) for a passable or plausible
reference in an effort to work efficiently. In a similar vein, it could be that self-citing is broadly
understood as promotional work, but that doing so is hardly sanctioned in practice because (1) the
behavior is so common and/or (2) the opportunities to sanction are few.

Second, a likely and fair response to this study is to question whether a sample of only life
scientists--all of whom received a prestigious post-doctoral award--is too narrow to draw broad
conclusions about how gender operates in science. We agree that that this sample has clear limits
in terms of its generalizability to all fields and to all strata of authors. At the same time, our sample
                                                   18
and results offer an important building block with regard to empirical knowledge. That is, our
sample may be limited in its generalizability, but the results themselves can be clearly interpreted
because we have controlled extensively for supply-side factors. We are confident that each cohort
of young scholars in our dataset is viewed by their discipline as having a great deal of potential to
contribute to the field. So, within this controlled group of scholars, to what extent does gender
matter for how careers unfold over time?19 Another building block then would be replicating this
study with, say, the group of scientists who applied for but did not receive a post-doctoral award,
or perhaps with a group of newly minted PhDs from a particular field but from institutions in the
lower- versus upper-half of area-specific rankings.

The beauty of this type of research design, as Delecourt and Ng (2020) illustrate well, is the clarity
that comes from controlling supply-side factors and hence, isolating demand-side factors. While
we cannot completely "fix" supply-side factors as Delecourt and Ng (2020) are able to do with a
field experiment, we come far closer to doing so compared to the many publication "snapshot"
studies devoid of (or with very limited) data on career context. More specifically, we come far
closer to being able to claim that women and men are rewarded differentially (or not) when they
do the same thing. In this way, our conclusions not only spotlight--by way of replicability--
previous findings based on publication-based samples, including Mishra et al. (2018) on the null
gender gap in self-citations, Lynn et al. (2019) on the null gender gap in citations per publication,
and West et al. (2013) on the major gender gap in publications, but go one step further and clarify
that these conclusions hold when subjected to an even stronger apples-to-apples test. 20

With this in mind, we see our null gender results as making an important contribution to the
current conversation around gender inequality in science. To recap, our objective was to examine
self-referencing in the context of scientific careers, which is why we analyzed the co-evolution of
publications, self-references, forward citations, grants, and employment type. In doing so, our
results easily reveal the arc of scientific careers: regardless of gender, scientists who publish more

                                                            
19
   We note that a recent study (Ginther and Heggeness 2020) raises the issue of administrative discretion in allocating supposedly
merit-based awards in science. They find that discretion is widely used by program officers when allocating the NIH NSRA F32
award, a grant given to "high-potential, early-career scientists" in the biomedical sciences. While the award is undoubtedly still a
selective prize, Ginther and Heggeness (2020) show that award winners include more applicants `reached for' through discretionary
decisions compared to applicants funded based on high peer review scores alone. That said, we speculate that heterogeneity in
potential is likely much smaller with respect to the recipients of the private, post-doctoral fellowships on which our sample is based.
Our confidence in this assertation, of course, would be much higher if we could directly examine the reward allocation process of
these private fellowships à la Ginther and Heggeness (2020).  
20
   In analyses not shown but available upon request, we also partially replicated Lerchenmueller and Sorenson's (2018) analysis of
the gender gap in the timing of the first R01 grant, which is based on a sample of roughly 6,300 life scientists who won an NIH
NRSA F32 award and produced at least one publication during the award period. They find that women F32 winners take 12%
longer before winning an R01, and this gap cannot be explained away by accounting for publications. In our sample, we, too, find
a statistically significant gap (N=55,741 person-years) in R01 timing but the magnitude of our gap is miniscule. Moreover, as shown
in Table A3, we find no gender gap in receipt of R01 funding after accounting for stock of previous publications.

                                                                 19
papers earlier are more likely later to self-reference, attract citations from others, produce future
publications, win grants, persist in academia, and persist in jobs with scientific autonomy. Put
differently, self-citation is indeed a hallmark of productivity, but so is every reward in science.

What is noteworthy then about these results is that, even though the conversion of earlier
publications into later rewards is not gendered, there is an inexplicable gender gap in publications
that begins in the very first career period for which scientists are tracked (graduate school) and
persists through every career stage thereafter (see Figure 1). Observation one is thus the unusually
good news that women and men's careers tend to unfold in highly similar ways when they publish
at the same rate. Observation two, however, is that even among a sample of the most competitive
graduate students in life sciences, women and men are not publishing at the same rate, and so
amass fewer rewards over the career course. In sum, for this sample of scientists, the publication
process is the single source of fuel for gender divergence in career trajectories.

While some might interpret this as arriving back at square one, i.e., the "old puzzle" that is the
gender gap in publications (Xie and Shauman 1998), we find our results provocative because of the
sample of elite graduate students on which they are based. Again, this is because supply-side
explanations have been effectively ruled out with this sample. For example, variation in human
capital and training experience is tightly controlled in our data given that we selected only high-
achieving graduate students recognized by field leaders for their potential to contribute. Regarding
individual tastes and preferences, we know that all in our sample were motivated enough to apply
for prestigious post-doctoral positions and that all chose to throw their proverbial hat in the ring
by accepting. We also know that scientists in the sample worked primarily in academic research
jobs. Thus, the persistent gender gap in publications we observe here cannot be a byproduct of the
job requirements associated with teaching versus research track positions, which has been shown
to explain the publication gender gap in datasets based on broader samples of scholars (Xie and
Shauman 2003).

Being able to reasonably set aside these major explanations means that we can approach the
productivity gap with renewed focus. Not only is the productivity gap the puzzle to solve, we now
know that (1) a publication gap can persist between men and women even in the absence of any
major differences in human capital, motivation, or job requirements, and (2) whatever
mechanism(s) creating the gender gap in publications are somehow muted when it comes to
publications being converted into future rewards. For example, in order to assert that demand-side
discrimination (e.g., the brilliance penalty) is the key reason why women publish less than men,
one would also have to explain why this mechanism has a negligible effect on how women and
men accrue citations and grants controlling for the publications they produce.



                                                 20
One promising line of work digs into the beast that is the journal peer review process, a specific
type of multi-staged, gatekeeping system that applies to the process of publishing articles (and
sometimes books). While there is little evidence to suggest that editors are more likely to accept
manuscripts written by men compared to women (e.g., Borsuk et al. 2009; Blank 1991), there is
compelling evidence to suggest that women on average generate higher quality work during the
peer review process (Hengel 2017), in part because reviewers and editors appear to impose higher
standards on women (Card et al. 2020).21 Ultimately, this process could push women to "spend too
much time rewriting old papers and not enough time writing new papers" (Hengel 2017: p. 3).
While our own data unfortunately cannot be leveraged to investigate this proposition or peer
review experiences more generally, we can perhaps motivate women scientists, as well as future
research on the gendered costs of publishing, by showing that on the other side of this bottleneck,
women and men earn roughly the same recognition per publication.




                                                            
21
  Hengel's (2017) analyses, too, suggest that women engage in more work in the peer review process more so because editors and
reviewers implicitly set the bar higher for women and less so because of supply-side differences in say, how authors respond to
negative reviews.

                                                               21
References
Aksnes, Dag W. 2003. "A macro study of self-citation." Scientometrics 56(2): 235­46.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Allison, Paul D., 1982. Discrete-Time Methods for the Analysis of Event Histories, in Sociological
Methodology. In: Leinhardt, S. (Ed.). Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, pp.61-98.
Auster, Carol J., and Susan C. Ohm. 2000. "Masculinity and Femininity in Contemporary American Society:
A Reevaluation Using the Bem Sex-Role Inventory." Sex Roles 43(7): 499­528.
Azoulay, Pierre, Ina Ganguli and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2017. "The Mobility of Elite Life Scientists:
Professional and Personal Determinants." Research Policy 46(3): 573-590.
Azoulay, Pierre, J. Michael Whalen and Ezra W. Zuckerman Sivan. 2019a. "Death of the Salesman, but not
the Sales Force: How Interested Promotion Skews Scientific Valuation." American Journal of Sociology
125(3): 786-845.
Azoulay, Pierre, Christian Fons-Rosen and Joshua S. Graff Zivin. 2019b. "Does Science Advance One
Funeral at a Time?" American Economic Review 109(8): 2889-2920.
Bellemare, Marc F., and Casey J. Wichman. 2020. Elasticities and the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
Transformation." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 82(1): 50-61.
Berlin, Isaiah. 1953. The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy's View of History. Weidenfeld &
Nicolson: London.
Bian, Lin, Sarah-Jane Leslie, and Andrei Cimpian. 2017. "Gender Stereotypes about Intellectual Ability
Emerge Early and Influence Children's Interests." Science 355(6323): 389­91.
Blank, Rebecca M. 1991. "The Effects of Double-Blind versus Single-Blind Reviewing: Experimental
Evidence from The American Economic Review." The American Economic Review 81(5): 1041­67.
Bonzi, Susan and Herbert Snyder. 1991. "Motivations for citation: a comparison of self-citation and
citations to others." Scientometrics 21(2): 245­254.
Borsuk, Robyn M., Lonnie W. Aarssen, Amber E. Budden, Julia Koricheva, Roosa Leimu, Tom Tregenza,
and Christopher J. Lortie. 2009. "To Name or Not to Name: The Effect of Changing Author Gender on Peer
Review." BioScience 59(11): 985­89.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. 1988. "Alternative transformations to handle extreme
values of the dependent variable." Journal of the American Statistical Association 83(401): 123­127.
Card, David, Stefano DellaVigna, Patricia Funk, and Nagore Iriberri. 2020. "Are Referees and Editors in
Economics Gender Neutral?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(1): 269­327.
Cohen, Michael D., James G. March, and Johan P. Olsen. 1972. "A Garbage Can Model of Organizational
Choice." Administrative Science Quarterly 17(1): 1­25.




                                                   22
Cole, Stephen, and Cole, Jonathan R. 1967. "Scientific Output and Recognition: A Study in the Operation
of the Reward System in Science." American Sociological Review 32: 377-90.
Correll, Shelley J. 2001. "Gender and the Career Choice Process: The Role of Biased SelfAssessments."
American Journal of Sociology 106(6): 1691-1730. https://doi.org/10.1086/321299.
Correll, Shelley J. 2004. "Constraints into Preferences: Gender, Status, and Emerging Career Aspiration."
American Sociological Review 69(1): 93-113.
Delecourt, Solène, and Odyssia Ng. 2020. "Do Buyers Discriminate against Female-Owned Businesses? Two
field Experiments." Working Paper, Stanford University.
Diamond Jr., Arthur M. 1986. "What is a citation worth?" Journal of Human Resources 21(2): 200­215.
DiPrete, Thomas A., and Gregory M. Eirich. 2006. "Cumulative Advantage as a Mechanism for Inequality:
A Review of Theoretical and Empirical Developments." Annual Review of Sociology 32(1): 271­97.
Eagly, Alice H. and Steven J. Karau. 2002. "Role congruity theory of prejudice toward female leaders."
Psychological Review 109(3): 573-598.
Exley, Christine L, and Judd B Kessler. 2019. "The Gender Gap in Self-Promotion." Working Paper 26345.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fiske, Peter. 2018. " Boost Your Market Value." Nature 555: 275-276.
Fowler, James H. and Dag W. Aksnes. 2007. "Does selfcitation pay?" Scientometrics 72:427­37.
Franck, Georg. 1999. "Scientific Communication--A Vanity Fair?" Science 286(5437): 53.
Garfield, Eugene. 1987a. "Some Deviant Behavior in Science Has Nothing at All to Do with Fraud." Current
Contents 4: 370­372.
Garfield, Eugene. 1987b. "Is There Room in Science for Self-Promotion?" The Scientist, 14 Dec. 1987,
https://www.the-scientist.com/opinion-old/is-there-room-in-science-for-self-promotion-63274. Accessed
5 Oct 2019.
Ginther, Donna K., and Misty L. Heggeness. 2020. "Administrative Discretion in Scientific Funding:
Evidence from a Prestigious Postdoctoral Training Program." Research Policy 49(4): 103953.
Hengel, Erin. 2017. "Publishing while Female. Are women held to higher standards? Evidence from peer
review," Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1753, Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge.
Hill, Ryan Reed. 2018. "Searching for Superstars: Research Risk and Talent Discovery in Astronomy."
Working Paper, MIT.
Hyland, Ken. 2003. "Self-citation and self-reference: Credibility and promotion in academic publication."
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54: 251­259.
Ioannidis, John P.A. 2015. "A generalized view of self-citation: Direct, co-author, collaborative, and coercive
induced self-citation." Journal of Psychosomatic Research 78: 7­11.
Ioannidis JAP, Tatsioni A, Karassa FB. 2010. "Who's afraid of reviewers' comments? Or, why anything can
be published and anything can be cited." European Journal of Clinical Investigation 40: 285­7.


                                                      23
King, Molly M., Carl T. Bergstrom, Shelley J. Correll, Jennifer Jacquet, and Jevin D. West. 2017. "Men Set
Their Own Cites High: Gender and Self-Citation across Fields and over Time:" Socius, December.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2378023117738903.
Koenig, Anne M. 2018. "Comparing Prescriptive and Descriptive Gender Stereotypes About Children,
Adults, and the Elderly." Frontiers in Psychology 9 (June).
Lawani, Stephen M. 1982. "On the heterogeneity and classification of author self-citations." Journal of
American Society for Information Science 33: 280-4.
Lerchenmueller, Marc J., and Olav Sorenson. 2018. "The Gender Gap in Early Career Transitions in the Life
Sciences." Research Policy 47(6): 1007-17.
Lerchenmueller, Marc J., Olav Sorenson, and Anupam B. Jena. 2019. "Gender Differences in How Scientists
Present the Importance of Their Research: Observational Study." British Medical Journal 367: l6573.
Leahey, Erin. 2006. "Gender Differences in Productivity: Research Specialization as a Missing Link." Gender
& Society 20(6): 754­80.
Leahey, Erin. 2007. "Not by Productivity Alone: How Visibility and Specialization Contribute to Academic
Earnings." American Sociological Review 72(4): 533­61.
Leslie, Sarah-Jane, Andrei Cimpian, Meredith Meyer, and Edward Freeland. 2015. "Expectations of
Brilliance Underlie Gender Distributions across Academic Disciplines." Science 347(6219): 262­65.
Levitt, David G. 2010. "Careers of An Elite Cohort of U.S. Basic Life Science Postdoctoral Fellows and the
Influence of Their Mentor's Citation Record." BMC Medical Education 10: 80. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1472-6920-10-80.
Lin, Jimmy, and W. John Wilbur. 2007. "PubMed Related Articles: A Probabilistic Topic-based Model for
Content Similarity." BMC Bioinformatics 8(423): 1-14.
Lynn, Freda B., Mary C. Noonan, Michael Sauder, and Matthew A. Andersson. 2019. "A Rare Case of
Gender Parity in Academia." Social Forces 98(2): 518­47.
MacRoberts, Michael H. and Barbara R. MacRoberts, 1989. "Problems of citation analysis: a critical review."
Journal of the American Society for Information Science 40(5): 342­349.
Mantovani, Richard, Mary V. Look, and Emily Wuerker. 2006. The Career Achievements of National
Research Service Award Postdoctoral Trainees and Fellows: 1975-2004. Bethesda, MD: ORC Macro
McGinnnis, Robert, Paul D. Allison, and J. Scott Long. 1982. "Postdoctoral Training in Bioscience:
Allocation and Outcomes." Social Forces 60(3): 701-722.
Medoff, Marshall H. 2006. "The Efficiency of Self-Citations in Economics." Scientometrics 69: 69­84.
Merton, Robert K. 1942. "The Normative Structure of Science." Reprinted in Norman W. Storer, ed., The
Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. University of Chicago Press.
Mishra, Shubhanshu, Brent D. Fegley, Jana Diesner, and Vetle I. Torvik. 2018. "Self-Citation Is the
Hallmark of Productive Authors, of Any Gender." PLoS ONE 13(9): e0195773.



                                                    24
Moss-Racusin, Corinne A., John F. Dovidio, Victoria L. Brescoll, Mark J. Graham, and Jo Handelsman.
2012. "Science Faculty's Subtle Gender Biases Favor Male Students." Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 109(41): 16474.
Moss-Racusin, Corinne A., Julie E. Phelan, and Laurie A. Rudman. 2010. "When Men Break the Gender
Rules: Status Incongruity and Backlash against Modest Men." Psychology of Men & Masculinity 11(2):140­
51.
Myers, Max H., Benjamin F. Hankey, and Nathan Mantel. 1973. A Logistic-Exponential Model for Use with
Response-Time Data Involving Regressors Variables. Biometrics 29(2): 257-269.
Nelkin, Dorothy. 1987. In Selling Science: How the Press Covers Science and Technology. New York: W. H.
Freeman.
Neyman, Jerzy, and Elizabeth L. Scott 1948. "Consistent Estimates Based on Partially Consistent
Observations." Econometrica 16(1): 1-32.
Reis, Richard M. "The Need for Self-Promotion in Scientific Careers." The Chronicle of Higher Education,
23 Apr. 1999, https://www.chronicle.com/article/The-Need-for-Self-Promotion-in/45602. Accessed 5 Oct
2019.
Reuben, Ernesto, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2014. "How Stereotypes Impair Women's Careers in
Science." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(12):4403­4408.
Reuben, Ernesto, Rey-Biel, Pedro, Paola Sapienza, Luigi Zingales. 2012. "The emergence of male leadership
in competitive environments." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 83(1):111­117.
Ridgeway, Cecilia L. 2011. Framed by Gender: How Gender Inequality Persists in the Modern World. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Rudman, Laurie A. 1998. "Self-promotion as a risk factor for women: The costs and benefits of counter
stereotypical impression management." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74: 629­645.
Silva, Elizabeth A., Christine Des Jarlais, Bill Lindstaedt, Erik Rotman, Elizabeth S. Watkins. 2016. Tracking
Career Outcomes for Postdoctoral Scholars: A Call to Action. PLoS Biology 14(5): e1002458. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pbio.1002458.
Snyder, Herbert and Susan Bonzi. 1998. "Patterns of self-citation across disciplines (1980­1989)." Journal
of Information Science 24: 431-435.
Tagliacozzo, Renata. 1977. "Self-citation in scientific literature." Journal of Documentation 33: 251­265.
Thébaud, Sarah. 2015. "Status Beliefs and the Spirit of Capitalism: Accounting for Gender Biases in
Entrepreneurship and Innovation." Social Forces 94(1): 61­86.
Thombs BD, Levis AW, Razykov I, Syamchandra A, Leentjens AFG, Levenson JL, et al. 2015. "Potentially
coercive self-citation by peer reviewers: a cross-sectional study." Journal of Psychosomatic Research 78:1-6.
Torvik, Vetle I., and Neil R. Smalheiser. 2009. "Author Name Disambiguation in MEDLINE." ACM
Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (3)3: Article 11. https://doi.org/10.1145/1552303.1552304.



                                                     25
West, Jevin D., Jennifer Jacquet, Molly M. King, Shelley J. Correll, and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2013. "The Role
of Gender in Scholarly Authorship." PLoS ONE 8(7). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066212.
Xie, Yu, and Kimberlee A. Shauman. 1998. "Sex Differences in Research Productivity: New Evidence about
an Old Puzzle." American Sociological Review 63(6): 847.
Xie, Yu, and Kimberlee A. Shauman. 2003. Women in Science: Career Processes and Outcomes. Boston, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Maximo Torero. 2002. "Labor Mobility from Academe to
Commerce." Journal of Labor Economics 20(3): 629-660.




                                                    26
 Table 1: Summary Statistics--Scientist Level
                                                                        Men Scientists                                                  Women Scientists
                                                                         (N=2,546)                                                        (N=1,014)

                                                    Mean       Median       Std. Dev.        Min.      Max.           Mean        Median      Std. Dev.     Min.        Max.

MD                                                   0.03          0          0.16            0         1              0.01           0          0.11         0            1
PhD                                                  0.91          1          0.28            0         1              0.95           1          0.22         0            1
MD/PhD                                               0.06          0          0.24            0         1              0.04           0          0.20         0            1
Highest Degree Year                                1986.52       1986        10.32           1962      2005          1989.29        1990         9.43       1963        2005
Year of Independent Career Start                   1991.30       1991        10.82           1971      2018          1994.55        1996         9.99       1972        2015
Year of Exit from Academia                         2007.80       2014        11.04           1972      2019          2007.43        2014        10.41       1972        2019
Exit/Censoring Year                                2013.09       2015         5.55           1972      2019          2012.93        2015         5.96       1972        2019
Postdoctoral Training Length                         4.78          4          2.22            1         15             5.26           5          2.45         1           20
Academic Career Length                              16.50         15         12.66             0        43            12.88          11         11.56         0           43
Independent Career Length                           21.79         22         10.60            0         43            18.38          17          9.88         0           43
Begins Career in Science                             0.96          1          0.20            0         1              0.90           1          0.30         0            1
Ends Career in Science                               0.89          1          0.32            0         1              0.79           1          0.41         0            1
Begins Career in Industry                            0.16          0          0.36            0         1              0.18           0          0.39         0            1
Ends Career in Industry                              0.20          0          0.40            0          1             0.18           0          0.39         0            1
Begins Career in Marginal Position                   0.08          0          0.27            0         1              0.17           0          0.37         0            1
Ends Career in Marginal Position                     0.09          0          0.29             0         1             0.21           0          0.41         0            1
Begins Career as P.I.                                0.76          1          0.42            0         1              0.65           1          0.48         0            1
Ends Career as P.I.                                  0.70          1          0.46             0         1             0.60           1          0.49         0            1
Career Nb. of Publications                          55.18         36         57.71            1        717            33.33          21         36.56         1          293
Career NIH Funding                                8,026,756    1,847,540   16,572,517         0     211,812,528      4,323,344    280,573     8,954,504       0     107,133,976
NAS/NAM Membership                                   0.02          0          0.14            0          1            0.02           0           0.13        0            1
Career Nb. of References                            2,006       1,314        2,145            6       25,411          1,276         781         1,399        18        10,698
Career Forward Citations (excl. self-cites)         3,819       1,934        5,805            1       64,081          2,032        1,151        2,856        0         38,710
Career Nb. of Self-references                        197          79          314             0        3,692           104           32          190         0          1,735
Career Self-citation Share                           0.07         0           0.05            0        0.36           0.05           0           0.04        0          0.24
Note: The sample comprises 3,667 winners of postdoctoral fellowships awarded by four US-based private philanthropic foundations between 1970 and 2005, whose careers are tracked
       until retirement/exit, death, or 2015, whichever comes earlier.




                                                                                        27
Table 2: Summary Statistics--Article Level
                                                                   Men Scientists                                                       Women Scientists
                                                                   (N=144,185)                                                            (N=35,131)

                                              Mean        Median       Std. Dev.      Min.         Max.              Mean         Median       Std. Dev.     Min.         Max.

Article Year of Publication                 1999.17         2001         10.52        1962         2015             2000.08        2001         10.11        1963        2015
Article Nb. of Authors                        5.76            5           3.88         1            30                5.62           5           3.82          1          30
Fellow Authorship Position                    4.43            4           3.39          1           30                4.04           3           3.20          1          30
Fellow is First Author                        0.13            0           0.34          0             1               0.18           0           0.38          0           1
Fellow is Middle Author                       0.42            0           0.49          0             1               0.41           0           0.49          0           1
Fellow is Last Author                         0.44            0           0.50          0             1               0.42           0           0.49          0           1
Article Nb. of Forward Citations             68.96           27          206.96         0         34,460             62.06          26          132.79         0         5,590
Article Citation Percentile                  73.50           82          25.75          0           100              73.49          82           25.31         0          100
Article Nb. of References                    36.05           34          18.22         1           500               37.99          36           18.56         1          351
Article Nb. of Self-references                3.56            2           3.73          0            47               3.12           2           3.46          0          36
Article Self-reference Share                  0.11            0           0.11          0            1                0.09           0           0.10          0           1
Article Nb. of In-field References            7.16            6           6.00          0            64               7.70           6           6.23          0          62
Article In-field Reference Share              0.21            0           0.15          0             1               0.21           0           0.15          0           1
Note: The count of forward citations count excludes self-citations. The citation percentile corresponds to position of the source article in the vintage-specific empirical distribution
       of citations at the article level. The universe of publications considered includes 17,312,059 publications between 1950 and 2015 indexed both by PubMed and the Web of
       Science. In-field references comprise the subset of all references which the PubMed Related Citation Algorithm indicates are intellectually related to the source article.




                                                                                        28
                                                                          Figure 1
                                                              Publication Rates--Scientist-level
                          A. By Career Sequence                                                                             B. By Career Year




Note: Publication rates by gender over the career by career sequence (Panel A) and individual year (Panel B). In Panel A, t-tests indicate that the difference between publication
       rates for men and women is statistically significant at the 1% level at every career stage. In Panel B, year 0 corresponds to the year of PhD receipt. In both panels, but especially
       Panel B, recall that the number of scientists in the cells corresponding to the most advanced stage of the career is relatively small (for example, in year 35, we observe only
       452 scientists--372 men and 80 women). The remainder of the sample has either exited already, or is not yet "of age" as they entered in the sample after 1980 and the last
       year of observation is 2015).




                                                                                          29
                                                                                 Figure 2
                                                                   Self-Reference Rates--Scientist-level


               A. Over the whole career                                                   B. Over time                                                C. By career sequence




Note: Panel A displays the histogram for the proportion of self-citations at the scientist level, taking into account publications published over the entire career, separately for men and women
      (seven outliers with a self-reference share higher than 0.25% are excluded). Panel B displays the evolution of the average self-citation rate over the whole career, separately for men and
      women. The clock starts in the year of PhD receipt (or MD for 84 of the scientists in the sample). Because the length of training differs across scientists (median and mean of five years,
      and a standard deviation of 2.3 years), Panel C breaks down careers into nine distinct intervals: graduate school, postdoctoral fellowship(s), first five years post training, years 5-10,...,
      years 25-20, and finally beyond the 30th year of career. 




                                                                                                30
                                                                                  Figure 3
                                                                          Gender Effect Magnitudes


                                   A. Calendar Year Splits                                                                        B. Career Sequence Splits




Note: Panel A displays coefficient estimates (and associated 95% confidence intervals) for the gender effects in 26 distinct regressions modeled after the specification in Table 4, column
      5. Each regression is run on a subsample that only includes source publications which appeared during a specific year, from 1970 to 2015. Panel B proceeds in the same spirit, but
      breaks down the data into 9 subsamples corresponding to natural career intervals: graduate school, postdoctoral fellowship(s), first five years post training, years 5-10,..., years 25-
      20, and finally beyond the 30th year of career. 




                                                                                               31
                                                                        Figure 4
                                                         Gender × Relatedness Rank Interactions




Note: Figure 3 displays the coefficient estimates (and associated 95% confidence intervals) for the interaction effects between gender and relatedness rank in an expanded version of
      the specification appearing in Table 3, column 7. In these specifications, relatedness is broken down into 112 dummies: PMRA-unrelated (the omitted category), PMRA-related
      of rank 1, PMRA-related of rank 2, ..., PMRA-related of rank 100, 100-110, 110-120, 120-130, 130-140, 140-150, 150-200, 201-250, 251-300, 301-400, 401-500, and finally 501-
      10,000. These main effects of intellectual relatedness are further interacted with gender.




                                                                                         32
 Table 3: Determinants of self-citation (OLS)
                                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)
                                                                           -0.010**         -0.009**         -0.011**         -0.011**          -0.000           -0.005            -0.003
Women scientist
                                                                           (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.001)          (0.003)          (0.003)
                                                                                                                               0.139**          0.139**          0.139**           0.141**
Citing & cited articles are related
                                                                                                                              (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)
                                                                                                                                                0.037**          0.037**           0.037**
Ln(nb. of citable publications)
                                                                                                                                                (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)
                                                                                                                                                                  0.001            0.001
Ln(nb. of citable publications) × Woman scientist
                                                                                                                                                                 (0.001)          (0.001)
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.009*
Citing & cited articles are related × Woman scientist
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.004)
Number of authors indicator variables (source article)                   Included          Included         Included         Included         Included          Included         Included
Authorship position indicator variable (source article)                  Included          Included         Included         Included         Included          Included         Included
Cited article age indicator variables                                    Included          Included         Included         Included         Included          Included         Included
Source article publication year indicator variables                      Included          Included         Included         Included         Included          Included         Included
Cited Article publication year indicator variables                       Included          Included         Included         Included         Included          Included         Included
Journal indicator variables (source article)                                 --            Included         Included         Included         Included          Included         Included
Long-run citation quantile (source article)                                  --                --           Included         Included         Included          Included         Included
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                 0.095             0.095            0.095            0.095            0.095             0.095             0.095
Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable                                            0.294             0.294            0.294            0.294            0.294             0.294             0.294
Gender effect, in s.d. units                                               0.028             0.038            0.041            0.047            0.005             0.005            0.005
Adjusted R2                                                                0.034             0.038            0.073            0.105            0.107             0.107            0.107
Nb. of Investigators                                                       3,667             3,667            3,667            3,667            3,667             3,667            3,667
Nb. of Source Articles                                                    165,123           165,114          164,878          164,878          164,878           164,878          164,878
Nb. of Unique Cited Articles                                             1,534,667         1,534,661        1,534,564        1,534,564        1,534,564         1,534,564        1,534,564
Nb. of Source/Cited Article Pairs                                        6,532,016         6,532,007        6,531,766        6,531,766        6,531,766         6,531,766        6,531,766
Note: Linear probability model estimates. An observation corresponds to a citing/cited article pair. The response variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the fellowship recipient
      author of the citing article is also on the authorship roster of the cited article. Also included as right-hand side covariates are degree indicator variables (MD and MD/PhD, PhD is
      the omitted category), fellowship award year indicator variables, and fellowship type (DRCF, LSRF, HHWF, or JCCF). The number of citable publications for each fellowship
      recipient is measured in the year prior to the citing article's year of publication. The citing and cited articles are considered related if they are neighbors according to the PubMed
      Related Citations Algorithm [PMRA]. Standard errors in parentheses, triple clustered on investigator, cited article, & citing article.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                                                            33
Table 4: Determinants of self-citation behavior (OLS), by initial position "type"
                                                                                                                          Start in a
                                                              Start in Academia             Start in Industry                                        Starts in Research
                                                                                                                       Marginal Position
                                                          w/o Pubs         w/ Pubs      w/o Pubs       w/ Pubs       w/o Pubs       w/ Pubs       w/o Pubs       w/ Pubs
                                                            Ctrl.           Ctrl.         Ctrl.         Ctrl.          Ctrl.         Ctrl.          Ctrl.         Ctrl.
                                                           -0.011**         0.001        -0.013*        -0.002         0.004         -0.001       -0.014**        0.001
Women scientist
                                                           (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                            0.152**       0.152**        0.106**        0.106**       0.119**        0.120**       0.149**       0.149**
Citing & cited articles are intellectually related
                                                           (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                                          0.041**                       0.034**                      0.036**                     0.039**
Ln(Nb. of citable publications)
                                                                          (0.002)                      (0.004)                      (0.008)                      (0.001)
Mean of Dependent Variable                                  0.107           0.107         0.075         0.075          0.082         0.082         0.105          0.105
Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable                             0.310           0.310         0.263         0.263          0.274         0.274         0.307          0.307
Gender effect, in s.d. units                                0.041          -0.003         0.207         0.134          0.609         0.695         -0.047         0.002
Adjusted R2                                                 0.102           0.104         0.121         0.121          0.138         0.138         0.100          0.104
Nb. of Investigators                                        2,650           2,650          531           531            279           279          3,354          3,354
Nb. of Source Articles                                     128,516        128,516         9,333         9,333          5,288         5,288        141,091        141,091
Nb. of Unique Cited Articles                              1,343,942      1,343,942       184,473       184,473        115,995       115,995      1,439,154      1,439,154
Nb. of Source/Cited Article Pairs                         5,101,818      5,101,818       313,726       313,726        177,866       177,866      5,561,105      5,561,105
Note: Linear probability model estimates. An observation corresponds to a citing/cited article pair. The response variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the
      fellowship recipient author of the citing article is also on the authorship roster of the cited article. The specification includes the series of indicator variables
      also included in Table 2, column 5. Also included as right-hand side covariates are degree indicator variables (MD and MD/PhD, PhD is the omitted category),
      fellowship award year indicator variables, and fellowship type (DRCF, LSRF, HHWF, or JCCF). The number of citable publications for each fellowship
      recipient is measured in the year prior to the citing article's year of publication. The citing and cited articles are considered related if they are neighbors
      according to the PubMed Related Citations Algorithm [PMRA]. Standard errors in parentheses, triple clustered on investigator, cited article, & citing article.
      
        p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                                                           34
Table 5: The effect of self-references on the flow of forward citations (OLS)
                                                        (1)          (2a)            (2b)           (3a)            (3b)           (4a)            (4b)          (5a)          (5b)
                                                      -0.48**       -0.01                           0.05                          -0.01                         0.12
Woman Scientist
                                                      (0.05)        (0.03)                         (0.06)                         (0.03)                       (0.07)
                                                                    1.50**          1.56**         1.50**          1.56**         1.54**          1.63**        1.56**         1.63**
Ln(Publications)
                                                                    (0.01)          (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.02)
                                                                                                   -0.02            0.01                                       -0.06*          0.01
Ln(Publications)×Woman
                                                                                                   (0.02)          (0.02)                                      (0.03)         (0.03)
                                                                                                                                  -1.47**        -2.53**       -1.76**        -2.48**
Fraction Self-References
                                                                                                                                  (0.36)         (0.34)        (0.39)         (0.37)
                                                                                                                                                                1.55           -0.27
Fraction Self-References ×Woman
                                                                                                                                                               (0.88)         (0.88)
Scientist Fixed Effects                             Excluded       Excluded       Included       Excluded        Included       Excluded        Included      Excluded       Included
Mean of Dependent Variable                             4.54           4.54           4.54           4.54            4.54           4.54            4.54          4.54          4.54
Adjusted R2                                           0.17           0.71           0.87           0.71            0.87           0.72            0.88          0.72           0.88
Nb. of Scientists                                     3,667          3,667          3,661          3,667           3,661          3,667           3,661         3,667          3,661
Nb. of Scientist-Year Obs.                           94,315         94,315         94,308         94,315          94,308         94,315          94,308        94,315         94,308
Note: OLS estimates. The dependent variable is the flow of forward citations accruing in year t to all the publications of the focal scientist up to and including year t-1,
      transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, so that coefficient estimates are approximately interpretable as elasticities. An observation corresponds to
      a scientist-year, with the first observation being the year following the receipt of highest degree, and the last observation the year of exit from science, retirement, death
      or 2015, whichever comes earlier. The time-varying covariates are lagged one year. The specifications also include degree indicator variables (MD and MD/PhD, PhD is
      the omitted category), scientist career age and its square, a full suite of calendar year indicator variables, and eight indicator variables corresponding to years of highest
      degree (in five year increments). Standard errors in parentheses, triple clustered at the investigator level.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                                                            35
Table 6: The effect of self-references on the risk of career exit (Logit)
                                                                        Exit from Academia                                                   Exit from Stable Position
                                                  (1a)        (1b)         (1c)      (1d)             (1e)                (2a)        (2b)         (2c)      (2d)        (2e)
                                                 0.05**      -0.05**      -0.03     -0.04**          -0.04               0.10**       0.02*        0.01      0.02*       0.00
Woman Investigator
                                                 (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.05)     (0.01)          (0.05)               (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.03)    (0.01)     (0.03)
                                                             -0.21**     -0.21 **
                                                                                    -0.22**         -0.22**                          -0.13**
                                                                                                                                                 -0.13 **
                                                                                                                                                            -0.14**
                                                                                                                                                                       -0.15**
Ln(Publications)
                                                             (0.00)      (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)                           (0.00)       (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)
                                                                          -0.01                       0.01                                         0.00                  0.02
Ln(Publications) × Woman
                                                                         (0.02)                     (0.02)                                        (0.01)               (0.02)
                                                                                     0.45*           0.60*                                                   0.46*     0.59**
Fraction Self-References
                                                                                    (0.21)          (0.23)                                                  (0.18)     (0.21)
                                                                                                     -0.78                                                              -0.50
Fraction Self-References × Woman
                                                                                                    (0.48)                                                             (0.36)
Pseudo-R2                                        0.01         0.44         0.44         0.44          0.44               0.03         0.41         0.41      0.41        0.41
Nb. of Scientists                                3,667        3,667        3,667        3,667        3,667               3,667        3,667       3,667      3,667      3,667
Note: Discrete-time hazard estimates using a logit link function--one career spell per scientist. Covariates take on the value in the year of exit or 2015, whichever comes
      earlier. The dependent variable is binary variable that takes on the value one in the year we observe the scientist exit academia (first set of four columns) or exist to a
      "marginal" position (second set of four columns). The specifications also include degree indicator variables (MD and MD/PhD, PhD is the omitted category), and eight
      indicator variables corresponding to years of highest degree (in five year increments). Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                                                         36
                      Appendix Tables & Figures

Figure A1: Distribution of relatedness rank for 1,303,113 related citing/cited pairs




                                        i
Table A1: Scientists' Initial Positions
                                                            Men                 Women                    Total
                                                           1,996                   682                   2,678
 Tenure-track Academic
                                                          (76.39)                (64.71)                (73.03)
                                                            124                     91                    215
 Staff Scientist/Research Associate
                                                           (4.75)                 (8.63)                 (5.86)
                                                              7                      7                     14
 Academic Administration
                                                           (0.27)                 (0.66)                 (0.38)
                                                              5                      5                     10
 Science/Health Policy
                                                           (0.19)                 (0.47)                 (0.27)
                                                             10                     15                     25
 Higher Ed Adjunct Teaching
                                                           (0.38)                 (1.42)                 (0.68)
                                                             28                     11                     39
 Clinical Medicine
                                                           (1.07)                 (1.04)                 (1.06)
                                                              2                      6                      8
 High-school Science Teaching
                                                           (0.08)                 (0.57)                 (0.22)
                                                            176                     77                    253
 Big Pharma
                                                           (6.74)                 (7.31)                 (6.90)
                                                            205                    100                    305
 Biotech
                                                           (7.85)                 (9.49)                 (8.32)
                                                              7                     10                     17
 Patent Law
                                                           (0.27)                 (0.95)                 (0.46)
                                                             11                      1                     12
 Venture Capital
                                                           (0.42)                 (0.09)                 (0.33)
                                                              9                      3                     12
 Biopharma Consulting
                                                           (0.34)                 (0.28)                 (0.33)
                                                              4                     10                     14
 Scientific Writing/Editing
                                                           (0.15)                 (0.95)                 (0.38)
                                                             12                     10                     22
 Other Industry
                                                           (0.46)                 (0.95)                 (0.60)
                                                             17                     26                     43
 Unknown
                                                           (0.65)                 (2.47)                 (1.17)
                                                           2,613                  1,054                  3,667
 Total
                                                         (100.00)               (100.00)               (100.00)
Note: Column Percentages in Parentheses. Observations with "unknown" position type are not lost to follow up. These are
      individuals who not only exited science (as ascertained by the complete absence of any publication or patent), but have also
      seemingly dropped out of the labor force.




                                                                ii
Table A2: Scientists' Last Positions
                                                            Men                 Women                    Total
                                                           1,842                   635                   2,477
 Tenure-track Academic
                                                          (70.49)                (60.25)                (67.55)
                                                             52                     58                    110
 Staff Scientist/Research Associate
                                                           (1.99)                 (5.50)                 (3.00)
                                                             59                     45                    104
 Academic Administration
                                                           (2.26)                 (4.27)                 (2.84)
                                                             12                      7                     19
 Science/Health Policy
                                                           (0.46)                 (0.66)                 (0.52)
                                                             17                     22                     39
 Higher Ed Adjunct Teaching
                                                           (0.65)                 (2.09)                 (1.06)
                                                             38                     20                     58
 Clinical Medicine
                                                           (1.45)                 (1.90)                 (1.58)
                                                              7                     13                     20
 High-school Science Teaching
                                                           (0.27)                 (1.23)                 (0.55)
                                                            192                     80                    272
 Big Pharma
                                                           (7.35)                 (7.59)                 (7.42)
                                                            227                     63                    290
 Biotech
                                                           (8.69)                 (5.98)                 (7.91)
                                                             19                     19                     38
 Patent Law
                                                           (0.73)                 (1.80)                 (1.04)
                                                             15                      3                     18
 Venture Capital
                                                           (0.57)                 (0.28)                 (0.49)
                                                             60                     28                     88
 Biopharma Consulting
                                                           (2.30)                 (2.66)                 (2.40)
                                                             15                     14                     29
 Scientific Writing/Editing
                                                           (0.57)                 (1.33)                 (0.79)
                                                             34                     24                     58
 Other Industry
                                                           (1.30)                 (2.28)                 (1.58)
                                                             24                     23                     47
 Unknown
                                                           (0.92)                 (2.18)                 (1.28)
                                                           2,613                  1,054                  3,667
 Total
                                                         (100.00)               (100.00)               (100.00)
Note: Column Percentages in Parentheses. Observations with "unknown" position type are not lost to follow up. These are
      individuals who not only exited science (as ascertained by the complete absence of any publication or patent), but have also
      seemingly dropped out of the labor force.




                                                               iii
Table A3: The effect of self-references on receipt of NIH R01 funding (OLS)
                                                   (1)          (2a)            (2b)             (3a)          (3b)            (4a)           (4b)            (5a)            (5b)
                                                 -0.02**        0.01                             0.00                          0.01                           0.01
Woman Scientist
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                           (0.02)                        (0.01)                        (0.02)
                                                               0.11**          0.06**           0.11**        0.06**          0.10**         0.07**         0.10**           0.07**
Ln(Publications)
                                                               (0.00)          (0.01)           (0.00)        (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)
                                                                                                 0.00         -0.00                                          -0.00           -0.01
Ln(Publications) × Woman
                                                                                                (0.01)        (0.01)                                        (0.01)          (0.01)
                                                                                                                              0.44**         -0.16          0.42**           -0.22*
Fraction Self-References
                                                                                                                              (0.09)         (0.09)         (0.09)          (0.10)
                                                                                                                                                              0.10            0.38
Fraction Self-References × Woman
                                                                                                                                                            (0.20)          (0.27)
Scientist Fixed Effects                        Included      Excluded        Included       Excluded        Included        Excluded        Included       Excluded        Included
Mean of Dependent Variable                        0.18          0.18            0.18           0.18            0.18            0.18            0.18           0.18            0.18
Adjusted R2                                      0.01          0.05            0.14           0.05            0.14            0.05            0.14            0.05            0.14
Nb. of Scientists                                2,678         2,678           2,673          2,678           2,673           2,678           2,673          2,678           2,673
Nb. of Scientist-Year Obs.                      61,151        61,151          61,146         61,151          61,146          61,151          61,146         61,151          61,146
Note: Linear Probability Model (OLS) estimates. An observation corresponds to a scientist-year. The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if a scientist is
      awarded an R01 grant from the NIH in the focal year, zero otherwise (it is exceedingly rare for a scientist to receive more than one such grant in a given year). Since scientists
      are only at risk of receiving an R01 grant if they are principal investigators in academic positions, we restrict the sample to scientists who begin their career in academia,
      from the start of their independent career, with the last observation corresponding to the year of exit from science, retirement, death, or 2015, whichever comes earlier. The
      time-varying covariates are lagged one year. The specifications also include degree indicator variables (MD and MD/PhD, PhD is the omitted category), scientist career age
      and its square, a full suite of calendar year indicator variables, and eight indicator variables corresponding to years of highest degree (in five year increments). Standard
      errors in parentheses, triple clustered at the investigator level.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                                                           iv
Table A4: The effect of self-references on the flow of publications (OLS)
                                                   (1)            (2a)          (2b)             (3a)          (3b)            (4a)            (4b)           (5a)            (5b)
                                                 -0.24**        -0.05**                         0.10**                        -0.05**                       0.14**
 Woman Scientist
                                                 (0.02)         (0.01)                          (0.04)                        (0.01)                        (0.04)
                                                                 0.60**        0.31**           0.62**        0.32**          0.56**          0.32**        0.58**           0.33**
 Ln(Publications)
                                                                (0.01)         (0.01)           (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.01)
                                                                                                -0.05**       -0.04**                                       -0.08**         -0.06**
 Ln(Publications) × Woman
                                                                                                (0.01)        (0.01)                                        (0.02)          (0.02)
                                                                                                                              1.43**          -0.16         1.14**           -0.37
 Fraction Self-References
                                                                                                                              (0.22)          (0.26)        (0.24)          (0.29)
                                                                                                                                                            1.47**           1.09
 Fraction Self-References × Woman
                                                                                                                                                            (0.52)          (0.60)
 Scientist Fixed Effects                        Included      Excluded        Included       Excluded        Included       Excluded        Included       Excluded        Included
 Mean of Dependent Variable                        0.97          0.97            0.97           0.97            0.97           0.97            0.97           0.97            0.97
 Adjusted R2                                      0.05          0.33            0.46           0.33            0.46           0.33            0.46           0.33             0.46
 Nb. of Scientists                                3,667         3,667           3,661          3,667           3,661          3,667           3,661          3,667           3,661
 Nb. of Scientist-Year Obs.                      94,315        94,315          94,308         94,315          94,308         94,315          94,308         94,315          94,308
Note: OLS estimates. The dependent variable is the flow of original articles published in year t by the focal scientist, transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation,
      so that coefficient estimates are approximately interpretable as elasticities. An observation corresponds to a scientist-year, with the first observation being the year following
      the receipt of highest degree, and the last observation the year of exit from science, retirement, death or 2015, whichever comes earlier. The time-varying covariates are
      lagged one year. The specifications also include degree indicator variables (MD and MD/PhD, PhD is the omitted category), scientist career age and its square, a full suite of
      calendar year indicator variables, and eight indicator variables corresponding to years of highest degree (in five year increments). Standard errors in parentheses, triple
      clustered at the investigator level.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                                                            v
